Although I don't generally rewrite older reviews (especially those that have "likes") my original review was premised on the idea that this is a children's book. It's typically treated as such today, and I did read it as a kid. But Sewall actually intended the novel for adult readers, so I've decided that the review should be re-written accordingly. This "Autobiography of a Horse" narrates an equine life running pretty much the gamut of possible horse experiences (except for cavalry service) in the 19th century, many of them decidedly unpleasant. Sewall's message is a forceful and entirely justified plea for decent and humane treatment of the animals whose well-being is so dependent on us. The book is well-written, with a prose style that's more direct and straightforward than that of much Victorian fiction; its human and animal characters are vividly-drawn individuals, the pacing is brisk, and it has a satisfying, full-circle kind of plot. To maintain her conceit of a horse narrator, of course the author makes her horses much more intelligent and anthropomorphic, and much more capable of verbal communication with each other, than they probably really are. Black Beauty, Ginger, and Merrylegs come across essentially as humans in horse bodies. This makes it easier to identify with them, and to see them as entitled to kind treatment; but it arguably sets that conclusion up for refutation and rejection if the readers stop to realize that this picture of horses isn't accurate. Possibly it might be better not to make the case for decent treatment of animals depend on an anthropomorphic view of them, but rather on the fact that they do have feelings and needs which it diminishes us to ignore and deny. It's also true that modern readers who have no experience at all of horses being used as draft animals might find the issues posed here hard to understand or relate to. But this book has all sorts of modern-day applications to issues, such as factory-style farming, pet neglect, use (or abuse) of animals for "research" purposes, etc.
