I did enjoy this book, however I feel Christie is a much better storyteller when in long form. I will probably read another short story collection in the future, but for now I'll stick to her novels. The Adventure of "The Western Star" - ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ This is the longest story in the book, and one of the most memorable. I did have to reread the ending to make sure I fully understood what had happened, but when I did I saw the quick clues I had missed. The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor - ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ This took an unexpected turn at what you would think is the end, and David Suchet gets 5 stars for his audio performance alone. I legitimately cackled at one point. It was glorious. The Adventure of the Cheap Flat - ⭐⭐ To be honest, I didn't care for this one. I don't like being confused for a tale's entirety. Poirot had a lot of information that wasn't revealed to Hastings (and therefore the reader) until the end. I'd rather have a piece of the plot here and there as the story goes on. Instead it was a bunch of random choices and actions that made no sense being taken until the very end. It just wasn't my cup of tea. The Mystery of Hunter's Lodge - ⭐⭐⭐ While I did like this story, I felt it would've been better if it was longer. I loved the premise even though we as readers were once again missing information. I would've liked more detail about the murder itself, and the suspects, but all in all it was an interesting story. The Million Dollar Bond Robbery - ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ This story was one of the more enjoyable ones for me. Granted it wasn't particularly exciting, I still rated it highly due to it's conciseness. There weren't 50 people to keep track of, and none of the clues or epiphanies were far-fetched. Poirot's breakdown of the case was very logical and easy to follow, and Hastings' obtuseness was quite comical. I hope more of the remaining stories are like this one. The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb - ⭐️⭐️⭐️ This one had an intriguing premise--I mean, who doesn't love an Egyptian curse, am I right?--but unfortunately it fell short of the mark. It was mostly a bunch of name dropping--about a dozen altogether, way too many for me to keep track of anyway--and next to no clues. The saving grace of this story is that I'm listening to the audiobook. David Suchet's voice acting is simply superb. All the voices were distinct, and I especially loved hearing all the different accents he can do. The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan - ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ I actually really liked this one. The story was interesting and had a good pace. The group of people involved was small, making it easy to follow. The clues were there without being too obvious. Of course, Hercule Poirot had a couple tidbits of information we didn't have but when does he not. It probably would've earned another star had it not been wrapped up in a neat little bow by Poirot without Hastings, and therefore the reader, being present. The Kidnapped Prime Minister - ⭐️⭐️⭐️ Honestly I didn't love or hate this one. If anything I would say it was mediocre, and a little on the boring side. It started off interesting, but with most of the case solving happening in Poirot's head--and with practically no dialogue and little narration--it simply lacked anything to entice or keep me interested. The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim - ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ This story was absolutely fantastic! I was engrossed the whole time. There was a lot of dialogue between the three main characters as they discussed the case, and I loved the sporting competition between Japp and Poirot. We knew all the same clues that Poirot did and none of his conclusions were far-fetched for once. It had everything I could ask for, and was easily my favorite tale from this collection. The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman - ⭐️⭐️⭐️ This one started out interesting but lost its momentum pretty quickly. This case was more about what wasn't there than what was. A lot of the clues were clues of omission, so they were hard to pick up on, except by Poirot of course. It wasn't a bad story. I just wish it had more oomph. The Case of the Missing Will - ⭐️⭐️⭐️ This one could've been better. The clues didn't really make sense and the end was underwhelming. It honestly had the feeling that it was either over edited or unfinished. There simply wasn't enough meat on the bones in this one. The Veiled Lady - ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ This story threw me off at first. I'm listening to the audiobook, and suddenly Poirot barely had an accent. I don't know if it's a different narrator or if they were just recorded at different times, but I did find out that the last three stories weren't in the original UK version of this book. The switching voices made it difficult to concentrate and follow who was talking at first, but the story itself was interesting, to the point, and kept a good pace. The Lost Mine - ⭐️⭐️⭐️ This one was told as Hercule relating a story to Hasting. It was decently hard to follow due to all the name dropping of companies and suspects alike, and the conclusion--while believable--wasn't really discernable from the text. I'll also point out that it was pretty offensive to people of East Asian decent, but when reading something written in this time period, I sadly expect to see that kind of overt racism. The Chocolate Box - ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ What a fantastic story to end on! This was one of my favorites. Another tale recounted as a story to Hastings, it tells of Hercule's only failure, back when he was a policeman. I loved being able to actually follow Poirot and his thought processes as he investigated the case for once. This definitely ended the book on a high note. *I listened to the audiobook with David Suchet as the narrator. For most of the stories, his voice as Poirot was perfection. Unfortunately something was different for the last three stories, and Poirot's accent all but disappeared. I don't know why this happened, but it made listening to those stories a little off-putting. I much prefer the strong Belgian accent to the barely French one.
