5/5 stars | Favorite Standalones Decided to bump this up because it's definitely a book that's stuck with me and has a firm place in my heart. Still deciding whether or not to deem it as an official fave or not though! 4/5stars Now, that rating might seem a bit low considering how, if you've spoken to me or seen my videos, you know I was obsessed while reading this book. But I shall explain. Let me begin with I LOVED the idea of this book. Anyone who knows me knows I ADORE cats - my cat Cody is the light of my life, I coddle him and love him more than anything. So when I heard about a novel that is literally told from a cat's POV, I HAD to get it. This story is a bind up of 3 volumes told from a stray tabby cat with no name who wanders into the mansion of a professor who decides to let him stay and live there. It is about his years living with his owner and all the drama and adventures throughout his life. I really enjoyed this whole idea because it was basically just a very unique way for the author to poke fun at the human race and all our flaws because mostly this little unnamed tabby cat would watch his owner do something and then make witty comments about how stupid and horrible humans are - such as how heartless they are when the unnamed cat's friend had kittens and her humans killed them all, how abusive they can be to animals who they think are lesser than them by not feeding this little cat, how stupid they are for walking on two legs when they have four available to them, and how they selfish they are. This book is 100% for any cat owner because, at least personally, I found myself laughing outloud at some of the comments this cat made, but also staring at the page in awe realizing I did the same things that this cat was pointing out were so horrible. I also thought the cat's voice was wonderful - because he sounded exactly how I imagine my cat, Cody, sounding if he was every able to speak. The reason this wasn't a 5/5stars was simply because, by the end, I was skimming through PAGES of this novel because I was so bored with the human's drama. There were very long winded paragraphs and pages detailing the tabby's owner's life and drama with his friends, and most of their stories were very boring and I found myself just not caring to read them and skipping to when the tabby was going on his own adventures. Therefore, since I skimmed a good chunk of pages, I felt it wasn't right giving it 5/5stars. Also, that ending though, wtf Natsume Soseki that was fucking uncalled for. Amazing book! Highly recommend!!
