December 5, 2014 "24 hours" is a great story but the story makes even more intersting when it comes to the author. Here are two reasons that show that. first, she worked in a library. In most of the cases librarians stay librarians and being a librarian makes people want to write which inspired her. second, she got 6 awards. She got many awards and most of them weren't only in New Zealand (her original country). Therefore, Margaret has a great talent at writing books. Themes excrepce different ideas about a book and here's an idea about that book which is illustrated in two ways. First, the theme is betrayal because Ellis got betrayed by his doctor. His doctor told him that he didn't have cancer which apparently, he lied to him. Second, he betrayed himself. He betrayed himself by saying that he'll do his hw everyday but he doesnt do it. These are two reasons that show that theme. Settings are very important in books and movies. In this book there's two important settings. First, the hospital. There, in the hospital, the doctor betrayed Ellis. Second, it's his house. In Ellis' house, he finds out that he does have cancer and becomes sad. These are the two settings of the book. Symbols are made to show what is happening in the story. There's two ways of that. First, the symbol is no trusting. No trusting because Ellis shouldn't trust the doctor. Second, the symbol is also used in his house. His mom shouldn't trust him when Ellis said that he'll do his hw. These are two ways that show the symbol. December 12, 2014 Ellis became very dangerous when he lost his hair, and got a tattoo. First, he did many dangerous things than involves sex, and raping. "He had, after all, been into something much more dangerous than sex" (Mahy 5). Secondly, "He had been in love, and love had failed him" (Mahy 5). What that means is that he fell in love with many girls and he wanted to be recognized in his futur life. Ellis has been a very bad young man since he finished his studies. Ellis had been a gentleman sometimes and here's evidence for that. First, he rescued a girl from a party, where she was drunk and drove her back home. "He rescued me from the party and drove me home" (Mahy 53). Second, he wanted to see a girl once more to talk to her because he missed her. " And, besides, he wanted to see Leona just once more" (Mahy 55). This paragraph shows that Ellis can also sometimes be a gentleman. Ellis gets very bad ideas from the world that's around him. First, he saw some people having tattoos, he wanted to do it too. "The man gloved with tattoos, who was directing him on to yet another tattooed man, the man he had seen earlier..." (Mahy 62). Second, he starting thinking about some words that people hear everyday. "DRUGS! BOOZE! SEX!" (Mahy 63). These are some ideas that Ellis thought about. Ellis remembers his family in some familiar things. First, when he sees his clothes, he remembers them. "They were almost the only things about him that was familiar" (Mahy 69-70). Second, the mirror helps him remember his family. When he looks at the mirror he sees himself and says that he ressembles to his family. This paragraph shows that Ellis has also a white heart and thinks about his family. He's not selfish. January 9th Winston is sometimes agressive towards people and wants to show that he's better than everyone. First, he disrespected people face to face, and he wasn't even shy. "Winston says you lot think you own everything around here, and you'd better watch out" (Mahy 104). Second, he makes people feel uncomfortable. "Bug Winston, and he'll rip your face off (Mahy 106). To conclude, Winston is a very bad guy that doesn't care about other people's feelings. Jason is the peace guy, that doesn't have and make problems. First, he thinks about people even thought they insult him. "Yeah, but Winston..." (106). Second, he doesn't want people to fight. When people are about to fight, he changes the subject. To sum up Jason is a good guy. Ellis had some problems with her friends and they got into a fight. First, she fought against Ursa and Leona. They had to meet in a sepcific place near Ellis' house, but she stayed there alone because they didn't come. Second, Ellis fought badly with Jackie which caused her many problems. "For the moment, both Ellis and Jackie are excluded" (Mahy 107). All for all, Ellis has been disappointing throughout the story. Leona has been the love girl through out the story. First, she was in love with Ellis. "Leona's eyes may have been red-rimmed, but the smile she directed at him was the smile of an angel" (Mahy 111). Second, Ellis has been the bad guy in the story until he met Leona. Every time he spoke, he was talking to her. Therefore, Leona has been in love with Ellis (the bad guy) throughout the story.
