Trixie expects to have a dull summer while her two older brothers are off at camp and she’s stuck at home with her baby brother and all the chores. But she gets a wonderful surprise when Honey Wheeler, a girl her own age, moves into the estate next door. And together they get an even bigger surprise when they discover Jim Frayne, the nicest boy either of them has ever met, living in his dying great-uncle’s neglected mansion. Trixie thinks there must be a fortune in cash hidden in the old house — enough to free Jim from his abusive stepfather, if they can keep the stepfather from stealing it. But first they have to find it. This is the first time I’ve ever read this first volume in the Trixie Belden series. And my adult self enjoyed it all right, but found the pacing a bit leisurely and the mystery not very gripping. It took forever for me to get through it because most nights a page or two would knock me right off to sleep (I’ve been making this series my bedtime reading for the past year and a half now). So Adult Self says, “I would never have read any more of these books if I’d read this one first! Three stars and a big spoonful of speed it up already!” (It didn’t help that I knew all this backstory from the later books I’ve read.) BUT. I’m positive that my age-appropriate 9- to 13-year-old self would have loved this book, and would have adored hanging out with these characters for however long it would have taken me to read it at that age. It’s perfect Kid Summer Reading, filled with beautiful weather, fulfilling friendships and resourceful kids, horseback riding, poisonous snakes and heroic action, a huge house to explore, a mix of helpful adults and one terrifying adult, and some sadness in the story of why the mansion is so delapidated … I doubt I would have wanted to put this down. It’s a little old-fashioned but didn’t feel especially dated in any way (except maybe for constant use of the word “dungarees.” Who says that anymore?) So I’m giving this 3-1/2 stars, rounded up.
