In my culture, it is unconventional to read a book on parenting. People would joke about such a notion and look at you condescendingly. If you can relate to such a situation, then this book is for you. It is for the curious father who is uncomfortable about asking "silly" questions on parenting for fear of eliciting a sententious response. This book is a combination of a user manual, on fathering, and a self-help book. It is laid out in a structured format that makes it accessible and easy to use as a reference in the future. The writer conveniently adds humor throughout the book to keep the reader entertained while reading such a dry topic. I highly recommend it to new, and expecting, dads as it contains information with respect to each month of the first infant year. It is replete with a variety of information regarding the baby's physical, mental and emotional health. Almost all the information is intuitive as well as retrospective, backed by adequate research on the subject. Ideally this book should be read cover to cover at once. After that it can act as an indispensable monthly reference material. Each chapter contains a section "What's Going On With The Baby" that lists the monthly milestones which can be used as a yardstick to gauge infant growth and health. It imparts a plethora of advices that would educate the dad and minimize the surprises - don't think for a second that it will contain every minute detail (this is not a pediatric bible), rather it equips the reader with a mindset - he may find down the line. Each chapter contains a section about the health (physical and emotional) of the mother which is instrumental in managing expectations for a couple. Additionally, handy information about miscellaneous stuff (insurance, social security etc) can be found scattered throughout the book. This is by no means a replacement of your pediatrician's advice. It just contains comprehensive information that can save the father a lot of trouble. Most importantly, it inculcates a sense of confidence and optimism.
