I full-on hated this book and I will never forgive Britain's Top 100 Favourites for making me read it, never. Outline: Mary is married to Charlie, an English werewolf diplomatist in Washington by day, alcoholic by night and day and all the time. Mary ends up having an affair with a journalist, Frank - not because her husband is a crazyass, which would make SENSE, but just because. Mary has two children towards whom she feels a strong flavour of cannibalism. Of note, she hates the idea of sending them to boarding school in England - they hate it too! - but does it anyway, for no reason I could discern. Charlie suffers a breakdown, which is what happens when you use Grey Goose as your breakfast, lunch, dinner and five-a-day, and is posted back to England. Mary has a Very Tragic Last Meeting with Frank in which they decide to NEVER MAKE CONTACT AGAIN AS IT WOULD HURT TOO MUCH, and there's even (nearly) an aeroport-chasing scene. Then it ends. Thank god. the faint aroma of honey, calico, half-baked bread, wild strawberries, of warmth itself I will buy babies smelling of talcum powder, but that is IT. the edible cartilage and soft tissue of the ear, which she had sniffed and nibbled like a rabbit I WASN'T LYING ABOUT THE CANNIBALISM. "What are those men doing?" said Mary. "Not something that concerns a woman." Yup, Frank is any woman's Ideal. Her lips were very ... how would you put this ... three-dimensional. HOSHIT. REALLY? BECAUSE I THOUGHT LIPS WERE FLAT AS PAPER, MYSELF. The following three quotes I labelled 'retrospectoscope', because it was so obviously a twenty-first century view of events that happened ... whenever they happened. A long time ago. Before feminism and electricity, I DON'T KNOW. This giant folly of pride, greed and quixotic ambition was about to receive, as far as Charlie could see, a cataclysmic judgement. Vietnam. I didn't realise the US Government admitted that was a heinous crime against humanity NOW, let alone at the time. Really, thought Frank, the panic over the identity of the potential vice-president was morbid when Kennedy himself was so young. OH WOW, BECAUSE HE MIGHT GET SHOT! ... wait, that'd NEVER happen. above the enslaved lands of Eastern Europe. I know peeps in the old times hated Communism as much as I do, but 'enslaved'? Were the atrocities of the USSR well known before the Wall came down? Because, dude, I thought they couldn't even get Levis, let alone information in or out. He had 'finer feelings' [...] but the intensity of his passion for Mary had banished them to some mental Alaska, far beyond reach. People can't reach Alaska?! When Sarah Palin can see Russia from her HOUSE? My hate cannot be (adequately) textually rendered.
