Imaginative alternative history novel by the idiosyncratic Philip K. Dick, needless to say a splendid remarkable author, unfortunately he never lived to see the day being praised. Lets begin Germany and Japan win World War Two , you are reading correctly .Think about the consequences to the planet, history changes to the dark side as billions perish who otherwise didn't. Europe, Africa, and most of Russia are dominated by the nasty Nazis, Imperial Japan most of Asia, northern South America, a few neutral zones not important enough for the Axis and here the tricky part, nominally independent Canada and the United States are divided, the west ruled by the Land of the Rising Sun, and the east from Deutschland. Petty states four in number formed also , they pretend to be free but governed by frightening foreigners. Set in 1962, friction naturally begins to come out between Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany exasperated by the death of acting Chancellor (Hitler is too ill) Martin Bormann, causing a vicious power struggle in Berlin. Back in Japanese ruled Pacific States of America the city of San Francisco, antique shop owner Robert Childan strives to survive selling authentic American trinkets to the invaders the only ones with money. Receiving a request from Nobuskuke Tagomi a top trade official and other secret occupations ( spy), that needs something important to give Mr. Baynes a Swedish businessman he says, but nothing in this fiction is clear. All are spying for various empires or groups, none can be trusted, the calm, underneath is bubbling out, fire and soon after the lava's eruption can and will destroy. Frank Fink obviously not an appropriate moniker with partner Ed McCarthy start a Jewelry business but times are tough, Mr. Frink (a bit of a criminal) better name for him, he's Jewish, Germans are everywhere. Poor Frank his wife Juliana left him and unknowingly she partners with a Nazi hit man. Searching for a person nicknamed ,"The Man in the High Castle", with a silly book most think, The Grasshopper Lies Heavy, he wrote ( but has priceless information), she believes is genuine with hidden deep secrets, living in Wyoming. An unique, tremendous science -fiction novel, this admittedly is weird, the author has the same reputation, still if given a chance this can be more than satisfactory...not my first from the writer and of course not the last, like I said before the fame came too late for him however we are the benefactors .
