Between its many animated and live action movie adaptations over the years, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland turned into this weird psychedelic drug-induced hallucination, rather than the original irony-filled charming children's story in my mind. So it was high-time for a reread. I wouldn't call myself a particularly perceptive person, having focused more on the many absurd adventures rather than the irony, as a child. So the constant barrage of "a-HA" moments that I now found myself experiencing, came as very welcome surprise. I love a book that ages well, especially when it reads like a completely different story at varying times in life. The contrast between Alice's educated demeanor, and its (lack of) use in real life situation was fun to follow. Alice's fumbling attempts at making use of the French lessons, while unintentionally insulting the mouse, hit quite close to home. Nevertheless, I have mixed feelings about the protagonist's curiosity/bravery, which would often come across as rather thoughtless and/or selfish. Take for instance that Mad Hatter's tea party, which she joins uninvited, only to then feel offended by the participants' (lack of) manners and amenities. Alice's Adventures Through The Looking Glass features a much more intriguing premise, but is also much more boring to get through. Admittedly, I know precisely nothing about chess, so the many clever game references would've gone right over my head without the footnotes. The overall effect seemed much closer to an ambitious endeavour, than a story with a natural flow. If the prequel gave us a story featuring several comedic episodes, this one seemed a series of funny banters, that so happened to have a story linking them together. It was still good, but the overall narration didn't flow quite as naturally as before. Score: 3.5/5 stars 4 rounded-up stars for nostalgia and writing style I would advise skipping the footnotes; while the poem references were useful, the emphasis put on the inspiration behind one or more of the events got tiring after a while. Like in the episode from Alice's Adventures Through The Looking Glass where Alice forgets her name, and only remembers it's something with "L". The footnotes insist this is a reference to " Liddel ", while I found it more likely to be a pun on how " Al " from " Alice " has the same pronunciation as the letter "L". ... plus the creepy revelation, that Charles Dodgson used to intentionally "cultivate friendships" with young girls, rather put me off any subsequent rereads. I probably shouldn't have googled documentaries on the subject.
