***Not a spoiler, this is from the first chapters** “I regret the necessity. I don’t make a practice of raping innocents.” “No,” she said, “only your brother’s mistresses.” There you have it, and fair warning - this isn't just a 'forced seduction', it is rape, albeit not a violent one (if that makes sense). The hero is a royal prince of Ruthenia, a fictional country in the Balkans, and he's bent on finding the person(s) responsible for his elder brother's murder, and he mistakes the heroine for her cousin who was found in the murdered brother's bed. So, consider yourself warned - if the heroine-raped-by-the-hero trope is a problem for you, you should not read this book . Period. Better to stay away than write those one star protest reviews on Amazon. The forced seduction/rape trope was fairly common back in the day, and we really don't know if the choice in this case was made by the author or what her publishers wanted - and hats of to Ms. Blake for not 'cleaning things up' when she got these out for the digital market. If, however, you can get past that, there really is a good story with plenty of action and adventure and twists and turns. Plus one of the sweetest endings ever with a nice twist on the Cinderella story to boot. This was a bit different from your usual Jennifer Blake book, her heroes aren't usually quite so commandeering as Rolfe was, but then again he's a Royal Prince and used to commanding people and having his way. While this book had a good feel for the historical period and mindset that you find in all of Blake's historicals, there wasn't the usual bit where she writes her characters into a lesser known bit of history, it felt more like action and adventure and a bit of cray-cray, but thankfully Rolfe was always able to arrive in the nick of time to save the day and the heroine's virtue. Whew. I'm glad I moved on and didn't miss out on the story or that lovely, lovely ending. I've read the last chapter about three times now :) This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
