I have become aware of Janny Wurts being a fantasy writer reaching back in the 1980ies I was curious to discover another one of early women fantasy authors. My local library has the whole trilogy of the Cycle of Fire available on audiobook and so I make the jump and get started with discovering a new to me author and a story that was written nearly forty years ago. What always fascinates me is the diction and language used in these books that came before the digital age. They seem to be more coherent and much more focussed than current publications are. I am intrigued by this story that charges three teenagers to sort out the wrong their forebears have wrought in a world that seems very slow and feudal. Who and what the Vaere are becomes only very slowly apparent and is an on going theme throughout the three books. On the other hand there is the real problem in this physical world that is the Stormwarden who gets captured and casts a spell that will hold them all together until the problem is solved. however there is a lot of representation that nowadays just no longer works and makes you rather shudder. Specially the description and storyline of the young woman involved made me cringe more than once as she is aged through the Vaere beyond the age her physical body holds, and therefore you have basically the topic of a woman in a childs/teenager's body. Also, the roles are very stereotypically distributed where the male gets the active / dangerous role and the woman gets the mind/spirit walking, so to speak 'soft' part. However, looking over the three volumes, this on the surface held stereotype is undermined by the story that evolves eventually and it is the female party that keeps the story moving forward and keeps the male characters moving and changing. What I loved in this book was the inclusion of nature, specially the inclusion of the elements of wind and fire and water and earth. This was amazingly done. In addition, the overall cast of the characters covers all ages, something, I always appreciate.
