#BookReviewFriday #2023readingchallenge #42aboutthenewworld Book Review ⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ # 42 About the New World Book: Roanoke Author: Angela Elwell Hunt This book would have been 5 stars, but I couldn’t bring myself to do it because I was was too triggered by one of the main characters. This book is dark, so be warned. Includes a few brutal scenes of murder and off screen rape. Angela gave us a double entendre. If you know the history of the lost colony of Roanoke, you know historians don’t know what happened to the colony. She decided to go the route of not only speculating on what happened to the colony, but showing that the colony was lost physically due to the fact that they were already lost spiritually…but not in the way you think. They weren’t living the Heathen life, they had an inept shepherd. It was well documented that the colonists had a goal in mind of converting the “savages”, and that the Puritans were there to bring the gospel to the new world. Angela decided to focus a lot of her energy on one Puritanical Minister, he becomes the worst leading man I’ve ever read about. Period. I will never forget him. Angela is one of my favorite authors and this book was well written and engaging from the start. We meet Jocelyn a sweet and effervescent ingenue with her whole life in front of her. Through a series of unfortunate events, Jocelyn ends up married to a man that is clearly being used by Satan, even as he believes he is serving the Lord. Thomas single handedly put the colony on a course for destruction and destroys the light and love in his young, sweet wife, simply by misinterpreting his Bible, proving how dangerous it can be to interpret scripture without asking God for guidance. Thomas believes he hears from God, but consistently misinterprets scripture with fatal consequences. I believe Angela’s goal was to show us how dangerous the teaching of the Puritans really was when taken to the extreme. Thomas is a psychological and emotional abuser, problem is he doesn’t know it. I had way too many scenes with him. Thomas made me angry, he made me cry and he made me slam the book down in frustration. But, the beauty of Angela is the story of the colony and the colonists was still engrossing and engaging. I loved this dark and haunting tale. I fell in love with the side characters of Rowtag, Audrey and their family, and lived for their few moments on screen. All that said, if you are in the mood for a dark, atmospheric saga, that makes you FEEL, not a love story-I highly suggest you pick this one up. https://m.facebook.com/groups/scriptl...
