This was such a surprisingly wonderful read, well beyond the traditional stereotypes of westerns with realistic, lovable (and hateful) characters and an incredible scenario. I am not sure how to present my review of this 1000 page masterpiece. Perhaps we start with the town of Lonesome Dove itself. It is a small settlement next to the Mexican border. There is the Hat Creek crew with their horses (a collection of which is a remuda) and cattle. In charge of the crew are Captain Woodrow Call and Captain Augustus 'Gus' McCrae who are our two primary protagonists. They are longtime friends and former Texas Rangers one whose squad was also the somewhat dim hand Pea Eye Parker and the Mexican cook Bolivar. There is a younger man Newt that was adopted by the crew after his mother, a local prostitute named Maggie passed away (I believe her story is told in Comanche Moon .) There are a few other ranches around and the downtown is just a handful of shops and the local saloon, the Dry Bean which is also the local whorehouse both owned and run by Frenchman Xavier Wanz. In the whorehouse, Lorena Wood is a rather silent prostitute living at the Dry Bean with a sad, long backstory that landed her in Lonesome Dove. Augustus is one of her kinder and more generous customers. Lippy, who has a droopy lip and a hole in his stomach, plays the "pian-er" and serves as comic relief in the bar. Into this picture, Dishwater Boggett, a local cowhand, rides in and falls head over heels with Lorena, who barely notices his existence. But the entire plot is set into inexorable motion with the arrival of former Ranger and colleage of Call and Gus, Jake Spoon - gambler, lady's man, and alcoholic. Naturally, Lorena immediately falls head over heels in love with him, giving up on the "sporting life." Before this however, he goes to the ranch and after some reminiscing, plants the idea of a cattle drive up into unsettled Montana. The idea being to "open" and "settle" the land there with a few thousand head of cattle (these will be stolen from Mexico by the crew.) This idea, initially panned by Gus, is, for somewhat inexplicable reasons at first, picked up by Call and becomes an obsession. He decides to make the drive and thus the story begins in earnest. Since the rest of the book is the trek from Texas to Montana, we need to add to this picture a few other important characters: - July Johnson - a sheriff in Fort Smith, Arkansas whose brother was mistakenly killed by Jake Spoon, thus explaining his presence, somewhat clandestine, in Texas. He is married to Elmira (who is unbeknownst to him a former prostitute still in love with her last pimp, Dee Boot). He has a deputee Roscoe Brown and a son named Joe. At the beginning of Part 2 (Part 1 being dedicated to the organization and start of the cattle drive), July and Joe set out to capture Jake Spoon and bring him to justice and Roscoe is tasked with "watching" Elmira who takes off on a whiskey boat to find her beau, Dee. - Clara Allen - this is Gus' first true love who we meet at the beginning of Part 3. She has two daughers, Sally and Betsey and a dying husband, Bill. She is strong-willed, quick-tongued and excellent with horses. - Blue Duck - When Gus and Call "settled" Texas, they wiped out the most violent Indian criminals as well as Mexican bandits, they missed one. The evil Blue Duck is one of literatures most repulsive and inherently evil bad guys on the level of Anton Chiggah in No Country for Old Men or Heath Ledger's Joker in the film The Dark Knight. He kills and rapes with no remorse and is a formidable antagonist for Gus and his capture of Lorena is a key pivot in the plot. The thing that strikes the reader is how the book avoids stereotypes. Despite having played a major role in destroying the place of Indians in the West and reducing the survivors to either crime or starvation (as we see repeatedly in the book), Gus realizes this and questions which side was truly in their rights, who really belonged on the land and sees the mechanics of how the scheme worked. Here is Gus about settling the West: "Why, women and children and settlers are just cannon fodder for lawyers and bankers," Augustus said. "They're part of the scheme. After the Indians wipe out enough of them, you get your public outcry, and we go chouse the Indians out of the way. If they keep coming back then the Army takes over and chouses them worse. Finally the Army will manage the whip 'em down to where they can be squeezed onto some reservation, so the lawyers and bankers can come in and get civilisation started. Every bank in Texas ought to pay us a commission for the work we done. If we hadn't done it, all the bankers would still be back in Georgia, living on poke salad and turnip greens. (p. 83) At another point during a conversation with Call, Gus says: "Does it ever occur to you that everything we done was probably a mistake? Just look at it from a nature standpoint. If you've got enough snakes around the place, you won't be overrun with rats and varmints. The way I see it, the Indians and the bandits have the same job to do. Let them be and you won't constantly be having to ride around these dern settlements. (p. 319) And later, "The thing is, if I'm going to be treated like an Indian, I might as well act like one. I think we spent our best years fighting on the wrong side." (p. 327) Dish, hopelessly in love with and devoted to Lorena, lost all sense of what life was about. He even lost the sense that he was a cowboy, the strongest sense he had to work with. He was just a fellow with a glass in his hand, who life had suddenly turned to mud. (p. 98) After stealing cattle and horses from Mexico from a former rival that had died unbeknownst to the company, they drive north. During the drive, they are hit by misfortunes of Biblical proportions: one is killed after stepping in a nest of snakes in a river, another having been struck by lightning, the crew is hit with sandstorms, locust storms, and hail storms. At one point, the surly Bolivar quits the company and they hire Po Campo later on to replace him. This is a good moment to point out the many moments of humor in the book - the rivalry between Gus and Po as the team's primary sources of entertainment was a great on-going joke. Po Campo is a Mexican character who walks beside the wagon all the way north being the closest to nature of all of them. In the narrative, the drive continues, the destinies of Roscoe and Joe and Elmira play out against a background of the drive making it across to Montana with wonderful descriptions the great west, technical explanations of the various aspects of cattle drives, and of course just great storytelling. I hope this review encouraged you to pick up and read this classic if you never had, or to reread it if you have. I was moved by the depth of the characters, the refusal of McMurtry to water down the violence or succumb to empty stereotypes or a Hollywood ending. While being faithful to aspects of the classic western, McMurtry surpassed the genre to create a real masterpiece of American literature that is enduring and beautiful. I am watching the 1989 TV series again with my kids 10 and 13) and we all nearly cried at the end of the first episode. Duvall is extraordinary as Gus, Tommy Lee Jones is great at Call...the breaking in of Hell Bitch was so well-shot. Just wish we had seen the rancher that Gus had that hilarious exchange about renting pigs with. Definitely worth seeking out the TV show. One of the rare adaptations to the small screen that came close to the perfection of the book. This first episode ends with the cattle drive over the Nueces River and the first tragedy of many along the route. The second episode deals a lot with Blue Duck, Gus and Lorrie. It is a rather brutal episode, but the beauty of Gus’ friendship for Lorrie is breathtaking as are the two gunfights, particularly the first one. I think they could have cast someone a bit more Heath Ledger-ish as Blue Duck as well as for Monkey John and Ermoke because the characters in the book were far more wicked and well-drawn. Episode two draws to a close as Gus comfort Lorrie. In the 3rd episode, we see the results of Jake’s moral laziness and the justice meted out by his friends. We also finally meet Clara in Ogalalla. We also see that Elmira’s obsession with the “unlucky” Dee Boot leads her and Big Zwey to being scalped. Another excellent episode where the humanity of Gus’ half honesty contrasted with the increasingly blind devotion to Duty by Call, his utter lack of subtlety leading to Deeks’ unnecessary death, which closes the episode setting us up for the finale. In this episode, Duvall’s acting is truly something to behold. The last episode deals with, well, the end of the book and is full of beauty in Montana as well as the death of some important characters for whom my entire family was in tears. It did not vary much from the book other than skipping the epic bull-grizzly fight and giving a slightly different final scene. Overall, it was an extraordinary TV show and was nearly a perfect reflection of the book. Duvall and Lee Jones are absolutely splendid and there are more great lines here than in the last 7 Star Wars movies combined. ;-) My rating of all the Pulitzer Winners: https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/1...
