Major Sylvester Gilbraith's regiment lost a decisive battle to the French on the shores of Portugal. Gravely injured, Sylvester survived a year in a French prison camp. On his return to England he is brought before a military tribunal, accused of cowardice for surrendering to the enemy. He cannot even defend himself because he has no memory of the fateful battle in which he was gravely wounded. The charge of cowardice clings to him and old friends, even fellow soldiers, turn their backs. He is ostracized from proper society. To add to his troubles, Sylvester learns he has just inherited the title of his family's sworn enemy, the Earl of Stoneridge. He won't inherit the money to keep up the estate, however, unless he marries one of the old earl's granddaughters. He has a month to convince one of the girls to become his bride. If he does not succeed, the girls will learn they inherit all of the wealth that goes along with the estate, and the new Earl will be left penniless. Sylvester soon learns that only one of the Earl's granddaughters, Theodora, is suitable for him. The young lady in question has no intention of marrying a Gilbraith. Theodora clings to her family's hatred of the Gilbraith clan, and ignores Sylvester's overtures, but she has a harder time ignoring the passion between them. Finally, Sylvester charms her into marrying him. But can he trust her? What will happen to the lovers' tentative truce if Theodore learns the true terms of her grandfather's will, that she would have been independently wealthy without marrying him? And how can he possibly tell this woman about his greatest shame? More than anything, he fears that the charges of cowardice may be true. Sylvester needs to search for the answers, but he can't bring himself to confide in Theodora or to ask for her help, not even when his life is threatened during his search for the truth.Rich characters and nonstop action! Ms. Feather writes with wit and humor. Her characters are delightful! This one is hard to put down!Annette Carney -- Copyright © 1994-97 Literary Times, Inc. All rights reserved -- From Literary Times --This text refers to the Mass Market Paperback edition.
