By the early twentieth century Japan had for decades been pursuing a policy of industrialization. Generally, this push toward modernization began with the Meiji Restoration of 1868. Now it’s sixty years later, 1928, and we find ourselves near Osaka in the home of Kaname and Misako. For a number of years they’ve been trapped in a loveless marriage. Neither knows how to proceed with the inevitable divorce. They are both stuck and suffering. Kaname, who considers himself a modern man, has even allowed Misako to see a lover, even though they still share the same house. A big problem is their young son Hiroshi, about ten, who, with the usual prescience of smart children, has intuited that something is terribly wrong. One morning Kaname arranges to meet his father-in-law at the bunraku puppet theater in Osaka, a favorite haunt of that connoisseur of Japanese culture. Misako can't bear to go since it means she'll have to forgo a meeting with her lover, she'll have to present herself to her father as Kaname's devoted wife, and she'll have to share the company of O-hisa, her father's mistress, a courtesan considerably younger than herself. The play that day is Chikamatsu's The Love Suicides (1703). Tanizaki deftly draws parallels between his characters's predicament and the melodramatic action on the stage. The motif of the puppet theater is ideal, since it suggests how the principals are acting a game or masque among themselves. Kaname’s father-in-law has brought food in traditional gold-flecked, black lacquer boxes. He talks a lot about O-hisa’s classical garb (which he busies himself buying to suit his tastes). O-hisa’s teeth have been blackened in the time-honored, esthetically pleasing manner. By today's standards, even in Japan, most would consider her a virtual slave, since everything she does is solely for the old man's pleasure. She is virtually a cipher toward that end. Misako represents the female side of the modern/traditionalist continuum, just as the old man does the male side. The old man likes to argue the merits of Osaka-style puppet theater versus the Tokyo style. He goes on about the correct way to sing the old songs. Kaname is torn. He is intoxicated by the old ways and his father-in-law's lifestyle but thinks of himself as modern. Enter Takanatsu, Kaname’s cousin, on one of his periodic visits from Shanghai. Takanatsu’s a fascinating character who’s able to articulate Kaname's indecisiveness with brutal clarity. With Takanatsu's arrival we see how truly split Kaname is between so-called modern (Western) views and the lure of old Japan. Even the house in which he and Misako live is split between a Western wing and a Japanese wing. Takanatsu, who's been in touch with Kaname by post, arrives with the hope of ending the masque, of revealing the players's true faces. The old man’s ways constitute a limiting provincialism that Kaname acknowledges yet cannot relinquish. Especially fascinating are the digressions Tanizake pursues with regard to Edo Period art, which is so reverenced by the father-in-law. I adore this novel. Tanizaki's touch is deft, his novel's emotional impact powerful.
