I'd say that "Everyone has got to start somewhere" but I don't know for sure when these stories were written, except they seem to date from fairly early in his career. The collection dates from 1996 and came out after he had two published novels under his belt, but despite it winning the World Fantasy Award that year (over Thomas Ligotti and James Morrow so maybe it was a novelty thing) I don't know if this would have been published if Lethem was a brand new author . . . its got moments but unfortunately those moments can be divided into "good" and "not-so-good", with the wrong one winning out more often than perhaps you would like. Anyone experiencing the latter day Lethem will probably be surprised at the stories here. Unlike the more place-centered work that later characterized "Motherless Brooklyn" and "Fortress of Solitude", where the stories are more or less normal with some quirky elements, at this early stage he was nothing but Prime Quirk. His first novel was a Raymond Chandleresque mystery that also featured a homicidal talking kangaroo with a firearm, so that alone should give you some idea of where his mind was at during this portion of his career. The stories here are more or less concentrated doses of that vibe, with stories that could be construed as strictly conventional under normal circumstances but with at least really bizarre element added to them to take them off-kilter. In a way it reminds me of the stories of Kelly Link, who came along much later and tends to push the weirdness to far more bracing extremes (even if not always successfully, but I have to admire the ambition) where here it can almost feel like an affectation, something thrown in to make it stand out without feeling like there's much more behind it than that. Its not weird for the sake of weird but more like . . . weird for the sake of standing out, if that makes any sense. Needless to say, that approach makes the stories extremely hit or miss. Even when the ideas are inherently interesting, like "The Happy Man", which posits a world where people's souls migrate back and forth from Hell on a regular basis . . . he often undoes what makes the idea interesting by inserting a completely obvious mystery (in this case, the protagonist doesn’t understand why his Hell is the way it is, even though it should be apparent to everyone reading very quickly) and then not going anywhere interesting with it, which makes me think he honestly thought the revelation was going to be a surprise. You have a similar problem with "Vanilla Dunk", where this time we have a vague near future where basketball teams are bought out by corporations and players are given exo-skeletons that allow them to access the skills of players from years past. During the draft a white player is given the skills of Michael Jordan and predictably goes off-the-rails with arrogance. It feels more thought out than most of the stories here and yet having a white player get Jordan's skills brings the story way closer to issues of race and identity in society that this story either isn't prepared to or has no desire to address in any significant way, making it feel both slight and a missed a opportunity. "Light and Sufferer" would be mostly passable as Lethem's idea circa the early 90s of what he thinks gangs are like if not for his insistence on adding in random aliens deemed Sufferers that look like cats dressed as snakes and follow people around for reasons that aren't explained. Without them the story is just a kind of melodrama without anything really memorable happening in it, and with the aliens its just a forgettable story with a pointless hook. However, it does have the distinction of being made into a direct-to-video film starring Paul Dano, which feels weirdly fitting. If you're getting the idea the stories can be frustrating, that's because they are. Its like Lethem goes out of his way to sabotage himself, so that even when he has a semi-promising beginning, like with "Five F--ks", where a lover seems to make someone lose time, the story soon goes completely nuts in too short a time and leaves you with nothing much to grasp. The best I can decipher is that it’s a time-spanning reality-warping "Krazy Kat" scenario but we kind of already have that in actual "Krazy Kat" so its like the world was asking for this. However, most people save their vitriol for "Forever, Said the Ducks" which starts out strange and then proceeds to spend pages going absolutely nowhere. The premise seems to be a couple throwing a party (virtual or otherwise) where simulacrums of past lovers mingle and interact but beyond everyone chatting for a while, no plot ever really develops and it just ends. It wasn't long enough to make me angry but unless I'm just not smart enough to grasp what he's doing its doesn't do much to justify itself. He goes for the gritty again with "Hardened Criminals", where again the only memorable bit is the literal strangeness the title promises as a young man gets sent to a weird prison and meets his father. It does feel like he's playing more with real-life elements here (and apparently was a dry run for stuff in "Fortress of Solitude") but again the weirdness doesn't feel like anything but window-dressing. Oddly, it reminded me of Cordwainer Smith's "A Planet Named Shayol", another story set in a vicious prison that in a lot of ways is tons more savage than this story can hope to be (and was published in 1961!). Here, beyond the concept, nothing really sticks. The same criticism could be applied to "Sleepy People", which features a tired man, a woman who is fascinated by him, her annoying coworkers and eventually maybe aliens. I don't even know and even more than the other stories it feels like he was throwing stuff at the wall to see what stuck, so nothing feels enigmatic or even holds together cohesively. The story is there and its over and you're not left with much to grasp. Not a lot of out of the park hits if you're tallying up . . . when you only seven stories I think you need at least one masterpiece to really sell readers and the best you can see about these is that they read fast (it took me only a few hours and you probably won't be dwelling on them). For those who like to play the lottery, there's a UK version of this collection that jettisons two of the stories ("Vanilla Dunk", probably because its was too American for those cricket lovin' Brits, and "Forever, Said the Duck" because if you have the chance to remove it, why not take it?) and replaces them with two others so its possible that it makes for a stronger collection. If someone ever figures it out, let me know. But I won't be going out of my way to find out.
