I have a particular love for pirates, historical sea battles, and girls dressing in boys' clothes; this book would have been a 4-star but all that swashbuckling goodness bumped it up to a five for me. Félicité (alt 0745 for fancy é!) is a wealthy, gorgeous young lady in New Orleans when the Spanish army takes it over to quell the French rebels. Morgan McCormack is the right-hand man of the Irish general who heads the Spanish soldiers. He's also super hot and dreamy and romantic, but I digress. The big antagonist is Felicité's adopted brother Valcour, a dangerous, sneaky rebel who grows exponentially more evil as the story progresses. ...So I started writing a couple paragraphs of step-by-step summary but I bored myself so forget it, I deleted it. Let's just say, there was a lot of action, angst, and pirates. Oh, and sexual tension! Can't forget that! One part, Félicité is trying to sneak out of bed in the morning without waking Morgan up, who's clutching her in his sleep. Every time she tries to inch away, he sleepily shifts and tightens his grasp, until finally she catches his eyelids flickering. Then she jumps out with a, "Wake up, you vile, grinning jackanapes!" If there was one part of the story that I hated, it was the way Ashanti and Dom were handled. They're black slaves, "movable property" according to Valcour. This book was very historically realistic so I'm not trying to impose modern values on her, but Félicité shows a real weakness of character and mind when she continually chooses to trust Valcour and doubt/disregard Ashanti's warnings about him. I was infuriated by the way Félicité pretty much brushed off Ashanti's horrific rape and mutilation and murder. These two girls grew up together, she should have been at the very least as attached to Ashanti as she was to Valcour, but she seemed barely affected! It made me like her a lot less than I wanted to. Ashanti was selfless, smart, determined, and way too loyal for her own good. I couldn't believe the author disposed of her so abruptly, I was counting on her to kick some evil-brother ass for a lot longer. My favorite part of this book is how Morgan tries to make up for the way he brutally raped her in the beginning. It happened in a moment of bloodlust and anger because he was ambushed by three men trying to murder him and for all intents and purposes it appeared that she was part of the plot, acting as bait. I'll be honest, I had no problem with it because of the way he didn't trivialize his actions, and actually seemed more conscious and affected by it than she was throughout the rest of the story. He doesn't skimp on the self-abasement and angst, and thus totally redeems himself in my eyes. The romance between them was intense and comes with a satisfying payoff at the end, with one of the most gorgeous, extravagantly passionate declarations of love by a romance hero everrrrr. Small excerpt from his grand speech: "The thought of you is a constant flow in my mind, and has been since the first moment I saw you with the contents of that damnable chamber pot perfuming the air!" I'll never smell a chamber pot again without thinking of you! Swoon! Seriously though it's a great speech and I won't quote any more of it so you can enjoy it yourself. Loved this book!
