1996 and Cathy O’Dowd puts in a great effort to get selected to join a South African expedition team in its attempt to climb the classic south route up Everest. What an expedition group she was in and not in a good way. No-one got on and the men just moaned or were sexist and abhorrent. They really come over as pathetic. The woman doctor was dismissed for being irresponsible. It was a mess of a team that Ian Woodall was leading. President Nelson Mandela penned a message ‘When I met the team I warned them it would not be easy and there would be set-backs. This has now happened. I call upon all members to try and settle the matter. This expedition is very important. It is important for South Africa. Our young sports people are reaching for the stars. I wish the team well.’ Well, what a start to this great and inspiring book. If it wasn’t enough attempting to climb Everest, you have to contend with a completely dysfunctional expedition team that had no Everest experience. You know from the title of the book that Cathy triumphs and you do root for her in this really well written book. Guess what, this is the same time that Jon Krakauer went up and wrote ‘Into Thin Air’ about the 1996 disaster. That is a terrific book by the way but Cathy gives her views on the factual content. Half this book is spent on this expedition and it whizzes by. There is a lot more drama with the climb and the aftermath. The second half of the book concentrates on the north side climb from Tibet which is harder than the south and a hell of a lot windier it seems. There is more than enough drama in this climb as well to compare with the first. What this book did not have was the massive ego of a man coming through. These types of books written by men get cramped with ‘inspirational quotes’ and how tough and focused they are so what a nice change to just hear the facts presented in such a normal manner. No bravado. No, look at me, beat chest, blah blah blah. What Cathy achieved was remarkable and this book is a great accompaniment to her achievements.
