" I Was Dora Suarez ” is the fourth book in Derek Raymond 's Factory series. The Factory novels, nominal police procedurals are narrated by an unnamed protagonist, a sergeant at London's Metropolitan Police Department of Unexplained Deaths, also known as A14. A14 handles the lowlife murders which are in stark contrast to the headline-grabbing homicides handled by the prestigious Serious Crimes Division, better known as Scotland Yard. After the relatively pedestrian third Factory novel, How the Dead Live (still good mind), I have the impression that Derek Raymond was trying to get the series back on track. I Was Dora Suarez opens with a very grisly pair of murders that could put off many people, however the murders serve to inform the righteousness of the sergeant’s unorthodox, avenging, victim-centric approach. One of the victims, the eponymous Dora Suarez, left some written thoughts that inform a growing, all encompassing love between cop and victim. The book's best sections come with Dora's diary passages and the unnamed sergeant's reactions and ruminations. These sections are in stark contrast to the tendency, which was also present in the previous book, for the sergeant to conduct himself like a camp playground bully, addressing people with possible information as “love”, “darling” and “sweetheart”, after having threatened them or beaten them. These sections let the book down and some became quite boring and repetitive - and also seem at odds with the more lyrical sections. So a curate’s egg of a book. I think if I Was Dora Suarez had been my entry point into this series I would wondered what was going on, and probably wouldn't feel inspired to read on, however, taken as part of the unnamed sergeant's nihilistic trajectory, it makes more sense. I will certainly read the fifth and final book but I do not think this series, so far, has quite delivered on the promise of the first book, " He Died With His Eyes Open ”. 3/5 The five books in Derek Raymond 's Factory series are... 1. He Died With His Eyes Open (1984) 2. The Devil's Home on Leave (1985) 3. How the Dead Live (1986) 4. I Was Dora Suarez (1990) 5. Dead Man Upright (1993) Click here to read my review of "He Died With His Eyes Open" (Factory 1) (1976) Click here to read my review of "The Devil's Home on Leave" (Factory 2) (1985) Click here to read my review of "How the Dead Live" (Factory 3) (1986) Click here to read my review of "I Was Dora Suarez" (Factory 4) (1990) Click here to read my review of "Dead Man Upright" (Factory 5) (1990) Click here to read a discussion thread about Derek Raymond
