The war is over, but not for one man and one woman for reasons of their own..they each carry the scars and great burdens because of it. Luke and Lettie, putting their pasts behind them set out on the same wagon train headed west to find a new and better life. Little did they realize that their lives would entwine together towards that future and that it would be filled with passion, excitement, joys and sorrows as well as danger. This is the story of a beautiful young woman, and a rugged ex-soldier that struggle against the odds to carve out an empire of their own, and forge a beautiful and magnificent love story that will stay with the reader long after their story is told. This fantastic saga of Luke and Lettie Fontaine is packed with adventure, murderous desperadoes, raiding Sioux Indians among a harsh an unforgiving land. Violence and tragedy will stalk these two, but they stand together with a love so strong throughout their story that it leaves the reader amazed at how much they endure as they are forced with brutal challenges, that will end with heart rending choices. Will this abandoned lawless land destroy them? Or will Luke and Lettie fight heart and soul for their Wildest Dreams? CHARACTERS: Luke Fontaine: Denied & disinherited by his father he sets out to prove to him & his brother he would build the biggest ranch in Montana,and give everything and anything to the woman he loves. Even if it turns him into a ruthless man ready to kill. Lettie Fontaine: Luke showed her how to open her heart and love again,after one man nearly destroyed her soul.But another man's desire could ruin all she cherished. And would another woman find a way to her husbands bed? Nathan: Conceived in violence and destined for tragedy,Lettie's young son would be stolen from his mothers arms by the Sioux and raised as a warrior..would he attack his own flesh and blood? Tyler: First-born Fontaine son, he is his father's spitting image, a boy destined to love a woman he can never have and to hate the half brother who will become his enemy and rival. Katie: A true child of the frontier,she is a hard-riding cowgirl,the apple of her father's eye... and soon the pawn in an outlaw's plan of revenge. This is my third time reading this book, I gave it a 5 star rating twice before and now again, as it captured and touched me once more. If I could, I would rate it a 10 because that is how much it captured me. The only other book that I have read that I loved so much and became a part of the Hero and Heroine's life as I read it was Outlander, and recently" Women of the Wind" by Margaret Ritter (with a review pending for it.) This book..Wildest Dreams, and "Women of the Wind" are neck to neck on my keeper shelf. But once again I was swept away into Luke and Lettie's story and loved every re-reading minute of it. And once again, it was hard to say good-bye.. and how many books can do that?
