What an enjoyable walk through the liturgical year with Nora. She is insightful, reflective and very likable. She leads me back along the trail to my Episcopal roots. Much like Wendell Berry’s fox, which Gallagher holds up as it “makes more tracks than necessary,” my mind was back and forth through several stages in my own spiritual journey and through several church families. I agree with Berry that we should emulate the fox, because the tracks in the wrong direction are still of value for the insight they provide and error they clarify, much like reading Things Seen and Unseen did for me. It was ironically fitting that Gallagher headed each chapter with a season of the church calendar and then, in true Episcopal form, she titles the last chapter “Ordinary Time,” which is in fact Roman Catholic and not Episcopal at all. She takes this liberty, because she, wait for it,“likes the idea of it.” I giggle now even as I type. Yes, Episcopalians allow themselves a lot of leeway because they “like the idea of it.” Founded by a King looking for a way around his vows they do not have a strong doctrine set down by a Thomas, Luther, Calvin, or Zwingli, and they do not have magisterial leadership like that of the Pope. We are introduced to a number of congregational members through her involvement in a “Base Community,” like a Covenant Group or dedicated prayer group, it brings together congregational members who may not become close under any other circumstance, but through this group share their joys and challenges and spiritual journeys together. The bonds often become stronger than family as she stresses the strength of the church family. Gallagher serves in the soup kitchen operating out of the church’s facility, which provides a wonderful glimpse into the daily challenges of ministering to that population. Her characters ring true to me as I remember my time providing Welfare to Work counseling. She wrestles with issues of leadership and the nature of working with volunteers. With a non-profit administration lens she provides some very insightful reflections. As a previous Treasurer, I found Trinity’s budget typical and inspiring as a testament of their faith. Part and parcel of trusting the Holy Spirit moving among them, they find themselves over budget by $17k for the current year and tentatively budget $30k into the red for the next year. Yes, in the red; running a soup kitchen on prayed-for, quickly rotting carrots that show up exactly when the soup pot is alarmingly empty. This phenomenon was openly discussed in one of my previous church families and was lauded for its ability to guarantee the tapping of currently unforeseeable funding. Gallagher quotes James Carroll describing the Holy Spirit as the “gift of imagination” and “the spark of fire that fills us with desire for the future.” Indeed. Trinity is depicted throughout the process of calling a new priest with the hopes of enlivening a dwindling number of “pledging units” and they call an openly homosexual candidate who has been serving as interim right around the time Bishop Righter was being tried in a church court for ordaining a practicing homosexual priest in 1990 claiming it went against a 1979 resolution. Their subcommittee on Sexuality hosts a workshop where Gallagher accuses the church of being irrelevant throughout the sexual “revolution”. The workshop spawns a subcommittee to work on ‘Homosexual Union Blessings’. I will not leap into that pit right now. Moving off that hot button topic and onto a spiritual practice Gallagher brings to light several times throughout the course of the journey. She talks about the creation of a canvas labyrinth for meditative walking. I really enjoyed her gem from Dorothy Day in the context of the Communion of Saints or the “Communion of Workers” as Day calls them. Gallagher imagines the labyrinth as a spiritual tool handed down as a “gift from the artists who conceived and made it, a gift from the Middle Ages.” Thank you Nora for sharing your spiritual journey and sharing your church family with your readers. You have joined in the Communion of Workers and invite your readers to do the same by example.
