Nora Roberts - Second Nature Journalist Lee lives and breathes for her job in the magazine Celebrity. When she finds out the secretive, but world famous crime author Hunter is going to an author conference in Arizona, she jumps at her chance to grab an interview. Albeit there’s no reporters allowed, she sneaks in as an aspiring writer and connects with a handsome driver from her hotel. Later she realise that he’s no driver at all and actually Hunter who’ll let her get an interview on one condition; she has to join a two week long hike with him. Nora Roberts write easy and fast paced books. They’re perfect palate cleansers while they also provide good entertainment. This is one of her earlier works (published in 1985) and it’s kind of fun to read about a time very different, yet similar to ours. Since most of the book revolves around the hike, I didn’t notice it that much, but it was still amusing. The book is simultaneously insta-lovey and enemies-to-lovers. There’s instant attraction between Lee and Hunter but as soon as they uncover each others identity, the animosity grows. Lee’s angry with Hunter because he never told he was a famous author even though he knew she looked up to him. Hunter on the other hand, was annoyed Lee lied about being a journalist and wasted her talent on a gossip magazine. They were hot and cold, which made for interesting and amusing interactions. During the hike they learned to know each other in a new way and I liked that. It was an untypical and more intimate way of kinship that bloomed. Their banter was enjoyable and kept up the pace. I was fond of the scenery the author painted. Nature played a big part of the book and transformed the characters in a way. Lee grew from a spoiled city girl, to one who slew fish. It brought out her inner strength and showed a warmer and kinder side of Hunter. I thought the relationship progressed a bit too fast, but I didn’t mind it that much either. It was an entertaining, easy book and that’s what counts. ⭐️⭐️⭐️
