There are a lot of reviews for this book saying that it is the perfect ending to the series and it is such a happy ending. No! No it is not! I wish I stopped the series at book 14! I wish nothing in this book ever happened! I love this series, but this book did not make me happy not at all! I really need to rant about this! Seriously, only continue if you've read this book (or if you want to take my advice and never read, but want to know what went down). So, we begin with a "nice" prologue. Hunter essentially proposes to Morgan. Then he frexing dies the next day! Of course there's no body, so I think He'll come back later, he has to be okay! Cate Tiernan wouldn't let me ship them for 12 frexing books only to kill him, right? Then we skip ahead sixteen years to see Miora, Morgan's daughter. Apparently, after her true love dies, Morgan marries another man (a month later). This man apparently died less than a year ago. Probably to free up space to bring Hunter in the picture again. Most of the book is Moira finding out basically everything that happened in the last 14 books because Morgan didn't tell her daughter anything (bad move). And a repeat of many things that happened in the last books (Moira crushes on a boy that has an evil mother and there is another dark wave). So, Morgan finds out that Hunter is still alive (long story) and is trapped on an island. Iona, Ciaran's other daughter, put him on the island and she had this whole plan that spanned 16 years. Honestly, it made no frexing sense to me. She says that she wanted to wait until Moira was old enough to feel pain when her parents die in front of her, because Iona had to watch Ciaran die. But later we find out that Iona killed Ciaran, so honestly I really don't understand the motive or why the hell she would drag this on for 16 frexing years. (to be honest, maybe it was explained more. I was so upset at this point that I was beginning to skim read). So, Iona is killed, Hunter rescued, there's a dark wave that is stopped by the power of teamwork, and we get a "happy ending". No! We do not! I see reviews calling it happy, but the only way this ending would be happy is if somehow time was reverted and Hunter never "drowned". Basically it ends with Hunter proposing marriage again to Morgan, which should make me happy, but I cannot help but think of how much they have lost. Hunter has spent 16 years on a dreary prison island, Morgan spent that entire time thinking he was dead, and Moira never got to know her father (oh yeah, Hunter is her real father) and he is basically a stranger to her! Yeah, they are together again, but I am frustrated that the lost so much because of Iona! And again, HER REASONS MADE NO SENSE!!! Sorry, I am rambling, but I am pissed off! I binge read this series and it ends with this! I really wish I never read this book! I could've been happy with the ending of book 14. I really want to give this book one star, but I like the rest of the books enough to not resort to that. It's like How I Met Your Mother all over again. Damn, I wish I never watched that last episode
