In one of Mercer Mayer's more socially confrontational picture books, we see Little Critter and his sister react under fire to the frequent admonition of their parents that they should "always stick up for each other." When a bully of her very own latches onto Little Sister at school, Little Critter stands up to the mean young gator, only to have this approach backfire as the bully forgets about Little Sister and shifts focus to harassing Little Critter every moment of the school day. If the bully refuses to let up, can Little Critter ever feel secure at school again? The bully is a lot bigger than Little Sister, and Little Critter knows from the start that it's no fair fight. But the antagonistic gator is also too big for Little Critter, so there's not much he can do to stop him when the bully makes him his new target. The bully shoots rubber bands at him, trips him in the hallway, calls him bad names, and wrecks a school project Little Critter worked hard to complete. Informing the teacher of the bullying only worsens the situation. Now Little Critter fears returning to school, and when he does, his scaly-skinned bully is waiting to start a scuffle with him. There may be no recourse for Little Critter but to raise his small fists and try to mount a passable physical defense of himself, but that's not likely to work out well for anyone. The bully may never change his mind and attitude about pushing around those littler than himself, but pushback from an unexpected source could at least level the playing field, if it's a source to which the bully has no effective answer. Bullies can be ruthless and crush one's spirit; they can force their victim underground so he or she doesn't ever safe resurfacing, but the proper support can keep a bully at bay and remind the harangued that all can still be good after the trauma. Rainclouds move on and the sky sparkles cerulean again, and we might almost forget we ever were bullied. Like Little Critter, revel in your surprise reinforcements when they come, keep looking up, and this too shall pass. The subtext of Just a Bully 's illustrations is worth a mention, though not every reader will catch it. For most Little Critter stories, there's a mouse hidden (or not-so-hidden) in every picture, but in Just a Bully the mouse plays a sidebar role in the narrative. The mouse has its own mouse bully to contend with, one who mimics the gator bully's tactics against Little Critter to push around the mouse, whose reactions to the intimidation mirror Little Critter's. It's a relief to see Little Critter and the mouse both get out from under their bullies' thumbs by the end of the book. Their intertwining stories are a great touch, and I consider Just a Bully one of Mercer Mayer's better books. I would give it two and a half stars, and considered going higher. I sincerely recommend this to readers of any age.
