Update: 'This Outcast Generation' (really, 'Generation of Vipers') is an even better work by this major writer who's been ignored by the West. This review is for 'Luminous Moss' only. it's the tale of a sea captain and his 3 seamen, on an ill-fated journey during world war ii that left them shipwrecked with only a small cave for shelter and absolutely no food. it is the tale of ghastly cannibalism and the horrific death that is starvation. yet it begins as a sunny travelogue, with the author travelling to the far north of hokkaido to see the elusive luminous moss growing there. with the help of an amiable school principal. he locates it. said principal, with all his amiability. hints at a tale of a sea captain who devoured his crew. "fantastic characters really do exist!" he proclaims repeatedly, without a trace of repulsion. the author, after collecting more information on this incident struggles to find a way to turn it into a story, given its gruesome subject matter will be a hard sell. and then without warning, we segue into a play. the reader is the producer, always receiving cues from the author. it is overflowing with symbolism, which is not my favorite device, especially if the author tells his audience to make their own interpretations. that is, for lack of a better term, a cop-out, and a free pass for the writer to let his pretentious side go wild. not to mention when all is said and done, the symbolism amounts to nothing. but this isn't really what takeda is doing with 'luminous moss.' the meaning behind the abundant symbolism gradually becomes clear, and as we sense the author isn't some David Lynchian con artist, our mind search for the deeper meaning in this novella/novelette. it should leave open and receptive readers with several things to ponder long after they've turned the final page. and the narrative structure is unlike anything i've ever seen. takeda was one of the first major post-war writers, but unfortunately, we only have these two novellas in english. he does nothing to hide his contempt for japan's involvement in the war and the horrific hypocrisy of the emperor, who most japanese viewed as an actual deity. he's also vocal about japan's treatment of koreans, and mostly about japan's treatment of the indigenous ainu. so if you're a left-wing crybaby, his writings will give you a lot to chew on. but finding others to share this material with, or any japanese art for that matter, is a silly dream that will never be fulfilled. americans could not care less about japan's artistic culture and opt for lame anime, miike gorefests, and internet videos showing how weeeeird and lolo lolololol japan is. philistines.
