Ooooh Gothic romance. I am a sucker for these… Your sister dies giving birth to a child who should inherit a fortune. What do you do? Well, if you’re Elizabeth, you pick up the baby, take the wet nurse, hire a carriage and travel to the dead husband’s family plantation and you pretend to be your sister Ellen-Marie; the baby’s future depends on it. Lucky Ellen Marie was a recent widow and his family has never met her. Her first night at Oak Shade plantation someone puts a jar of spiders in her bed. It is only the first of several attempts on her life. It has the correct Gothic recipe: a lone girl, an isolated plantation, two options for hero, a mystery (the death of Gaspard), and many odd goings on. A large family: Grand’mere, Gaspard her dead son (maybe pushed off his ladder), his sons Felix (dead - married to Ellen-Marie) and Bernard; Gaspard’s second wife Alma Delacroix, her children from her first marriage (Darcourt and Theresa who is perhaps insane); Celestine, Felix’s fourth cousin and betrothed before he left for war (now keen on both Bernard and Darcourt); and Denise the old woman’s French maid. There is also an overseer who is besotted with Alma, but sacked by Bernard for fraud. Bernard looks like this: There was a chiseled appearance to the planes of his face, in the high cheek bones, firm chin, and the contours of his mouth. Thick black brows divided by two parallel grooves, as of constant anger or irritation, gave him a forbidding look. There had been a faint French accent in his speech that might have been attractive if his voice had not been so cold. The only thing about him that she could approve was that he was clean shaven, though this was a mark of a strong, near arrogant, self-confidence in a hirsute decade. (Kindle Locations 130-134). And Darcourt like this: His hair gleamed in golden waves under the candlelight and his laughing eyes appeared blue, though it was hard to be certain at such a distance. As she watched he lounged back in his chair, said something to Celestine, and touched a fingertip to his neat mustache, which was a shade darker in color than his hair. (Kindle Locations 202-204). Contrast. No? Evidently, Felix wrote a will and posted it back with some letters about his lovely frail wife. Elizabeth isn’t frail. But what she is, is stuck. She has no money, Bernard is appointed as baby Joseph’s guardian (in the will she hasn’t seen), her maid Calliope is a runaway slave and technically belongs to the mortgagee who took over their plantation OR to Bernard as part of his brother’s estate (property of his wife and all that). She has no money, and no family of her own. There is twenty thousand in a bank account for the widow but it’s also controlled by Bernard and he wants to use it to invest in the plantation. And she can’t even entice a man with her fortune, as the money will revert to Joseph’s estate on her re-marriage… or death. But she can’t prove Felix married Ellen as the marriage certificate, baptism certificate and the family bible disappeared out of her luggage when someone knocked Callie out and left the baby at the top of the stairs. Theresa made an odd statement about babies dying… but Elizabeth feels for her and takes Joseph to her room when she is locked up. When Theresa tells her she is seventeen Elizabeth argues to Bernard that the girl should be treated as an adult and not dressed like a child. But Alma overhears the maid Callie call her Miss Elizabeth. Both Darcourt and Bernard show an interest in Elizabeth but if she marries either, it will be immediately obvious that she’s never had sex let alone given birth to a child. To the left rose a wide staircase with a mahogany stair rail ending at the foot of the stairs in a serpentine coil that served as a newel post. In the center of the coil was fixed a smooth ivory button, a symbol that the house was paid for, that it carried no mortgage. (Kindle Locations 100-101). I looked that up and it seems it is a myth. The button was supposed to be a cover over the stored mortgage papers. Myth because no papers have ever been found inside, and mortgages like that didn’t exist in that time either. Intriguing. How do these things even start? *** This is another of Blake’s 1974 romances re-released on Kindle and other than a few obvious bad scanning errors, it was highly entertaining. 4 stars Show more
