3/2020- joining in with Detectives group for my umpteenth reread - Cadfael is a comforting delight, and as a member pointed out, with all the horrible virus news, we could all use a comfort read about now! 2018 - Another wonderful outing in the series which made me a lover of historical mysteries many years ago, when I first met Cadfael. I had forgotten the plots, so rereading the series is like reading each book for the first time. This time, Cadfael is called to administer what aid he can to a dying man (Gervase Bonel) who has just signed his manor over to Shrewsbury Abbey and moved into “retirement” on abbey grounds with his household (a house, daily meals from the abbey kitchens and stabling for a horse are provided, in exchange for the manor). Cadfael is unable to save the man, who has been poisoned, but recognizes the widow as Richildis, the sweetheart of his youth. This attachment adds a poignant touch to the mystery, and further fleshes out Cadfael’s fascinating life story; Richildis was happily married before Master Bonel, and her youngest son had been named heir to Bonel’s manor, as he had no legitimate children of his own. Bonel was apparently a stubborn, difficult man and fell out with Edwin, his heir and Richildis’ youngest child. Edwin becomes prime suspect in the poisoning murder of his step-father. What I loved about these mysteries, and am rediscovering, is the appeal of a much slower pace of life - apparent throughout is Cadfael’s acceptance of who he is, his vocation, the worth of this contemplative life he has chosen after a lifetime soldiering and sailing around the world, and his humility and decency. Nothing surprises him, he truly treasures every day among his herb garden, making potions and remedies to care for his brothers and townsfolk as needed. Peters created a wonderful character, and her research and beautifully written stories are full of peace, tranquility and humanity, and provide a satisfying puzzle, as well; I enjoyed them when I first read them 20+ years ago, and in the current political climate, I find them a balm to my overloaded nerves, and am enjoying getting reacquainted with Cadfael and his world.
