4:50 from Paddington is the 8th novel by Agatha Christie to feature her genteel amateur sleuth, Miss Marple. It was first published in 1957, and might well have been the first novel I read by Agatha Christie. I remember the day when I was first allowed through the double doors from the children’s library to the main adult library. I was perhaps 14. The libraries which still have special children’s tickets now, seem to specify ages of 5 to between 13-16, but many libraries now incorporate both adult and children’s sections within one library. Nevertheless, the thrill of that day remains with me. What would I choose? In fact I chose one book by Agatha Christie and a Sherlock Holmes one by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (only to discover when I got home that a visiting relative told me one was much better than the other, but refused to tell me which! I now think he was being a little snooty about Dame Agatha …) Did he have good reason? Well this is not her best crime novel, although it is certainly enjoyable. It features a murder on a train, one of Agatha Christie’s favourite devices, since it is a variant on the locked room mystery, with the added spice of locomotion. British fans of her books would have a good idea of what was about to occur when they read the title 4:50 from Paddington , as Paddington is one of the largest railway terminal stations in London. Their appetites would be whetted for a murder mystery similar to “Murder on the Orient Express” - two decades earlier, and with Hercule Poirot as detective - in 1934. However an international reading audience of 1957 may not have been as conversant with London railway stations as they are now, so the author’s American publishers decided not to risk this title, but instead call it “What Mrs. McGillycuddy Saw! , complete with arresting exclamation mark. Instead of heightening the intrigue for British audiences though, this title may well have conjured up sleazy ”What the Butler Saw!” seaside coin-in-the-slot Victorian peepshows, or French farces. At any rate Collins publishers decided on discretion, and later British editions always have the original title 4:50 from Paddington . The story begins in a gripping way, with the murder taking place very early on. Mrs. Elspeth McGillicuddy is on the train from London, setting off to visit her friend Miss Jane Marple in St. Mary Mead. At one point on the track her train passes another, running in the same direction. We know from one of the titles, (and by the genre we are reading) the sort of thing she is likely to see which would merit an exclamation mark in 1957. These were times well before the almost mandatory use of exclamation marks in current textspeech. Mrs. McGillycuddy is of course horrified, and reports this to various officials, but after taking a look at her lurid reading material, and noting her age, they put her down as a dotty old lady having a vivid dream as she indulged herself having a snooze for forty winks. However, Miss Marple knows that her friend is an honest woman - and has no imagination at all - so that what she reports as having seen must be the literal truth. She insists that the police follow this up, which they do to the best of their ability, but since there is no evidence to bear out what Mrs. McGillycuddy was so sure she had seen, i.e. no body, nor any evidence of a man having strangled a woman they inevitably come to the same conclusion as the railway guards and officials. Mrs. McGillycuddy has gone off on holiday abroad by now, but Miss Marple is still cogitating. She is feeling the effects of old age by now, and is no longer as sprightly as she once was, although her mental acuity remains as sharp as ever. Miss Marple has quizzed her friend closely, and knows exactly which train she took. She analyses the possibilities on a map, and takes several rides by train to determine where the body must be. There is only one possible contender: the grounds of Rutherford Hall. Those who have ever travelled by train in Britain or Europe may wonder about the likely topography of the route taken by the 4:50 from Paddington . Agatha Christie herself researched this quite closely before she wrote her novel. The Paddington line serves the stations to Devon. However there must be a possibility of two parallel tracks at some point on the line, unless we are to believe that the entire scene was some sort of mirrored reflection (which is not beyond the bounds of possibility; this author has used this device before after all.) There must also be somewhere for the murderer to tip out the body from the train without being seen, and for the body to lie hidden until it could be retrieved . Agatha Christie found all this in the real life Abney Hall, the splendid Victorian mansion belonging to the Watts family. Agatha Christie spent many Christmasses and holidays there with her best friend and sister-in-law Nan Watts. So she transposed this hall and its environs to Devon, and fictionalised it as the slightly down-at-heel “Rutherford Hall”. The lodge has since been demolished, and only the gates are left standing, but the description of Rutherford Hall in the opening chapters fits this perfectly. In addition, a Victorian map of the estate of Abney Hall show the proximity of two railway lines; the London and the North West lines. One of these has since been lifted for economic reasons, but when Agatha Christie originally wrote the novel, they were there, adjacent to Abney Hall. In 1961, four years after the book was first published, MGM decided to begin a series of Miss Marple films, kicking off with 4:50 from Paddington , which they renamed “Murder, She Said.” It had a strong cast, led by Margaret Rutherford, despite the fact that Agatha Christie herself said that although Margaret Rutherford was a “fine actress” , she bore no resemblance to her own idea of Miss Marple. Agatha Christie had seen her own ideal incarnation of Miss Marple; a young woman at the time, but who would be perfect in the future when she eventually grew older. It was a young woman playing a maid on the London stage, and her name was Joan Hickson. And of course Joan Hickson did indeed go on to play Miss Marple for the BBC, not only in a dramatisation of 4:50 from Paddington in 1987, but also in dramatisations of every short story and novel Agatha Christie wrote with Miss Marple in; the entire canon. Plus Joan Hickson actually had a small part in this first 1961 film “Murder, She Said” , playing Mrs. Kidder. The 1987 adaptation with Joan Hickson is my preferred one, and I have watched it many times, even though it differs from the novel itself in a few key places. Sometimes this is to enable a smooth continuation of the television series, such as adding Inspector Duckham and the recurring characters from the BBC television series, Inspector Slack and Sergeant Lake, and making Detective-Inspector Dermot Craddock, Miss Marple’s godson rather than Sir Henry Clithering’s. There is no poisoning of the family, and Alfred is still alive at the end, although suffering from a terminal illness that Dr. Quimper had apparently misdiagnosed deliberately. Anna Stravinka’s real name is revealed as “Martine Isabelle Perrault”, although in the novel, her real name is unknown. Thus the twist where James Stoddard-West’s mother is Martine is deleted from the script for the dramatisation, and the real Martine is not seen. Both of these threads are inventions of the 1987 BBC film, plus there is one which is lifted straight from the 1961 film: Harold is murdered in what appears to be a hunting accident, and not by poisoned tablets. This was explained as being because Dr. Quimper suspected that Harold knew who the victim was, as Harold had a deep passion for dancing, and collected posters of the same ballet troupe she was in. . The two young boys also feature more largely in the adaptation, even being there shortly after the discovery of the body in the sarcophagus , and at the end, Miss Marple openly expresses her views about an upcoming marriage, which she does not do in the novel. However, none of these minor story changes affect the plot line adversely in my opinion, and it is surely to its advantage that Miss Marple is played by the author’s own personal choice of actor. The BBC also dramatised the novel as a single 90-minute episode for radio, which was first broadcast in March 1997. June Whitfield played Miss Marple, and went on to act the part in further dramatisations; I feel she acts the part authentically. There is one remaining dramatisation, by ITV in 2004 for the series “Marple” starring Geraldine McEwan as Miss Marple. When it was shown in the US, the title was changed to “What Mrs McGillicuddy Saw!” This adaptation contains several major changes from the novel, which diverge from the novel so much that it is almost a completely different story! I shan’t bother to enumerate them, since the entire series of “Marple” seems to be staged differently from Agatha Christie’s intention, with the actors playing their parts in such a droll, knowing way that the entire production seems camp. Some viewers like this, but it is not in keeping, in my view. Margaret Rutherford also played her role for laughs, although she was well received enough to reprise it for 3 further films of Agatha Christie’s novels. I very much enjoyed it at the time … not quite as early as 1961, as at that time English local cinemas used to show films which had been released a few years before. I had never read an Agatha Christie novel, but I knew the name, so accordingly in the long school holiday one summer, still entitled to a child’s 6d. ticket, I took the bus (or perhaps walked) on my own to the local cinema to see “Murder She Said!” I loved it, ripply pink curtains rising over the black and white screen and all, and from then on determined that I would visit the cinema as often as I could. Again, such solitary pleasures are probably denied to today’s children, in a world full of fears for them, both real and imaginary. My rating of four stars is in part an affection for this novel, rather than an objective rating. In fairness it probably should stay at my default of three stars. There are huge coincidences, for instance knowing a detective inspector at Scotland Yard personally (Dermot Craddock, who first met Miss Marple in “A Murder is Announced” and was also to work with her in "The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side" ). Not only that, but also in this case she has a great-nephew, David, who works for British Railways. Also, is it likely that Miss Marple, in these class-ridden novels, would know just the right sort of person to be a maid of all work at Rutherford Hall ? We are expected to believe that she and her brothers are all academic highflyers, and that she Lucy Eyelesbarrow is a veritable mathematical genius, yet prefers to work hard at short-term grinding domestic labour, in order to have the money to go on holidays abroad. This seems to be a carefully contrived plot device, rather than a realistic and believable portrait of a young woman of the time. And (sorry Dame Agatha!) a couple of the changes in the 1987 film do seem to make the plot more plausible. A fellow crime writer of the time, Anthony Berkeley Cox, (who wrote under the pen name of Francis Iles), wrote in “The Guardian” newspaper that he was disappointed. He admitted to a liking for the “sprightly stories” of Agatha Christie, but also looked for: “detection: genuine, steady, logical detection, taking us step by step nearer to the heart of the mystery. Unfortunately it is that quality that is missing in 4.50 from Paddington . The police never seem to find out a single thing, and even Miss Marples (sic) lies low and says nuffin’ to the point until the final dramatic exposure. There is the usual small gallery of interesting and perfectly credible characters and nothing could be easier to read. But please, Mrs Christie, a little more of that incomparable detection next time.” And the current mystery writer Robert Barnard seems to agree, saying that it: “settles down into a good old family murder. Contains one of Christie’s few sympathetic independent women. Miss Marple apparently solves the crime by divine guidance, for there is very little in the way of clues or logical deduction.” Nevertheless it is an entertaining read, with plenty of engaging characters, and a murderer who is cleverly disguised for almost the entire story. I have no doubt that I will choose it again, should I need a comfort mystery read (or watch) when I have the ’flu. As the critic of the “Times Literary Supplement” in 1957 said: “Miss Christie never harrows her readers, being content to intrigue and amuse them.”
