Shuffling the through the dreamlight and crepuscular dusk of life, the rubicon stands as a dividing line--can we go beyond into the vale and realize our full potential, or will we see it as a border, a barrier beyond which is nothing but death, an end? Steve Erickson's fictions move outside of time and logic, they're highly surreal affairs where character is fluid, plot is fluid, and the aesthetics of the moment make significance. Erickson is a true surrealist in the classical since of his need to juxtapose diametric things, binaries, inconsistencies, and clash them together. In his second novel, Rubicon Beach , he splashes murder against infatuation against disillusionment against geography against self-fulfillment. Broken into three parts, each constituent part is a self-contained arc with lingering motifs, character details, even dialog and thoughts woven through creating a vein of meaning coursing through each story. In the first section, Cale--a recently paroled prisoner living in an alternate version of Los Angeles--is entranced by visions of a black haired woman with glowing eyes murdering a man, however, there is no murder. In his quest to find the woman, Cale discovers the strangest mystery of all: the identity of the man slain by the siren. In Part Two, a South American woman is kidnapped from her village by a shell game conman who travels from town to town by boat, and swindles the locals out of their wealth by playing games of solitaire. Eventually, the young woman escapes her captivity and makes her way to America where she is promptly taken as a slave/housekeeper. Parallels are drawn to Catherine of Part Two and the murderess of Part One, and the home owner where she's captive is driven to a madness of his own. The concluding section tells the story of a man who discovers a missing number that exists between nine and ten, and is set out to disprove himself, only to find there is only a way to disprove everything except the mysterious number's existence. In his life, the man meets an old gentleman living in England named Cale who speaks of a black haired woman they must find. As the twining narratives tell an incomplete story of the protagonists, it's in the third section of the book where Erickson tells us the meaning of this book, of the title, "He was standing on the banks of a river listening to something from the other side, something he had never heard but had always known . And instead of crossing the river, he listened for as long as he could stand it and then turned his back and returned the way he had come. And he's never heard it again. He should have crossed that river." I don't want to parse this too much, because I think to do so would reduce it to platitude and cliche, but it is not cliche because it has power and echoing significance, resonant with the variegated lives of the three protagonists of the novel. In life we come to points of no return--and maybe time itself is that invisible barrier which we struggle to keep from crossing--but it's with courage and ambition that we do cross it, embrace life and light. What's on the other side? It could be absolution or it could be death, but to stand at the precipice, we learn not what exists in the gaping void beyond, but only the things we have already learned and know.
