He was the check-out clerk who always had something to say. Not in an annoying way; not like, just because he worked in a used book store, that made him some kind of expert. Rather, that there was a better than average chance that your purchase could give him a moment's joy. So, he didn't just zap the stuck-on bar code. He held the book. Bit by bit, his face broke into a wry smile. "'A California Gothic'"? He set this book in California, specifically with an opening scene driving on U.S. 101 in Mendocino County, but also with cultural hues like a 'time-chasm', 'karmic aether' and 'the fire-breath of her astral shelf'. A fog of cynicism, a smoke, from having one foot still in Vietnam, will not lift. We are lost. . .we are scrotally alone in the universe. There is death, but, more so, dying. The act and art of dying. He 'dates' the chapters by separate days or by a handful of days, all between August and October, 1991. Yet, even in those few months, the days crisscross, like 'Pulp Fiction', a character we know to be dead, returned to die again. Already dead . So, yes, a California Gothic. He uses constantly shifting points of view, almost always a third-person observation with a hint of omniscience. The third-person is invariably one of the handful of main male characters, the female characters having roles which allow the male characters to react or which serve to perpetuate a stereotype (a Wyccan priestess; a born-again; a Black Widow). This allows him to open virtually every chapter with a a few paragraphs of HE, challenging the reader to identify which of the guys is wandering in the fog. In a few chapters, he failed to figure out which he he was writing about. He is not unintelligent, some say, but he can be an asshole, others believe. One of the main characters is a cop, flawed, but with a capacity for understanding. It wasn't the badge's fault. The badge caused nothing. It didn't give you the disease, it only warned the others that you had it. Modern movements might nod knowingly, in unison; might bookmark it for later usage. But that's not what this was about. This was neither chant not rant. It was a Blues. Of souls lost in a certain time and a certain place. California Purples. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhKzg...
