Moberg refers to his trilogy detailing the immigration of Swedes to America as a set of documentary novels. This installment is set in 1850, was published in 1952, and here I am reading it 2022. Moberg is writing about a set of events from a century earlier, and I'm reading them another 70 years out, and it's a fascinating look both at the Swedish experience of immigration, and the pieces of the story that Moberg wanted to highlight and record. As in all pioneer stories, the theme of discovery and imposing order and productivity on the untouched chaos of nature is present throughout the book, though Moberg's characters are kinder and more sensitive to the Indigenous peoples of Minnesota than many other accounts like this. But Moberg doesn't just present hardship and righteous labour that overcomes - he also balances his account with the bewilderment of finding yourself in a place where you don't speak the language, know who to trust, and are vulnerable and powerless against enemies like cholera. Certainly, Karl Oskar builds a home for his family with his own two hands, wresting domesticity from the wilderness with the sweat of his brow, but this hero narrative is tempered with his dependency upon his fellow Swedish immigrants, and their experience of being totally awash as they first arrive. Moberg also gives a character who uses the immigration as a chance for complete rebirth, but unlike in many stories, Ulrika is a woman old enough to have a daughter in her late teens. Rather than a story of a man reinventing himself, Moberg shows us a woman stretching the limits of her agency in a time when women did not have much of it. This is a story about the American experience, but it's not what I would call an American story. Though Moberg retreads many of the familiar paths of immigration to America stories, he brings a different sensibility to things that I enjoyed. Also, it's totally wild to me that Kristina is most worried about the danger of snakes to her children when they're out alone in the woods, and not, you know, bears.
