This review is of “Only for Love” by Elaine Barbieri. The Story: In London, England, a wagon arrives at a harbor bearing cargo to board the Colonial Dawn, a ship heading for Jamaica. This cargo, however, is human: One hundred twenty people being shipped from England to Jamaica and the Colonies to work as indentured servants. Among those being shipped out are Gillian Haige, the heroine of the book, and her identical twin sister, Adria. The Haige twins are being indentured to pay their late father’s debts. From the moment she boards the ship, Gillian is in conflict with people, most notably Derek Andrews, the hero of the book and the captain of the Colonial Dawn. Derek is not happy about transporting human cargo; he’s doing it because he needs the money. Later, Adria become seriously ill due to the unsanitary conditions below deck. Gillian offers the only thing she has of value-herself-to Derek in exchange for his saving Adria. Derek agrees to the offer, and he and Gillian become lovers. All, however, is not well aboard the Carolina Dawn. In addition to Adria’s illness, there are other issues. Derek is jealous of Christopher Gibson, another indentured servant who is also attracted to Gillian. Then there are the malevolent forces: one is John Barrett, the “supercargo” who contracted with Derek. When Derek discovers the conditions below deck-after he and Gillian begin their affair-Derek captures Barrett and throws him into the brig. Barrett vows revenge on Derek. The other evil is in Jamaica, in the person of Emmaline Dorsett, Derek’s former lover, who, although she is married, vows to get Derek back, at any cost. After finding out about Derek and Gillian, Emmaline joins forces with Barrett to try to achieve their personal goals. When Gillian discovers that she is with child from Derek’s amorous attentions, she, Adria and Christopher hatch a plan to escape Jamaica. That plan is thwarted by Barrett, who kidnaps the trio. Derek saves them, Adria falls in love with Christopher, and the couples have their Happily Ever After. Upside: As always with Ms. Barbieri’s books, her characters emotions are on full display. Even when I don’t like those emotions, they are felt deeply by me as a reader. Downside: Also as always with Ms. Barbieri, her hero is a piece of human garbage. Derek is an obnoxious bastard, who treats Gillian like his possession, which according to the laws of the time, she was. He bullies, threatens, and emotionally abuses her. Yet, despite this, Gillian falls in love with him! At the beginning of the book, Gillian is a smart, strong, independent woman. By the end of the book, she’s a weak, Simpering Sara. Storylines are unfinished and unsatisfactory. Sex: There is slightly more sex here than in most of Ms. Barbieri’s books, but it’s still far from erotica. Violence: a shooting and several other killings. The violence is not graphic. Bottom Line: Elaine Barbieri is one of the most disappointing authors I’ve read. I’m very glad I only have one more book of hers, and then I can breathe a sigh of relief.
