Re read with The Christie Carnage -noobs, middlings & hoity tots WARNING : My thoughts are going to be scattered all over this review, Why? Because, I suck at reviewing. Lets begin from the beginning. So, some of the readers at the Indian Readers decided to read the complete works of Agatha Christie . I, being overly curious and enthusiastic, jumped right into with my fellow readers, despite of having read, re-read, watched, heard (audiobooks and those delicious BBC radio plays) multiple number of times. So the book most voted upon (roughly based on chronology of its publishing) was the Secret Adversary , published in the year 1922 (this was after Mysterious Affair at Styles ). Disclaimer : Prior to this I had never followed any chronology while reading her works. The primary reason was availability. Whatever books were available in the school and local libraries, had to make do with those. But that was almost 15 years back. (Totally useless information.) Coming back to the book, had I read, The Secret Adversary , some odd 10 years back, this book would have been a winner for me (getting older un fortunately has made me more critical). This book has one of my most favourite tropes- An espionage set during the First World War period . The idea of saving secret documents from the hands of the bad guys during one of my most favourite period of history (should have) got my juices flowing. The story had almost all the elements - secret societies with members having code names, dual identities, chasing and spying sequences, lost memories and of course murder. Despite of the things that should have made this great espionage book, the story went flat for me. The main characters, Tommy & Tuppence (Two people going to extreme lengths trying too hard for the sake of money and some idea of grand adventure) and Julius Hersheimmer somehow seemed a bit caricaturish to me. Exception perhaps was Sir James Peel Edgerton who made a clever and believable character. The plot too, IMO, was a bit too contrived. Then mid way, through the book, I recalled the bad guy was :-/ (curse of re-reading). Was languishing at 50%, had to speed up because my co-readers were already done with it (again completely rambling thoughts) I had started with the intention of giving it at least three stars, chopping off one star now. Was annoyed at times while reading those obvious coincidences and at Tommy’s tomfoolery, the way he would goad his captors. Here's an incident, "Good morning", said Tommy amiably. "You have NOT used Pear's soap, I see". "No light repartee, have you old bean? There, there, we can't always have brains as well as beauty..." Sorry, I was neither amused nor impressed with his bravado. Damn! Thats the reason I don’ t like doing reviews. The Secret Adversary gets only 2.25 stars from me. Having said that do not go by my verdict, Goodreads is teeming with good reviews. I would recommend it to all mystery/thriller aficionados
