Edward Hoch's famous list of the fifteen best impossible crime novels, compiled by seventeen authors and reviewers for his 1981 anthology, has John Sladek's Invisible Green as the fourteenth best---I think it could have credibly gone higher. Invisible Green feels like the last hurrah of this type of detective fiction. It isn't, of course, in a literal sense---writers will produce locked room mysteries with amateur detectives even after 1977---but the authors who'd championed such novels during the Golden Age were pretty much all gone by then---of the big names, I think only Ngaio Marsh was left, and the writers replacing them were interested in forensics, police procedurals, and “psychologically realistic” crime fiction. Sladek himself was primarily a scifi author. But if this occasionally feels like a eulogy ... The policeman snorted. "You're tired, Phin. And if you don't mind my saying so, the whole idea of an amateur sleuth is pretty tired as well. … it isn't a mopey one. John Sladek pays tribute to the genre by working skillfully within it, and although it has moments of profound pathos, it's really quite funny: "Phin, there's only one thing you can tell me," he said. "Who the hell's your haberdasher?" "Like the clothes, do you?" "No, I want to arrest the bastard, for fraud. God, you look like best man at a pimp's wedding." The premise is pure Golden Age---about thirty years after their last meeting, the mystery club The Seven Unravellers are having a reunion. When one of them dies before the event, the police put it down to natural causes---after all, he was an old man with a heart condition, found dead in his flat, which was locked and bolted from the inside. True, he believed he was being persecuted, but how could that be taken seriously when he also believed that vodka was a Russian mind control drug? But then, other members of the club start being murdered. Fortunately, Thackeray Phin, amateur detective and friend of one of the Unravellers, is on the scene. There's an immense amount to like about this novel; the pacing is tight, the characters are stock but well-drawn---I want to especially hone in on the Major, who is both awful (a crypto-Nazi) and pathetic, genuinely in danger but unable to separate it from his mental illness. Chilling stuff. Each murder is remarkable in some way—-while the first is the most classical “impossible crime” (how could the Major be murdered when, in his wild paranoia, he had turned his flat into a miniature fortress?), my favorite bit of jiggery-pokery is much more low-key: why did one of the victims seemingly not recognize his murderer, when he had been introduced to all the possible suspects? It's certainly not perfect; there are bits of awkwardness that feel like they could easily have been ironed out (there were unusual circumstances related to the death in an air raid of one of the Unravellers before the major events of the book, and Sladek seems a little uncertain whether those were public knowledge, for example, and I'm not sure a comic scene at the very end was really appropriate, given the emotional pain the unmasking of the killer must have caused several of the other characters), but overall, this is an extremely well-wrought example of a dying genre.
