As this is one of my textbooks for school, I only did the assigned readings for the class. I really enjoyed all of the readings I did and I have plans to read this volume from start to finish at some point. I'm just going to do a quick blurb and rating for each text I read for now so I can shelve this guy. Beowulf translated by Seamus Heaney 5/5 This was a poem I had wanted to read for a while and I was ecstatic for an excuse to finally do so. This Middle Ages epic poem did not disappoint in any way. The characters are charismatic and the tensions elicited between barbarism and civilization, good and evil, and pride and humility were fascinating components. I could dissect this text to death (and did in class), but I’ll refrain here. All in all it was fantastic, and I can see why J.R.R. Tolkien studied it like he did and wrote his own epic stories loosely based on it. The General Prologue, The Miller’s Prologue and Tale, The Wife of Bath’s Prologue and Tale , by Geoffrey Chaucer (from The Canterbury Tales ) 4/5 This is yet another great poem I had meant to read long before this since I hear about it everywhere. Actually reading it was a feat, so I’m glad I had a reason to do so or I’m not sure I could have persevered. The stories themselves were great, the characters have depth and are relatable, and their stories had wonderful comedic and/or dramatic effect while still managing to convey a major societal critique. The only issue I had was with Chaucer’s language, it is HORRIBLY difficult to read. The only way I managed to get the hang of it was by reading aloud and doing so in a Swedish-Medieval English hybrid accent. I sounded like an idiot but it worked. Chaucer’s best characters are his women, and I can’t wait to read this entire work and meet the entire cast. Morte Darthur , by Thomas Malory 5/5 If I am a sucker for anything, I am a sucker for Arthurian tales. They’re what I live for. This anthology only has four chapters from this major work in it, but they’re very good chapters. I believe they’re the last chapters of Book 21 and some from Book 20 (at least that’s what corresponds with the entire work of Morte Darthur that I have). The chapter names are _The Conspiracy Against Lancelot and Guinevere_, _War Breaks Out Between Arthur and Lancelot_, _The Death of Arthur_, and _The Deaths of Lancelot and Guinevere_. All deliver what they’re names promise. The main critique at work in these bits is that pride and selfishness are major destructive forces, which are really fun to pick apart (if you’re a dork like me). All in all, there is a reason this story is timeless, it’s absolutely fabulous. The Faerie Queene , by Edmund Spencer 4/5 I was only required to read Canto 1 of Book 1 for class, and I’m afraid I stopped there, although I wish I hadn’t. I think it’s unfair to say anything positive or negative about this work considering how very little of it I read. So all I’ll say is that I really enjoy Spencer himself and his personal controversies with his age, and his use of language is exquisite. The part of the tale that I read was interesting and evocative, containing a depth I’m really looking forward to exploring later. From what I’ve gathered so far, the knight is going to have many more temptations to come. The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus , by Christopher Marlowe 4/5 I’m picky about my plays, but this one didn’t disappoint. It was a superb read, aside from the overuse of Latin (that I absolutely butchered!), that was very interesting. I was very much entertained by it, especially by Faustus and his complete ineptitude concerning God, Mephastophilis, and Satan. This is the original “sell your soul to the devil” tale, and it’s probably one of the best I’ve ever read (not surprising). I highly recommend it. Sonnets, by William Shakespeare. 5/5 I’m a Shakespeare fan, but I don’t want to discuss every sonnet I was required to read. I could, and I’d enjoy it, but I think that would be overkill. I’ll just list and rate the ones I read. However I will say that all are worth a read, especially since not one conforms to “normal” sonnet convention of the day. There is a reason he is called The Immortal Bard, and he proves it. 3 -4/5 12 -4/5 15 -4/5 18 -5/5 (this is a VERY famous one) 19 -4/5 20 -4.5/5 23 -4/5 29 -4.5/5 30 -4/5 33 -4.5/5 (this one is a fairly dark and lamenting one) 55 -5/5 60 -4.5/5 62 -4.5/5 65 -4/5 71 -5/5 73 -4/5 80 -4/5 85 -4/5 87 -4/5 93 -4/5 94 -4/5 97 -4/5 105 -4.5/5 106 -5/5 116 -4.5/5 129 -4/5 130 -5/5 (this one too is amongst his most famous and one of my very favourites) 135 -4/5 138 -4.5/5 144 -4.5/5 146 -4/5 (I really loved this one, but to this day I have absolutely no idea what it means) 147 -4.5/5 152 -4.5/5 Holy Sonnets , by John Donne 4/5 I’m going to do the same I did for Shakespeare’s sonnets. As well as say that these are samples from his early career all the way to his later life. All of them are very good; the language and imagery express vivid emotion. I’m glad to see Donne get’s the honour due him now. The age he was in has no idea the gem it overlooked. 1 -5/5 5 -4.5/5 7 -4/5 9 -5/5 10 -5/5 13 -4.5/5 14 -5/5 18 -4/5 19 -4.5/5 “Eve’s Apology in Defense of Women”, by Aemilia Lanyer (from Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum 4/5 Overall this was a really wonderful poem. The first three stanzas were my favourite parts and parts that I felt held the most meaning. This is a very feminist poem considering its content and the year in which it was published (1611). It mainly calls on the power of intentions and choice, and good and evil. It also crosses gender boundaries, which is always a fun thing to look for in old texts. When women are the embodiments of reason in an old text and men the passionate fools, you know some man in power at the time, along with the critics, really aren’t going to like it. “When I Consider How My Light is Spent”, by John Milton 4/5 Milton is positively one of my favourite writers of all time, and I haven’t come across something he’s written and not loved it. This poem is both mesmerizing and moving. It concerns Milton’s struggle with the loss of his eyesight and God’s divine plan for him. His pain, loss, hurt, and eventual acceptance are strikingly articulated in a way only Milton seems to be able to do it. His contribution to the English language has always struck me and I believe he is truly timeless. Paradise Lost , by John Milton 5/5 I was only required to read Books 1 and 2 of this famous and epic text, but I can say with 100% certainty that I will be reading the remaining 10, not only because I have three editions of it but also because it’s one of the most amazing things I’ve ever set my eyes on. Satan (no longer permitted to be called Lucifer), is the ultimate protagonist. He’s charming, charismatic, forlorn, brave, strong, and so utterly tread-upon by the all-knowing Father that you can’t help but adore him. He is so stoic, and his way with words it nothing less than powerful and moving. I would have followed him! You can’t help but root for Milton’s Father of Lies. Milton’s use of language in the two books alone is seriously why he is a revered legend, his imagery, his wit, his invocation of epic conventions just leave you shaking your head at the awe-inspiring way his poem moves you. Needless to say, I couldn’t have loved this text more. The Rape of the Lock , by Alexander Pope 3/5 As I’m a fan of seriousness, morbidity, and plot, I don’t think I appreciated Pope’s work as much as I should have. I found it very amusing at points, as I was supposed to, and I think this epic in miniature, aka heroi-comical, is full of some intensely evocative imagery and wonderful metaphors, but it wasn’t my favourite. I believe Pope proves himself to be a great of his day –a true wit– despite his lack of formal education and I really enjoyed this tale of the theft of a lock of hair and the hysterics it causes, but I felt it was too long and drawn out. It kind of kept going after the point was made so that it was almost like work to finish it. I think people who like drôle poetry would enjoy this, the social critique behind it is fabulously put, but for me, it was a little too much. Oroonoko, or The Royal Slave , by Aphra Behn 4/5 This work is considered to be the first novel, and it set the conventions for that type of work. It is part travel narrative, biography, and abolitionist text (although I really doubt that aspect was part of the author’s intention). It tells the tale of Oroonoko, a Royal African prince and the hero of our story. The narrative recounts his life, his upbringing, the beautiful woman he falls for and then looses in a terrible series of events, and his own harsh demise. It is a wonderful story filled with vibrant characters and locales, bringing to light the lives of African slaves shipped away from their homes. Behn makes quite a few statements in this work, her feminism and royalist bent are very obvious. It was a fast and easy read, both powerful and moving. I recommend it to everyone. Gulliver’s Travels , by Jonathan Swift 5/5 I was really disappointed when I discovered that the editors of this anthology cut out a few chapters from this story. Only one from Part II, but most from Part III, so I am making it my mission to get my hands on a full copy of GT and read it all. What I read I really, really enjoyed. The very obvious critiques on English culture and belief, the worlds, the characters, ideals, and every other component made for a fascinating and engaging read. I think anyone, young and old, would love this novel. It’s brilliant, yet simple. Straightforward yet complex. All in all, it’s splendid. Houyhnhnmland is my favourite place, but Lilliput and Brobdingnag were very entertaining as well. It also amuses me that Swift originally published GT under the name of the Lemuel Gulliver (his main character) in order to give it greater credibility as a travel narrative. The History of Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia , by Samuel Johnson 4/5 The 48 chapters of this work are in the form of the moral fable. The message behind each “tale” in each chapter concerns the pursuit of happiness and the choices we all face. They were all interesting and contained a fair measure of depth. Every clichéd moral life lesson known to man is in this work since Johnson said them first. The writing of this piece made up for the lack of plot and character development. I like fables, so this really kept my attention. Overall it was well done and had quite a bit to say. from The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African, Written by Himself , by Olaudah Equiano 5/5 This anthology only contains two chapters of this work, The Middle Passage and A Free Man, but I intend to get a full copy. For me, this was an eye-opening piece, so I can hardly imagine the reception it received when it was published in the 18th century. I’ve read very few abolitionist texts but after reading this I understand why they’re so powerful. Equiano’s writing is interesting, clear, and concise, and his point of view is truly powerful. I look forward to reading more of his story. And those are all the texts I was required to read for fall of 2010.
