Something you won’t learn in school, George’s first purchase from London as a married man was a “quantity of Spanish fly” while Martha opted for “a spruced-up nightgown". How nice was Martha Washington? She held her own half-sister as a slave. When George later on wanted to free his slaves, “Martha lifted not a finger to help.” But marrying that racist tart “saved Washington from financial ruin” as GW had been holding off one creditor for two years. “Washington was the first person to breed mules in America.” Without him, it would have been “20 Donkey Team Borax.” GW demanded all workers “may be at their work as soon as it is light and work until it is dark.” This of course meant getting up before it was light and walking back in the dark. Because GW had a lot of draft animals, his slaves had to grow lots of fodder crops. George was usually taller than others by a foot. Mount Vernon’s brick slave barracks are still there, a testament to the “permanence of slavery.” Washington’s uncle disciplined his “favorite” slave by slashing him and then immersing him in brine to increase his suffering. George’s formal schooling ended by age fifteen, after that he was an autodidact. Forget GW’s wooden teeth: this book clarifies the super dark fact that GW had teeth yanked from the heads of slaves and placed in his own mouth, but also offers a partial explanation. In Europe, there was a custom that the rich would pay the poor for their teeth, and the dentist that did the deed was a Frenchman at Mount Vernon (who transplanted teeth for the aristocracy) and “Washington paid his slaves for their teeth” so that they might “procure for themselves a few amenities”. Slaves taught their own children “how to survive”. GW’s slaves were “miserably clothed. A set of clothing was doled out just once a year supplemented by a woolen jacket in winter. Their clothing would have soon been “reduced to mere rags” and yet GW denounced their “villainy” when slaves stole socks or wheat sacks to mend clothing. “Discovery of a mended garment could bring down punishment”. What slave wouldn’t want to be forced to work for George who gave you one blanket every two years and you were expected to share it with livestock so that at the end of the two lovely years, it was reduced to “a filthy, insect-ridden rag”? Who wouldn’t want to work this way for the father of our country? One overseer, reported one December that the black “children had no clothes at all – none – and it was already winter.” Before his revolutionary role, Washington spent his time as a planter ordering “breeding wenches” and “blithely exiling a man to a likely death at hard labor.” Historian Carl Bridenbaugh saw the origins of Patriotism/Patriarchy in the plantation system: White boys were given a personal servant to rule over, and they were expected to rule over their own land and their “people” as they saw fit. Edmund Morgan wrote that the indentured servants sent to the colonies by England were considered “its filth and scum”. One quarter of Virginia’s freemen were landless and lived in or near poverty. Morgan wrote that only after Virginians had rid themselves of all these unruly indentured servants and switched to outright slavery, did it become possible to talk of individual liberties and freedom. It simply had been previously too dangerous to talk of liberty and freedom when Virginia had an obvious discontented white working class. Sally Hemmings was three-fourths white and was “the half-sister of Jefferson’s wife.” The top selling US textbook in the 50’s talked about “Sambo” suffering less than other groups during slavery and that most slaves “were adequately fed, well cared for, and apparently happy.” The textbook ends with a black “devoted to his white folks”. Visitors at Colonial Williamsburg get upset even today, at any implication on the official tour that the founders weren’t perfect. Weincek uncovers what he calls GW’s “moral nadir” when he finds George Washington officially raffled off slaves. GW’s hope had been that he could get a higher price through raffling by appealing to the “sporting spirit” of other Virginians. In 1773, GW’s overseer wrote to him saying separating families for sale was “like death to them.” By 1775, GW had started to soften and started buying whole families. A black man fought at Lexington, the Continental Army had 5,000 blacks constituting 6% > 13% of it’s size. No one saw a Continental regiment without blacks. Unlike racist Jefferson, GW made the decision to “admit blacks to his army” and caused a black poet’s work to be published and even entertained her at his headquarters. 1776 enlistment slowed and 1777 was so bad that enlisting blacks had been a wise move. Black sailors and fishermen from Massachusetts end up saving Washington’s army by evacuating it from New York without losing a single man. The painting of GW crossing the Delaware shows a black at his side who was the slave of a New Hampshire officer. One officer wrote that the integrated Continental Army was creating “the foundations for the Abolition of Slavery in America.” Seven hundred blacks fought in Washington’s army at the Battle of Monmouth. Three fourths of a Rhode Island regiment were black and considered top-notch soldiers. Baron von Closen wrote that overall, he thought one in four of the Continental soldiers were black. GW wanted to protract the war and he knew he might lose in which case he planned on fleeing to his Ohio lands as a hunted man. “He knew every foot of that terrain.” It’s interesting to note that “a number of Washington’s slaves” who were less impressed by his new celebrity ran away to the British. Although Lafayette fought for the Americans, he said, “I would never have drawn my sword in the cause of America if I could have conceived that I was founding a land of slavery.” South Carolina had been opposed to enlisting blacks, and Northerner big wig John Adams took their side. Samuel Johnson had written, “How is it that we hear the largest yelps for liberty among the drivers of Negroes?” Washington travels to NYC, boldly bringing his slaves to the “capital of a free and enlightened people.” Transporting the slave system where ever they went seemed “natural”. When the US Capitol shifts from New York to Philadelphia, Washington rotates his Philadelphia slaves so that none stay there the full six months, in such case they might consider themselves legally free. In doing so, not only did George Washington tell a lie, but he instructed his secretary to lie. GW writes Patrick Henry that he wanted to establish “an American Character” marked by independence and freedom. Any Native American or enslaved black reading that same letter would of course asked: Independence for who? Freedom for who? At GW’s best, he allowed three of his slaves to go by themselves to the theater. But he also signed the 1793 Fugitive Slave Act and he spent three years chasing his wife’s runaway slave Ona Judge - even after she had married a free man. After visiting Washington and seeing his slaves jealously guarded by paranoid overseers with guns, Niemcewicz writes sarcastically, “What a country of liberty.” He adds, “They work all week not having a single day for themselves except holidays.” GW actually referred to his slave dwellings as “Coverings” and admitted that white people would not live in them. Washington’s death amounted to “a slow strangulation”. Thomas Jefferson compares blacks to orangutans while hiding his obvious prejudice behind “the gloss of pseudoscientific verification.” Jefferson enslaved “his own kin”. Jefferson said, “A woman [slave] who brings a child every two years [is] more profitable than the best man [slave] of the farm.” When Jefferson worked on revising local slave codes, he actually proposed a law that a white woman could in effect be legally lynched for having a black man’s child. What a charmer. Washington on the other hand, said to Edmund Randolph (and it was recorded by Jefferson) that if the Union split into North and South, “he made his mind up to be of the Northern.” In fifteen years, Washington went from being an unquestioning slaveholder to planning to give up “his most valuable remaining assets”. Emancipation was planned by him secretly but clearly as early as 1789 (ten years before death). Washington also stated, “I can clearly foresee that nothing but the rooting out of slavery can perpetuate the existence of our union.” Really great book, deeply interesting, and wildly unlike the sanitized US History taught me in school.
