Claudia and the Great Search Claudia gets out of class early to attend a special science ceremony for Janine. One of the teachers makes a comment that if Claudia is anything like Janine, she looks forward to having her in her class and asks is she a genius. She then comments they don’t look anything alike. Claudia doesn’t even get a chance to answer because the attention is on Janine again. After this they leave. Janine goes with her friends to celebrate. Claudia thinks to herself out of jealousy how unfashionable they are. At the BSC, Kristy says because Emily is language delayed, she’s having some problems. She’s also having nightmares, she’s scared of a lot of things and won’t try new things. Kristy wants to spend more time with her but she’s got a regular job at the Papadakis-they’re grandfather feel down and hurt himself-. Mrs. Brewer then calls needing a sitter next Friday night to watch Emily and David Micheal. After her friends leave, Claud feels depressed and her leg starts to hurt-this means rain-. After this Claudia thinks about the week starting with Janine asking her what to wear to the ceremony-All her clothes look the same so she just says they all look fine-, a test she didn’t do so well on, and then the ceremony. Claud makes a salad for dinner but they think it’s in honor of Janine. Janine has more news that there will be a reporter following her around and writing an article on “A Day In the Life of a Genius”. Her mother asks what Janine will do with the check she got for 250.00. Clauida is thinking of clothes, art supplies, and candy. Janine says she’ll put it toward college. There’s even a cake for Janine with yellow roses. The best part is her name is spelled wrong Claudia looks through some old pictures later. She looks through one. Then another. In the second one it’s full of pictures of her *and* Janine. The first has only pictures of Janine. Claudia notices they don’t look a thing alike. Then she thinks of how she doesn’t really look like her parents either. She looks through her parents drawars hoping that there will be a roll of her not developed but there aren’t any. Way back in the drawer she sees a locked box. Claudia knows all of a sudden she’s adopted and the box holds her adoption papers. Claudia wishes she could ask Mimi. She knows she can’t ask her mom and dad. She wonders who her real mom and dad are, why they gave her awa, and who is she really. Claudia’s imagination starts to get the better of her and she thinks up wild scenerious like maybe she got stolen and sold to the hospital. Only her parents didn’t know this. Maybe they are incognito and on the run. David Micheal is sick when Claudia sits for him and Emily. The weather also looks bad. Mrs. Brewer gives the instructions (David Micheal has a cold, Emily might shed a few tears) then she and Watson leave. Emily runs to the door and starts to wail. She calms down a little when they go to check on David Micheal. Emily tries to go for the remote, but David Micheal won’t let her have it (she breaks them). Claudia gives her a bath. Then she gives David Micheal a few things (jice, water, a wwash cloth). Emily won’t go to sleep so Claudia puts Karen’s night light in her room. The thunder makes her antsy again so Claudia holds her until she goes to sleep. After this, Claudia tries to start her homework, but ends up thinking of how lucky Emily is that her parents have told her every day she’s adopted. Stacey calls and Clauia ends up telling her what she thinks. Stacey says she thinks she should start a search and look for her bio parents. She says at least she and Janine aren’t related. Then she has to go because Emily wakes up. Dawn also has a sitting job at Kristy’s. Kristy says she’ll be by later with Hannie, Linny, and Sari. Emily again starts to cry but stops when she sees David Micheal. David Micheal invites over a friend (Timmy) who wants to join Kristy’s Krushers. While they do this, Emily almost eats a pebble. Then she thinks of how two years olds are supposed to be past that stage. She thinks of Gabby and Marnie and compares them. Emily is *way* behind. Dawn is stuck watching Hannie when Kristy agrees to give Linny, David Micheal, and Timmy a Krishers lesson. So the girls play ring around the roses. Emily doeesn’t catch on very fast but she seems to have fun. Kristy sees this. She tells Dawn her mom and Watson tried to get her into a preschool program but she didn’t get accepted because she too far behind. Kristy says they think she’ll catch up. Dawn tells it won’t do any good worrying. Kristy says no they need to take action. Claudia starts to see the similarities between her and Emily. Emily doesn’t look ike her famly and isn’t as bright and she’s adopted. LAudia starts her search at this place called “Love Bundles”. She says they’ve only been in operation five years and Claudia is thirteen. They also only place Vietnamese children. She then has an idea to go look at her birth certificate and it’s at the bank in a safety deposit box, So she goes there. The lady wants her ID and a key. Claudia has to pretend she “left the key at home”. Claudia has an idea and decides to go to her doctor’s office, but then she can’t just waltz in and ask if she’s adopted. She thinks of a lot of different things to tell her (Janine has a rare blood disease, she has a report for school). She decides to just go with the school report story. The receptionst frowns at her and tells her the Dr she came to see wasn’t her first pediatrician. She didn’t start to see her until she was 2. She’d have to look at her charts to find out who her first one was. Claudia says she’ll just ask her parents but decided that MRs. Wilson lied to her. Claudia sits for David Micheal and Emily again. Only David Micheal goes over to Timmy’s. Emily wants to color. Claudia asks to see the red crayon. Emily doesn’t know red. Claudia then just asks for a crayon. This she can do. Then she gives her another. She asks again for the red crayon. She gives her a purple and yellow one. Claudia lays three different colored squares. Then she tries to get her to match it with the other red square. She points to it and then praises Emily. She tries again with the yellow square but Emily gives her the red quare. Then she tries to get her to match the red square. Claudia realizes she’s not teaching her colors. She’s teaching her matching. So Clauida helps her match the two squares. Claudia can see a light go on. She does it immediately. She then matches the yellow one and the blue one. Then when it gets to easy Clauida gets her to match the shapes. When MRs. Brewer comes home Claudia and Emily show her what she can do. Mrs. Brewer wants Claudia to work with Emily two times a week. Stacey has a job at the Perkin’s. Gabby and Myriah want to know if they can cook with real ingrediants that night. She says yes as long as they clean up and be in bed by eight thirty. Mrs. Perkins tells Stacey to make a list of whetever they use up and don’t let them eat anything to dubious. Myriah wants to make chocolate thicp cookies. Gabby wants to make a green mess. So they compromise and make green chocolate chip cookies. Myriah is one of those cooks that doesn’t need a recipe or cookbook. They bake the cookies. They hear a CRASH and the girls go to check on him. He’s knocked cookies everywhere. They have to get him quick before he eats the cookie and put him in the garage. The Perkin’s have a friend that gives the girls book since she’s a pushlisher. She finds a book called “Find A Stranger Say Goodbye”. She then calls Claudia and tells her about it. It’s about an adopted girl). Clauida gets through the book quickly. It gives her a lot of ideas. The girl (Natalies) parents are very open with her and give her the information she needs to find her birth parents. Claudia has to go to the public library when her mother isn’t there. She goes to the old time machine that has the dated articles (micro fishe). She wants to look at the announcements for births. She finds the dates but none of them are hers. She looks at the week after and the before. Nothing! This proves that she was born through a private agency. Maybe she was given a different name. So she copies down the girl’s names that she doesn’t recognize. The name Reeca Ho intrigues her. Her parents say they were visiting from Wyoming. Stacey stays after the meeting for dinner. Finally Claudia says she read the book and says she thinks she was privately adopted. Maybe to a young couple that wasn’t ready. Maybe her parents found out that after they had Janine they couldn’t have any more kids. Claudia tells her she went to the library. Stacey says she might have been born anywhere. Claudia says all birthds were listed and hers wasn’t. It’s a possibility she was born in Steonybrooke. She says she’s going to look up the three names she’s found. Claudia gets the numbers and addresses but decides to wait until the next day to contact the first two. She calls Mr. Ferguison (?) first. She makes up a story about a school project. One of his kids (Cara) is the one on the birth annoument. Next she calls the (Selsomes?-I’m as bad a speller as Claudia-_. She goes to this address. She tells her the Selsoms live in Lawrenceville and were the previous owners. The layd has their number and she calls. They did have a daughter (do) named Daphne. STRIKE TWO! She talks to Stacey after this and Claudia says she’ll come over. Stacey says she has to be on bed tho. She’s been tired. Kristy takes David Micheal to a Krusher’s practice. Nannie has taken Emily back to be re-evaluated. She’s making a lot of progress now. On the way David Micheal confesses, he hates Emily. Well not hates but he gets so much attention. Kristy says she resents her a little too, but she tells herself that Emily really needs all the attention and help. She needs way more help than they do and she gets David Micheal to see all the limitations she has she has that he doesn’t. I think I’ll just skip this Krusher’s practice. Moving along, Are these really necessary? They fill like just something to fill pages and this is a REPAT of scenes in KRISTY AND THE WALKING DISASTER. Bart talks her home. Kristy excitedly asks Nannie what was said but Nany says it’ll take several days. The day after Charlie brings Emily over to Claudia’s. She now tries to pronounce names and doesn’t cry. Claudia takes Emily to her room. Janine gives her a balloon on the way up. She gets the color of it right. Now she can matc and knows how to recognize colors. Claudia decides to give her a counting lesson. All the Ho’s are a NO GO! But Claudia the lady that didn’t answer -from process of elimation-is her mother. She calls Stacey and she tells her she’s not the only one that won’t fit into her family. Look at her. She’s the only one with diabetes. Look at Niky Pike. Look at Jessi and Becca. She tells her the o nly way she’s gonna know is if she asks her parents. Her parents luckily say they call her into the den after dinner. They tell her they’ve noticed something was wrong and encourage her to tell them. She accuses them of lying to her. Then they tell them she’s adopted. She says there are hardly any pictures of her and she’s different from them. She’s a wild dresser and boy crazy and she’s found a locked box. Then she says there’s no birth announcement for her in the paper. They tell her she’s not adopted. They say there usually are more pictures of the first child. As for being different all families are different. They tell her she’s a lot like Peaches and she looks a lot like Mimi when she was young. Plus she looks like she’s a cross between the both of them. As for her birth announcement it was in the Stoneybrooke Gazette a paper that went out of business. There’s five hundred dollars in the lock box for emergencies. In the future they tell her they’ll pay more attention to her feelings. They show her the pictures of Mimi and she and Claud look like twins. Claudia fames them and displays them in her room. Stacy says she’s beat and all she did was sit for Laura. Claudia is about to give Stacey a lecture. She says she needs the bed. Kristy announces the Papadakis grandfather is now better. Now she’ll have more time to spend with Emily. Speaking of the teachers say Emily has made progress. She trust people now. She still doesn’t like thunderstorms but she can start preschool in the fall (She’ll be three). She says she’ll have to be toilet trained by the teachers have given her praises for learning her shapes and colors and that’s thanks to Claudia. The teachers want Claudia to keep working with Emily. It’ll be good preparation for preschool. When Claudia calls to set up a tutoring session Emily answers the phone and all the others talk to her. After everyone leaves she looks at Mimi’s picture and says she can’t believe she was adopted but she’s lucky to have her family. She then asks Janine to make dinner with her. My Thoughts This book reminded me of a couple of things. The first was when my best friend’s son was about Emily’s age they (well his wife) became worried that he wasn’t talking yet. He had to have special tutors and *today* you would never have none it. He’s bright and friendly and excels in school and especially computer related things. I just think of all the progress he’s made and it’s amazing! Sometimes it just takes the right teacher. I love how patient Claudia was with Emily! The other thing it reminded me of was when my little cousin King first started preschool about a year ago. He’d never been to school before and my cousin was worried because the teacher -who was ridiculous and expected him to know *and I’m blanking on the term but I think it was combination words*. Thus, my cousin somehow got the crazy idea that he was “slow”. My mother 0whose a teacher) had to make him see that he’d JUST started school. He also wasn’t being very interactive with the other students. And then I had to make them see that (just like Claudia) my little cousin is different. He’s quite a lot like me so I understand him more than my family who are pretty much extroverts. Bottom line is that everyone learns at their own pace! Some are quicker at certain things than others but then you might be better at something else than the next person. After reading this it did make me sentimental, I kinda wished I a little girl like Emily to nurture and watch progress. Even when she cried and got frustrated Emily just seems like a very sweet baby. She might just be my favorite one in the series. I also have a rough relationship with my sister -who I didn’t grow up with-. She’s not a genius or anything but I do feel like she tends to get all the attention from my family. Even from my mother-who isn’t her mother-. And this is hard because even when she’s dead wrong people in the family always for some reason that I sear to you I can not figure out-they side with her and do everything to protect her feelings. So I know what it’s like to have a siser that sometimes you feel resent for just like David Micheal and Claudia and it is ROUGH! So this one I could reate a lot too! Rating: 7 This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
