Orlando, the youngest, and most loved son of the late Sir Rowland de Boys, ( set in France in the 16th Century) is being mistreated by his older brother Oliver, the middle son Jaques, is away at school, since Oliver inherited most of the rich estate, and money, he has the power of the purse to do anything . He, Oliver is jealous of his sibling's superior attributes, Orlando lacks education, possessions, totally dependent on his brother, but the very simpatico boy's qualities, nevertheless shines brightly through, causing Oliver who hates him, to hate him even more. He arranges a wrestling match between Orlando and the vicious wrestler Charles, who has crippled three previous opponents and gives special orders to kill his brother... Things don't go as planned, and Charles is the one carried off unconsciously to the surprise of all, Rosalind witnesses this event and falls in love with Orlando. The political situation in the dukedom, at the court of Duke Frederick, who overthrew his brother Duke Senior, and exiled him is hazardous, the shaky ruler fears plots against him, all are potential enemies, his daughter's Celia's best friend and companion is her cousin Rosalind, the daughter of Duke Senior, which makes for an uneasy situation. Duke Frederick the paranoid royal, banishes his niece Rosalind, from court and threatens her with death if she remains, the loyal cousin Celia, will not abandon the person she loves the most in the world. They the two cousins secretly leave the palace, dressed like men for safety reasons during their travels, Rosalind becomes Ganymede, and Celia, takes the appropriate name Aliena, for additional help the court fool, Touchstone, also goes, he is a lot smarter than he looks. Meanwhile warned by the longtime family servant, old Adam, that Oliver is plotting to kill him, Orlando... the two flee to the Arden Forest, where the exiled Duke Senior lives with his followers . Duke Senior, is rather enjoying himself, no responsibilities, a leisurely existence in the beautiful woods, the food while not luxurious, is enough for his simple needs, shelter quite adequate for his people too, he doesn't care about losing power. Then the needy men and women, escaping the tyranny of his cruel brother, arrive, Celia, Rosalind, ( who while disguised, likes to play amusing tricks on Orlando) Touchstone, Adam, Orlando, and many others. And the nervous evil one Frederick, is bringing a vast army to crush the oblivious inhabitants of the forest paradise. One of Shakespeare's better comedies, still after 400 years , it will please readers who like to be entertained, and this not serious tale, does indeed accomplish that very well.
