My initial rating would be 2 star but I changed my mind towards the ending because the suspense kept me on my toes. Personally, I didn't quite enjoy the book because the plot buildup was quite slow and messy in the beginning. It took me a while to understand if Stacey, the MC, was having a nightmare or was it like really happening in real life. I got a little confused, but then it got slightly better. It's a typical high school nonsense, falling in love with your best friend's on-and-off-and-on again boyfriend, bitching about who's better at picking up boys, etc. And our MC here is the typical Miss I Don't Pick Up Boys But I Hang Out With Cool Girls kind of person. And she's a witch. Hooray. Hey, I dig this kind of story but maybe I'm letting emotional state affects my reading mood right now so yeah..... moving on! So Stacey had been having nightmares about Drea, her bff, getting into troubles and she was very convinced someone's trying to harm Drea. But since Drea's the too cool for school kind of person, so they had several conflicts trying to figure out the nightmares. But then she started to receive "gifts" from a stalker guy and it freaked her out senseless and with the help of their other bff, Amber, they started to link event to event, trynna figure out who the stalker was. I'm just gonna say this straight. I thought Amber's a bitch at first then I realised that Drea's the bigger bitch. Also, if I were Stacey, I'd just walk away from this whole mess because hey I'm just trying to help why you gotta be so rude, you know? Anyway, I'm glad she didn't walk away because the stalker was a goddamned psycho. The ending was quite good but there were some things unexplained... as usual. Not that I expected anything (a lie!) The lovey dovey part of the story was so typical high school stuffs, too. But yeah, just the way I love it. I usually cringe and smile at the same time because I'm a sucker for cute stuffs like that. Guess I'll pick up the second book after all. I hope it gets better but what is life without a little disappointment, right?
