Well, there goes the last major work of Tacitus. Over the last month and a bit its been a fun experience going through the Annals and the Histories. The histories is an extremely chaotic book both in content and narration. Tacitus constantly switches back and forth between events. Sometimes this change can be quite unforgiving and without the footnotes I would have probably struggled to notice the change (especially for the discussion of Vitellius time in Rome). Overall, I would divide this book into two parts, both in terms of themes and my enjoyment. The first portion of the book spans book 1 to book 3 and this is by far my favourite part of the histories. Tacitus is at his most cynical and brutal in this section. There are very few redeeming moments. Tacitus very clearly deals with what he perceives to be a disruption of Roman traditions. At the centre of this narrative is the crowd. They are fickle, sycophantic and quick to change sides. Galba and Piso are brutally murdered in the forum, senators degrade themselves by dressing as slaves or freedmen. Galba, Otho and vitellius are all shown as incompetent in commanding troops and dealing with sycophants. Even the victorious Vespasian is treated in a negative light. By far my favourite part of this section is book 3. No where else is Tactius' absolute disgust at this period more clearly seen than in the destruction of Cremona and the burning of the capitol. This disgust created one of the best books written by a classical historian I have ever read. The second major part of this book comes from books 4 to 5. The themes of the first 3 books give way to new ideas: the Senate dealing with Neros former informers, a precursor to the tyranny of Domitian and the revolts of Germany and Judea. This part was not as good as the first section. Perhaps this is because this section is so incomplete. After reading the first part I cannot say that this part was as good. In fact, I would be lying if I did not say that I found Civilis' revolt to be boring. That being said, Tacitus' discription of Jews and Jewish history was very fascinating. I've decided to come back after a month of really letting this work sink in. I still stand by my stance that the 'second half' of the book is not as good as the first but I do believe there is a real importance to it. Yes, the narrative is cut off. All we get is the rebellion of Civilis and a history of Judea, but there is the essence of some really intriguing ideas. It always seems to me that a focus is placed on the actions of the major parties during a civil war and not so much the effects of said civil war on the provinces. Perhaps this is the case because Marius and Sulla are immediately followed by the mithridatic war and the rise of Pompey. The same can be said with the war between Octavian and Antony, the brilliance of the beginning of the principate takes centre stage. With the histories, we get the sense of the real damage that a civil war can have on volatile regions of the empire. Tacitus really helps to answer the question of what happens when large number of troops are moved away from the Rhine, or political instability threatens Romes control of her borders. This may be a somewhat incoherent ramble, but I've really come to appreciate this second half. Civilis may be insignificant in the grand scheme of Roman history, but he shows just how precarious the relationship between Rome and tribes of Gaul and Germany really are.
