I really enjoyed listening to old stories of my aunts, uncles and most of all my grandparents. I really love my grandfather but he died before I ask him his love story and his life in Ilo-ilo fighting for his life from the cruelty of the Japanese armies. At least I still have my grandmother who can still talk but cannot remember everything from her past, but I know some of her secrets and stories that inspire me for so long still there are probabilities that she made fictitious stories. My mom is a little bit chatty and ready to answer all your questions about her life with her sisters and parents. Well, they have normal life in the barrio and they love eating Filipino delicacies like papaya pickle, suman , ibos , bola-bola and many more. For their love to foods, they created a special bond between them. They are poor that time, not enough money to buy expensive clothes, shoes and supplies but they have the love that surrounds them all. Imagine no electricity that time and my mom suffer from studying using a gas lamp and candles, but it wasn't a hindrance for them to graduate and be successful in their related fields. In 2003 The Canning Season received and won the National Book Award . Well, it was worth reading and seriously I was hoping for a sequel for this book. It was ended too soon and I think she can still continue to write Ratchet 's love story. It wasn't that bad and it was an easy read, like listening to your parents or aunties talking about their life. The Epilogue sounds interesting but it only made the reader wanted to read it briefly and question behind my mind was still unclear. The Canning Season , will always be at your grandmother's backyard waiting for you to read her story. Ratchet Clark a girl living in a very small basement apartment with her mother. Without window, a very thin wall divided the mother and her daughter with worms and bugs living in their floor and walls. She can't be like a normal girl like her classmates and she don't have friends, not being selfish but being a tail of her mother, Henrietta . It wasn't that bad at first living with her mother, but her mother's obsession to The Pensacola Hunt Club everything goes wrong, she ate her breakfast, dinner and lunch with chips, no allowance and no money to buy decent clothes. One day her mother forced her to go to Maine to visit her twin aunties but she have to hide her secret behind her clothes under her shoulder blade. It was a big deal for her mother for having such a distortion on her daughter's shoulder. So she went to Maine for not having a decision and met the twins. Within 48 hours of travelling she met Penpen , a happy and fat, and Tilley who looked like a sphincter. They were well known and called as the blueberry ladies or the queer Menuto women . Days passed, the aunties and Ratchet have the best days of their life having a nice warm beach at the side of the sister's villa and the best blueberry garden at the back. But when a girl named Harper step into their house the girls become more queer than before. Technologies and more secrets have been dig and one of the sisters is at stake to die. The funny story of the sisters and the fantastic friendship between the characters that blooms and ignites the story to the next level. These are the bookmarks I made for the books that we will discuss this month of April and coming month of May and June hosted by me. I can't wait for others to read the books. Rating - The Canning Season by Polly Horvath, 4 Sweets and the bears hiding in the forest! (I really recommend this book to everyone. The novel is more on dialogue and some parts were hilarious. The end part was charming but I want a longer ending to satisfy my tummy. Bit in fact over all, it was a great read! Cheers to Polly Molly! Anyway, this is my second book of Polly and I want more.) Challenges : Book #70 for 2011 Goodreads - Filipinos , 2nd Quarter: (Book 2) YA Book from Kwesi's Shelf
