Oh the delights of just plain reading for pleasure! And this book was just that. First published as Addie Pray in 1971, it was made into the movie Paper Moon in 1973. I remember that, too, as being a delightful little film, though it’s been 40 years. For those of you unfamiliar with the film it starred Ryan O’Neal and his daughter Tatum as Addie Pray, who absolutely charmed me. Now the fictional character Addie Pray has done it again. This charm almost feels subversive because of the hucksters that Addie and her “daddy” Long Boy are. Now Long Boy may or not be her real Daddy, but he’s the one that takes her into his life after her mother dies. And that life is one spent traveling the south scamming people out of money, in small and ever growing ways. They begin with selling personally engraved Bibles and framed pictures of recently deceased husbands and grow from there. At first this is a day to day existence but it quickly evolves into more lucrative and complicated schemes providing them money for expensive cars and stays in good hotels. It doesn’t take Long Boy long to realize that Addie is an asset to his way of life. And despite his hucksterism, he’s good to her and they compliment each other like two peas in a pod. I’ll segue from that little clichéd metaphor to one of my favorite aspects of this book (aside from characterization, masterful storytelling, and uniqueness of concept), that of language. Addie provides the most color through the kinds of metaphors one could only find in the American South, and Long Boy is a master of dialect. It is a dialect that changes depending upon who he is conversing with – their class or status, region. Even if you’ve seen the film and know the story, you may want to read the book if only because less than half of their escapades are contained in the film. (Author Joe David Brown must have had one ingenious mind to think up all of their schemes.) The entire last third of the book takes place in New Orleans where Addie poses as the lost granddaughter of a dying and supposedly wealthy woman. I just realized that my last 5 star read, Crooked Heart by Lissa Evans had a plot similar to this. Only it was a not-so-bright woman who takes in a boy, who is a whip smart WWII evacuee, and together they, too, go door to door scamming people. Not sure what that says about me or my reading, but I read them for different reasons and highly recommend them both.
