Probably my least favorite of all the Known Space books that I've read so far... and I've almost read them all... I have about 3 left in the entirety of the Known Space series: The Patchwork Girl, Betrayer of Worlds, and Fate of Worlds... Then a couple of short stories that didn't make it into the main collections of Neutron Star and Tales of Known Space. So my knowlege of Known Space is almost complete... And I really do think this is my least favorite of the whole series. There are a couple short stories in Tales of Known Space that I would consider inferior to these sci-fi detective stories... most notably his earlier works, the short stories that Niven wrote before he even conceptualized "Known Space" as an overarching universe, effectually writing Known Space stories without realizing that that's what he was doing. But compared to the bulk of his Known Space series, this definitely ranks near the bottom for me. And even though that statement is very true, like I say with all Known Space reviews where I say that "this book lands in the lower half of my ratings list of Known Space novels and stories", well, I love Known Space so much that that means that even though its maybe my least favorite of the series, I still enjoyed a lot about it. I think my favorite was probably the middle story, "The Defenseless Dead"... And even though I solved the mystery of the "who-dunnit" aspect of the detective story kind of early on in that one... I thought it was clever enough, and cool enough of a story, to make that not really matter. All in all, I found that the brevity of the short story format is probably what hurt these stories more than anything... I don't read many detective stories (actually, I don't really read any detective stories)... but I think it felt a bit rushed at times, and much of the interrogating and the conversations seemed quite truncated... So I'm hoping that The Patchwork Girl's being a full-length novel, about roughly 3 times the length of any of these shorter novelettes, solves that issue, because I actually DID like the character of Gil "The Arm" Hamilton, and his whole "3rd arm" psi power that he has... That's another thing I think that fell short in these stories, his USE of that "imaginary" arm of his... sure, he does use it here and there, at least a couple times in each story, but not enough to really make good use of it. It becomes more of an afterthought than what it could've been, which is a true asset to his skills as a detective. Well, that's about it... I'd recommend it to anyone who has read 80-90% of the Known Space novels and short stories... but not really to anyone who hasn't... That pretty much says is all.
