Snap, crackle and pop -- dialogue to die for... William Marantz can come again. His first novel Christmas Eve Can Kill You is a cracking read. The slightly edge-worn hero is Val Virgo, real name Izzy Miller, who's sunk from being the travelling singer-songwriter Muddy Rivers to taking a job with the Canadian national broadcaster. For Americans, this is the living hell of public service broadcasting. I've been there, done that, won the prizes, ran for my life. So has Marantz, as a movie critic, writer and actor. The realism is superb; every word rings true. Marantz, a Winipeg lawyer, has also written successful radio, TV and film drama, and played featured roles in films. It rings in his dialogue and his eye for hanging the lantern just so in his quickly sketched but appeallingly sordid Winipeg landscapes; no actor on his page is ever without `business' either, which gives the whole thing a layered sense that all the best novels have. Now Val is working for the pint-sized Patricia St John Hogg, a zero-talent civil servant who is trying to live up to a Napoleon-sized father who was fired from the station a couple of decades ago. Val is interviewing an obstreperous cop about the unsolved murder of a judge when the death-threat against him comes in, and is promptly cut off during the standard delay (you didn't think "live" really means "alive" in PSB, did you then?) by Sinjin Hogg. When the copper has taken away the tape for analysis, the reluctant colleagues demonstrate why one is an entertainer and the other a bureaucrat. First they wait for the recording tech to leave: *** Throughout this familiar ritual the girl wonder was rocking on her heels like someone dying to relieve herself. And as soon as Bans was out of earshot she proceeded to do so, on her favorite target. "Okay, Virgo, I'm through arguing with you. Just tell me one thing, are you or are you not prepared to conduct yourself in a professional manner?" "What seems to be the problem, Patricia?" "You're the bloody problem. It's that smart ass attitude of yours that invites this kind of nonsense." "By nonsense I take it you are referring to the only spark of life that lit up this morning's slumber fest. A wake-up call that, thanks to your itchy trigger finger, our faithful listeners didn't get to share." "Yeah right. I'm sure you were just dying to have your faithful listeners hear some drunk call you a two-faced bugger." I smiled, modestly. "A rose by any other name..." *** A judge is dead and Izzy, okay, the semi-famous no-shock-jock Val Virgo, soon moves in with his grieving widow, one Abby, who is one of those scatty girls I remember from my own time in the theatre -- perfectly true to life. She's a potter, of course: *** "That's an interesting pot," I said. "Do you like it?" she said, brightening. "I threw it myself." She waved her free arm around the room. "I threw all this stuff." Not far enough--you fell short of the trashcan. "No kidding." *** Val Virgo is playing the dead judge's guitar and sleeping in his bed, in a house just across the road from the deposed Napoleon, father to St John Hogg. To try and track down the threat to his life, and the perpetrators of several attempts on it which have already resulted in the death of one cat which shouldn't have sat on the television controller, and one chambermaid at the "Hooker's Hilton", Val takes a tour through his life. He almost misses the turning point because it is so small. Marantz has a good grip of structure and I never spotted the red herrings, and didn't identify the killer until too late, even though he has a prologue and later on a reprise. Marantz gives a money-back guarantee to anyone who spots the guilty party before he is announced. I think his money is safe. This thriller is highly recommend. I read it in my bath, which happens in the early hours of the morning in an echoing old house, and my family, being woken for the third night running, threatened to exile me to the stables until I finished reading Christmas Eve Can Kill You -- and stopped laughing aloud. I know I've gone on too long, but I just can't resist giving you another sample of the snap, crackle and pop of William Marantz's dialogue. A newspaper editor asks Val about being nearly killed: *** "Do you want to tell me about it?" "Why, so you can sell a few more papers?" "It's what I do for a living, Val." "Well, breathing is what I do for a living, Morgan, so you'll pardon me if I don't jump at your generous offer to plaster my name, address and phone number in the `Assassins Wanted' section of that snot rag you edit." *** André Jute is the author of Writing a Thriller (Writing Handbooks). His most recent books are IDITAROD a novel of The Greatest Race on Earth and THE LARSSON SCANDAL the unauthorized guerilla critique of Stieg Larsson.
