I know, I know, it's a romance about a girl and her guardian angel, and it's called An Angel for Emily. Can it get any cheesier? And yet . . . So I was looking at cheap romances to purchase for my mother's Christmas present (understand, I don't mean "cheap" as an insult; it's just the only term I know to make clear what kind of book this is). I picked up one about a werewolf hunter, and then I saw this: girl runs into her guardian angel with her car, and he's really hot. Who could resist? I didn't really mean to read it (yes, I read it and then gifted it). I was just flipping through the first few pages, and on page one she's already running into the angel. What can I say? Kept me reading. Cut me some slack though, I haven't read a cheap romance in years, and I shamelessly devoured this like a chocolate addict after years of resistance coming upon a Hershey bar. Yeah, it's cheap and not that good, but irresistible to one who hasn't eaten chocolate in awhile. Still, this is at least a Hershey bar with almonds. The angel really is quite a fun character. There's some decent humor. The romantic/sexual tension is effective. I like the ghosts thrown in. I give it three stars because I cannot deny being utterly entertained, and judged against other books of this genre, this one is pretty good. On the other hand, it's really nothing special. The leading lady is your typical low personality "insert self here" romance heroine. But she's maybe even more offensive than usual because she's always getting walked on and picking up losers (throughout multiple lives) until the hero saves her and shows her how amazing she really is. This bothers me, as I feel like this is unashamed consolation for all the women with low self esteems reading romances out there, and I don't think this idea that Mr. Right will come and save you from being a doormat is a good one. She's stupid too. She knows the angel can't be killed, yet in the final showdown she jumps in front of him and takes a bullet (this after a string of other monumentally dumb choices). Really, Jude, you couldn't have done something less silly there? Also, it's formulaic (of course, when one picks up a romance, one wants a romance). The ending and the solution to the mystery are let downs. The theology of the thing is foggy (and one wonders how the heroine isn't more interested in getting the answers to The Big Questions when there's an angel around who might let her in on this stuff). But it would be ridiculous to expect more on the theology from a book like this, really. That's not what it's about. It's about rippling chests and raging passions. And I freely admit, that's yummy stuff. Anyway, it's less pretentious than City of Angels, so it's better than that at least. If you're looking for pure escapist cheap romance, this isn't a bad choice. I think I've fulfilled my craving for cheap romance for awhile. I find I can't stomach them like I used to, but they're still fun now and then. And give me some credit. I refrained from reading the one about the sexy werewolf hunter.
