Prior to reading The Compleat Enchanter , I didn’t think I could enjoy a true “portal fantasy” - by which I mean, a story where the protagonist travels from the actual, contemporary world (e.g. 1930s New York) into Fairyland. My previous encounters with the sub-genre, such as Merrit’s Ship of Ishtar , were deeply unsatisfying. But these Harold Shea novellas were surprisingly entertaining, so now I have no idea what I like. It’s impossible to read these stories without imagining De Camp & Pratt stood around the typewriter, wearing shirts with the sleeves rolled up, smoking Camel non-filters, one-upping each other with jokes. It’s a vibe, you know? These are stories told by hack writers for hack writers - and I mean that in the best possible way. The fourth wall has been removed with a sledgehammer and De Camp and Pratt are waving you in and asking you to bring a bottle of Tom Collins mix. The central conceit - psychologists jumping between the fantasy worlds of myth and literature to escape the banality of mid-century American academia and try to meet strange women - is so flamboyant and so rich with possibilities that every novella seems able to rekindle the boyish enthusiasm of the last. The opening gambit, The Roaring Trumpet , is clearly the best from a purely literary standpoint. The portrait of Norse mythology is lightly but lovingly drawn and provides a backdrop to a well-spun story that aims simply to entertain and finishes at exactly the right moment to do so without trying the reader’s patience. This was a masterclass in comic fantasy from the standpoint of structure and pacing. The later novellas suffer somewhat in quality - lacking the tight delivery of the first outing (to say the least) and often descending into strings of one-liners and slapstick action sequences. That said, the more the characters embrace the madness, the more we do too. I was laughing out loud at Shea and Chalmer‘s encounter with The Blatant Beast from Spencer’s Faerie Queen : “What mean you?” roared the monster. “You called me, did you not? Then wherefore such surprise when I do you miserable mortals the boon of answering?” Chalmers gibbered: “Really - I had no idea - I thought I asked for a bird -“ “Well?” bellowed the monster. “B-but you’re a reptile-“ “What is a bird but a reptile with feathers?!” I’d be remiss if I didn’t note that the portrayals of women and basically anyone who isn’t a WASP male have aged like a carton of milk left next to a basement furnace, but if that’s going to bother you then a lot of what was written for the popular genre audience between 1920 and 1960 is going to be a hard pass, and compared to some of their near contemporaries (e.g. Merrit) it’s… well, it’s still not great, but it could be worse, is all I’m saying. Not necessarily great literature (though The Roaring Trumpet comes close) but great fun!
