It was an essay by Joyce Carol Oates some months ago in the New York Review of Books that drew my attention to the late Derek Raymond as one of the best “noir” crime novelists of the end of the last century, and the most Chandleresque British author. I had never heard about him until then. “I was Dora Suarez” was described as Raymond’s most terrible and also most poetic book which, I was warned, was definitely not for the queasy. There was also the story (maybe urban legend or a well-planned publicity stunt but credible all the same) that the editor had actually vomited on his desk upon first reading it. So despite the fact that I knew his “Factory” series included a few less disturbing books, I thought I’d go for the hardest piece. I found “I was Dora Suarez” truly incredible. I don’t think I ever read a book with the amount of gore, blood and assorted body fluids as well as perversion and cruelty that occurs in this story. What is quite unusual is that the nameless narrator (he calls himself Detective Sergeant) investigating Dora’s horrible murder and leading us into a web of crime in 1980s London, which gives the word depravity a new dimension, literally falls in love with the murdered girl via her moving diary. This sort of thing – falling in love with beautiful dead girls – conjures up early 19th century Romantic poets, and the parallel is apt: the feeling and poetry is closely akin to what we find in the work of those authors. The diary and the horror of the murder fill the Detective Sergeant not only with a lust for revenge but also with a longing that is hopeless by definition, its subject being dead. The extremes of terrible realism at one end and intimate romantic feeling on the other create a tension that keeps the book vibrating. There is one more element: the author’s compulsive wish to emulate his idol, Raymond Chandler by constant wisecracking. The huge majority of these quips are elaborate threats addressed to the various lesser criminals and shady characters who figure as witnesses and accomplices helping the narrator to close in on the murderer. This permanent quipping (in certain dialogues you will find a threat of this kind in every second sentence) is a bit overdone and is the only weak point of the novel. All in all, “I Was Dora Suarez” is a terrible, weird and magnificent book.(less) 30 minutes ago
