It took me the whole summer to read this book, but that was not necessarily because of the length. (Although 558 pages of very tiny print was a lot to get through, definitely.) Rather, I tried only to read this book when I was not distracted or rushed, which means I put it away for weeks at a time when my young stepson was visiting. The reason I gave this book such hallowed treatment is because Oates is writing in very heightened prose here, and it definitely keeps you on your toes. Some of her sentences stretch on forever, but they never feel stilted or forced, just languorous. My disjointed reading of this book was aided by the fact that each chapter is on a totally different theme. Some recount a particular event, some quickly sketch the life story of a minor family member we haven't heard much about, while others enumerate one type of possession among all the family members through all the generations. (For instance, the chapters called "Horses" and "Automobiles.") The chapters hop around throughout time, so that we are learning the stories of all the Bellefleur generations simultaneously. (However, there is a "present" of the book where the main action occurs; this is during the time that Germaine Bellefleur is a young child, and she is what I would call the main character, if I had to name one.) Speaking of time, Oates is definitely playing games with it in this book. I think it's not a coincidence that she omits almost all dates from the family tree at the beginning of the book, with only the first few generations having definite birth and death dates. At first I was convinced that the "present" of the book was in the late 1800's, but then about halfway through the book, the first car appeared, and by the end of the book, things were happening that could only have happened in the 1960's. Likewise, the ages of the characters seem amorphous. The book opens right before Germaine is conceived and ends on her fourth birthday, so the action would be expected to take about 5 years. However, the twins Bramwell and Christabel are said to be 5 years old in the beginning. By the midpoint of the book, Christabel has married, while Bramwell is said to be 11 1/2 years old. Clearly time does not proceed at the same rate for all family members. Even more puzzling is the case of Jedediah Bellefleur, one of the earliest family members, who spent twenty years of his life, from 1806 to 1826, living as a hermit on the top of Mount Blanc. Although we have definite beginning and ending dates for his time on the mountain, he is never able to keep track of time while he's up there, and among his visitors are a modern Girl Scout troop clad in multi-colored parkas and one of Germaine's uncles who is surveying the mountain. The sense I got from this is that all times exist simultaneously on top of the mountain. No wonder Jedediah was so befuddled while he was up there! I had never read a novel by Joyce Carol Oates before, but I had read many of her short stories, and this is definitely a different mode that she's writing in here. In tone the book reminded me most of Little, Big and One Hundred Years of Solitude . If you are a fan of either of those books, you might want to give this one a try.
