What a shame. I read this about two or three years ago. It was quite good, for me. The book, the way I remember it, is about a French dwarf nicknamed Nandou who works in a circus, who falls in love with the beautiful daughter of a garbage collector, and this girl falls in love with another rich boy, who impregnated her. This boy was some kind of a politically radical activist, and his family didn't approve of him living together with a dustman's daughter. (I can't remember if they're married, but they certainly lived together..) Boy and girl had a passionate relationship, but he eventually falls out of love--after she told him she's pregnant. Yeah. A jerk--and the dwarf saves her before she destroys her life. It was actually beautiful, the silent emotion Nando always has, almost every second of the book. He kept silent when he was jealous, when he was angry, even when he's with the girl, but ultimately he's the one that gets her love. Well, I had a hard time remembering the title of this, given the time elapsed, so I googled it up. I tried dwarf, french dwarf, french circus dwarf, french circus dwarf in love with garbageman's daughter, but it never showed up. Only when I remembered Nandou's name it appeared. And when I checked up Kay Nolte Smith on Wikipedia, I was shocked to see only a couple of sentences or so about her (yeah. Her being a her also surprised me). I've always thought this book is pretty good. Then how come it's not famous? Hm. (update: so I searched for this in amazon, and I agree with this one. From Publishers Weekly Smith's ( Elegy for a Soprano ; Country of the Heart ) clever, solidly based historical novel of 19th-century France follows the tangled professional/sexual fortunes of three women of the theater: Jeanne, a ragpicker's daughter who rises to become a playwright; her headstrong daughter Gabrielle, a singer; and her granddaughter Simone. Devoted to Jeanne is the actor Nandou, a noble dwarf who rescues her as a girl, educates and cherishes her, and parents her illegitimate daughter when Jeanne's well-born lover--the painter Vollard--deserts her. Vollard weds an heiress; their son Marc, abhorring his "sodomite" inclinations, forms a marriage of convenience with half-sister Gabrielle. The plot unfolds against the well-depicted political and artistic upheavals of the age, including the stormy beginnings of French romanticism with the work of Victor Hugo, who makes a cameo appearance in the novel and remains a constant presence: not only is Hugo a friend of Nandou's, but the portrayals of Nandou and Jeanne optimistically recreate Hugo's hunchback and gypsy girl of Notre Dame de Paris. Unfortunately, though Smith orients her story to lively issues--artistic boldness, feminism, homosexuality, incest, adultery (the libertine Vollard jails his wife for infidelity)--she fails to probe the psychic depths of her characters, who speak and behave like wooden puppets. Literary Guild alternate.
