A sharp-eyed, thickly written consideration of growth and loneliness. The sentences are convoluted, taking abrupt and sometimes grammatically curious right turns. But some delicious phrases: "a girl who had to have lessons to claim a mother tongue"; "The giant sky cracked its knuckles far off in an approaching assault." What I appreciate most about this novel is what it seemed other reviewers disliked - that Vera is, at the core, selfish, that she is impatient with being someone else's everything. It's not about whether she is a good person or a bad person; as the novel tells us, this isn't about measuring bags of sugar and bags of mealies,* this is about learning who you are, everything you are, and what it costs to do so. And even if the ending scene is one of stark aloneness, half pained, half relieved, there's never any sense of regret, or, as we're told in one quick brilliant paragraph, of looking back like Orpheus. Also I'm sorry, I love a selfish female character - a later-middle-aged character, no less - who wants to fuck and fight for justice and doesn't want to be lost in someone else's romantic fantasy and puts herself first over even her kids. Who's brave enough to know herself. Not nearly enough of 'em. Consider the parallels of country. If South Africa, if any place with blood in its soil, which is almost all of them, wants to rebuilt into a better future it has to know what it is and where it came from and what it's done. The characters in None to Accompany Me are sober-eyed about the stakes, rational and practical yet idealistic beyond compare. These revolutionaries tortured spies; they work within the system; no one sits around arguing leftist theory, not even the far-leftists; they're fighting to unite a country where one half despises the other. We see people hurt by chaotic, random crime (robberies, home invasions) that's growing in the aftermath of apartheid, but, and this is important, we also see people hurt by apartheid, by the system working as it was designed. Violence is no less cruel because it comes from a government edict instead of a random car hijacker. If I have one complaint it's that, despite raising their stakes several times, the novel forgets about Sibongile and Didymus Maqoma by the end. They needed at least one more chapter, but this is very much Vera's story. Disappointing regardless, but especially considering the setting and circumstances. *Side note: Learned a lot about South Africa reading this, including that mealies refers to corn. I was picturing bags of mealybugs tbh
