Although there are mentions of time travel, nuclear war that kills the earth, and a superbreed of aliens, I don't really consider this book science fiction. I think it's more of a love story with a supernatural twist. SPOILERS BELOW: When Mark falls in love with a girl with a boyfriend, he resigns himself to just being "the friend". Then he meets a couple, Kara and Vincent, who he immediately befriends, as both Mark and Vincent write computer games and agree to help each other. Kara right off the bat offers to get rid of the boyfriend by revealing to Mark's true love that her boyfriend is cheating on her. Although Kara's plan works, and the girl breaks things off and asks Mark out, Mark can tell her heart isn't in it. Further, he's baffled as to why Kara, a complete stranger, cares so much about his love life. Once Vincent is mysteriously kidnapped, Kara is forced to come clean about her motivation in helping Mark. Kara tells Mark that if the girl he loves stayed with her boyfriend, she will marry the boyfriend, be miserable, she and her husband will turn on each other, and set off a chain of events that will eventually lead to nuclear war and the Earth's complete destruction. Other factors are in play here, but Kara is convinced the world can be saved if Mark gets the girl. It is basically the precursor to The Butterfly Effect, only much better. Kara is, obviously from the future, although as the book goes on Mark starts to wonder if Kara is truly a time traveler from the future, or a dead woman who was offered the chance by whatever deity he believes in to come back to life temporarily and alter the course of the future (as evidenced later when he's analyzing the story Kara has told him and wonders if she didn't maybe misunderstand the whole thing that happened to her). The ending is very bittersweet, in that the world is believed to be saved, but the ending is not happy for any of the main characters. I really enjoyed this book, but it is definitely not for everyone.
