This book is another in the Popular Culture and Philosophy series. In it like the others are a group of philosophers and other academics that examine the popular item in the title. In this case they discuss various philosophical positions based on their reading of The Lord of the Rings . They are grouped into a topical nature delineated into parts. The first part looks at the Ring itself, followed by essays on happiness aspects of the book in part two. Part three examines what the book has to say about good and evil. Then, part four discusses time and mortality as it appears in the book. Finally, the last part looks at what you can learn about what ends and endings can teach us. I have a number of comments on specific pieces of text. Each is prefaced with page numbers in brackets [] from the Open Court paperback edition of 2003. [19-20] “For Galadriel, Bombadil, and Sam, the characters who most clearly reject the Ring, who remain uncorrupted by its seduction of unlimited power, their strength comes from their awareness of their own being, who they are and what they can accomplished.” This reminds me of the very first rule: “Know Yourself” in the book Happiness Rules by Mark Hebwood. [27-8] “Universal assemblers would make matter replicators of the sort found on the TV series, Star Trek , a reality. Theoretically, we could put the design specifications of any object into an assembler-driven replicator, and as long as it was supplied with enough of the right sort of atoms, the replicator would produce it.” Supposedly, they could construct both inanimate and animate things. “Thus, genetic engineering and robotics would be greatly enhanced by the advent of universal assemblers.” This supposes that we could learn how to build one in the first place. Does anyone know if this is not anything but a pipe dream at the present time? I am not naysaying here. I only wonder if the dream is ahead of the reality at the moment. [50] Gregory Bassham relates a list of things “that contribute to lasting happiness” from the research of David G. Myers. I wonder whether or not these are things are not the result of happiness and not causal factors in having it. [56] “. . . there is a strong causal connection between goodness and happiness.” (ibid) But, which way? [64] “. . . Gollum ends up not just in misery but in destruction.” But, he is extremely happy before he falls into the Cracks of Doom. [89] “Here, Nietzsche suggests, we might be wise to consider great birds of prey who exploit (eat) little lambs for their own purposes.” These birds are not considered moral creatures by most philosophers. I would put an asterisk on this belief because we do not know what level of intelligence and consciousness that these birds possess, which are two important qualifications for moral deliberation. So, this maybe a non-transferable action to human beings. [90] In note 8 it says in part: “This, his [Nietzsche] atheistic commitment seems more akin to a fundamental axiom than a well-reasoned conclusion.” It seems that this is all Nietzsche does. He just makes statements and grants that they are true. [90] “For if God does not exist, it follows that humans have not been divinely created; and if they have not been divinely created, they have not been designed for any specific purposes. Humans thus exist for no purpose. Their lives have no inherent meaning.” This is considered the result of Nietzsche's “death of god.” The apparent purpose when god did exist was to die and go to heaven. Humans have to qualify for gaining access to heaven, so all actions they perform are geared towards gaining this access. But, if heaven is your abode would not an eternity worshiping god become a little bit tedious (a lot, actually). Anyway, it is human beings who determine their own purposes (goals) and provide their life with meaning (what is important).* There is an almost inexhaustible supply of these. I have many goals, so my life is filled with purpose, and there is also plenty of things I find important in my life. Thus, a world without god still contains a lot of purpose and meaning, it just resides in the brain (mind) in us, and not given to us by some inexplainable god. [91] “Beauty not truth, will be our salvation.” Some mathematicians would find this almost acceptable because I feel these mathematicians would have the sense that a mathematical proof cannot be true if it is not beautiful. What mathematical beauty entails is never explained very well in my opinion from anything I have read. [91] “To illustrate the meaninglessness of life, Nietzsche puts forward an unusual view of history, a view according to which everything that will ever happen has already happened infinitely many times in the past.” Like his claim for “the death of god,” this is never argued for, or proved by scientific studies. [111] “For Aristotle, moral virtues are states of character one develops which, as they become more integral to one’s being, help one to lead a happier, more fulfilled life. This means we should not make lists of good or bad actions, or try to formulate general principles that allow no exceptions.” But, one does under this view draw up a list of virtues to instill in our lives. While I would agree that lists where morals are concerned should never have no exceptions, but as guidelines, including these lists seem like a positive contribution to ethics. Virtues and ethical guidelines are not mutually exclusive. [140] Joe Kraus complains about modernism in the form of Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche. I think he is arguing against straw-men here. These are some of the worst forms of modernism. Modernism that values science and rationality has much to recommend itself for. I do realize that these are not the only things of value in life, but I maintain they are very important, and modern life would not be possible without them, and much poorer if you could actually reject them. [222] Here you will find this quote from Hegel: “We may affirm absolutely that nothing great in the world has been accomplished without passion.” While I am sure I would not agree with the overall context of this quote, taken as stands it seems pretty spot on. Our emotions and feelings seem crucial to any action, both physical and mental. [224] This quote by Whitehead sounds good: “Philosophy begins in wonder. And, at the end, when philosophic thought has done its best, the wonder remains.” If this is not the case, then the philosopher has done a bad job. The book, being an anthology, had both its good and its bad chapters from my point of view. There were both those writers who I could agree with, and those writers that I was in disagreement with. These agreements and disagreements where either in the writers philosophical approach or in the specifics of what they argued for. Overall, I enjoyed this book, partly because it takes as its starting point one of my favorite works of fiction, and partly because of what was actually said. I should mention that this was the second time I have read it. If you have and interest in The Lord of the Rings and are even a bit curious about philosophy you should enjoy this book. For those who have and interest in neither, I would not even bother to pick it up. * See my blog “What Do You Mean? @ https://aquestionersjourney.wordpress... for a more in depth exploration of meaning.
