Ok, his prose is great. We all agree on that. He almost gives the reader synesthesia from his descriptions. It's excellent. HOWEVER. I was sickened by some of the things I've read both in the book and surrounding it. I have searched through many other reviews, and all I've really found is "this book is so great because" or "Laurie Lee is the best author because he captures England at it's finest" blah blah blah. He kind of does, but then again, it's nauseatingly rose-tinted, and you can basically HEAR him saying "I can't believe how appalling the youth of today is [etc], I remember, back in my day, we would never..." etc etc snooze boring etc. Not only is Mr Lee somewhat racist, he is also sexist. And no, I don't care if that's what they did at the time, that doesn't make it ok. It also doesn't mean it's the perfect wonderful England to look back on where everyone wants to live, because I wouldn't want to live in a country where it's ok to call a woman of (I imagine) African origin both "a Negress" and to describe her thus: " Mrs Moore was a jolly, eye-bulging, voodoo-like creature who took charge of us with primitive casualness." He subsequent treatment of women is pretty awful too, from describing when he had to go and sleep in his own bed, away from his mother as "my first lesson in the gentle, merciless rejection of women." Because, of course, we are all the same, we all reject men and we're all cold and evil and have no feelings. Not only that, he also sleeps around frequently, from the age of ELEVEN(!), and writes, extremely casually no less, about a rape that he and his friends planned one time. Not that it actually occurs. But that's not the point. The intention was there to rape a Christian girl, probably because she is extremely innocent, and his descriptions of said girl aren't especially flattering. All of this, coupled with the aged look of "back in the day, things were wonderful, our family had pride in itself and we made a name for ourselves in the village, everyone knew the name we bore" blah blah blah - all of that, makes for a pretty sour ending to what I thought was going to be a quaint look at country life in the early 20th century. Maybe it is. Maybe Mr Lee is adding in these unsavory parts to show how everything wasn't perfect. But I doubt it. I would like to know why he is hailed as such a hero, when I believe Thomas Hardy gives a much better impression of rural life and with spectacles that have not been near a rose bush in a thousand years.
