Lester Dent wrote The Spook Legion, which was published in the April, 1935 edition of Doc Savage Magazine; I have several Doc Savage adventures in my e-library, “shelved” in my Asus X551 laptop and my Amazon Fire HD tablet. Most of the covers were downloaded from eBay or one of the Doc Savage sites and inserted into a PDF of the downloaded Bantam edition, or in this instance a PDF version of the original Doc Savage Magazine story, complete with its two-column format. So, I’m able to read the vintage text published by Bantam with the original Smith and Street Doc Savage Magazine as a cover. This particular cover is interesting as it shows Monk driving an early 1930’s coupe with Doc riding on the car’s running board. The Spook Legion opens as a complicated mystery with Lester beginning the story in the middle of the action. An invisible “spook” has entered a telegraph office in Boston and sent a mysterious telegram to Doc advising him to travel to Boston and return to New York aboard a certain flight. The telegram sets the stage for the mystery as its author claims the situation, “is a “matter of vital danger to thousands and merits your attention.” After discussing the situation between themselves, the telegraph operators decide to send the telegram to Doc, “cash on delivery” meaning Doc will have to pick up the tab. Evidently, the mysterious telegram “spooked” Doc's curiosity as he did catch that particular flight from “Bean Town” to the “Big Apple." Upon receiving the telegram, the Man of Bronze calls the office for further information and informs the operators that the telegram’s author is using an anonymous “name” and listed a non-existent address. Doc, Ham, Monk, and Habeas show up in the first four chapters of The Spook Legion, as a passenger traveling incognito and two innocent bystanders. I enjoyed Lester's method of introducing Doc and his guys in the story’s early paragraphs as it made for an interesting beginning to this “spooky” Doc Savage adventure. The bad guys are also introduced, and according to the group's “lieutenant,” whatever they are involved with is, “too big for mugs like this palooka.” Of course, the “palooka” was none other than Doc Savage disguised as a “palooka,” or translated from the vernacular of the day as a “has been” prize fighter, complete with numerous battle scars that more than likely include two “cauliflower ears.” The story line for The Spook Legion is set in the first four chapters; I’m reading a reprint of the original story as it appeared in the April, 1935 edition of Doc Savage Magazine. The promotional lead-in states, “a horde of invisible men attack New York! Millions in cash and jewels move through the air as if dangled on unseen threads! But the power of one man is overlooked— Doc Savage! So, it appears Doc and his guys will match wits with another evil mastermind who somehow has enabled his gang to practice their craft literally without being seen. Can Doc solve the mystery of this “spook legion "?” It remains to be seen, but I have the utmost confidence The Man of Bronze will prevail against these invisible adversaries. And, Doc and his crew do prevail against this invisible legion of spooks, but not before several people are murdered and twenty million in loot is stolen by these unseen criminals. The “field lieutenant,” as one of the characters referred to him, was a cold-blooded but rather intelligent former “con man” by the name of Telegraph Edmonds. Obviously, Lester paid homage to his former career as a telegraph operator with his unique name. I guessed the identity of the mastermind, who is revealed in the story's final chapter, which also describes the demise of the entire invisible gang; as usual, they perish due to their own actions … Doc tried to reverse their actions, but was unable to do so, so they got what they deserved. There’s a sprinkling of humor in The Spook Legion as Doc and Monk find themselves incorporated into the gang and suffer the humorous consequences of being invisible. Lester managed to cross into the science fiction genre with his theme of invisibility in The Spook Legion; he must have enjoyed reading H. G.Wells’ 1897 classic, The Invisible Man. Doc offers a theory of how the mastermind accomplished this amazing scientific feat in Chapter XIV… it had something to do with changing the electronic composition of the body. As I mentioned in other science fiction story reviews, the reader doesn’t necessarily have to understand the science in the fiction to enjoy reading the story. So, Doc, along with Ham, Monk and Habeas, who plays an expanded role in the story, solve the mystery of the invisible thieves without the aid of Renny, Long Tom and Johnny, who were busy working at their day jobs in other parts of the world. Lester ends The Spook Legion with a preview of the next thrilling adventure for Doc and the guys, which will be The Secret In The Sky and will be published in the May, 1935 edition of Doc Savage Magazine; he billed it as the next menace that will confront Doc Savage and his aides. I’ll be sure to read it since I’ve just finished this five-star rated Doc Savage adventure aptly titled The Spook Legion. *****
