Unbelievably, Melville had a hard time making a living from his writing. [That was sarcasm.] His style is overly archaic. I read a fair amount of classic literature, but this is just ridiculous. In the mid to late 19th century, were people still saying "Hark!"? And "Blah, blah, blah, thought I"? Really? You can't convince me. 1. From that tree-top, what birded chimes of silver throats had rung. 2. Dire sight it is to see some silken beast long dally with a golden lizard ere she devour. 3. Himself became reserved. REALLY? Himself?? Because "he" is just too simple? I don't care if you are writing in the fourth century, the fifteenth century, the 19th century, or the 55th century; if you write a sentence like "himself became reserved" you deserve every heap of scorn and lack of income that comes your way. Billy Budd and Benito Cereno , the two longest stories here, are actually the least offensive and most readable, stylistically. (Least offensive stylistically, I must stress; Benito Cereno is quite offensive racially and makes a fascinating study of that issue.) But The Piazza is one of the most ridiculous things I've ever read. The Encantadas is just barely fiction - it's more of a travelogue. If you can get through its ten sketches, give yourself a pat on the back. The Lightning-Rod Man and The Bell-Tower made me want to throw myself off a cliff they were so dull. I did feel like his homoeroticism was a little ahead of its time, though. If Billy Budd is not a gay icon, I can't understand why. "You have but noted his fair cheek. A man-trap may be under his ruddy-tipped daisies." Now the Handsome Sailor, as a signal figure among the crew, had naturally enough attracted the Captain's attention from the first. Though in general not very demonstrative to his officers, he had congratulated Lieutenant Ratcliffe upon his good fortune in lighting on such a fine specimen of the genus homo , who in the nude might have posed for a statue of young Adam before the Fall. And "The Town-Ho's Story?" Yes....of course I thought that meant the town ho.
