Agatha Christie's second Hercules Poirot novel isn't a smooth, confident trip of bloody fun to the inevitable solution satisfying the curious fan, her wobbly sea legs will walk down the decks looking straight ahead soon enough no need of endless dead ends to fool the fools but hurting the narrative her eyes seeing the light in the darkness but not yet . Poirot keeps his secrets close to his ample vest never hinting who the killer is, driving others batty including Paris police investigator, the very arrogant officer Monsieur Giraud, though the quite gruesome, the... brutal murder was committed in a far away place the provincial northern France, an arch rival tries to show how superior he is making the great detective look unimpressive and downright silly to the lawmen , you want to grab him by his shirt and shake the clues out, however this would ruin the mystery too early, a patient reader is a happy contented person, besides we all know the future victor .The humans lacking control of their emotions can never be believers in mysterious stories....Oh the story set in the early 1920's when it was written a rich man is stabbed to death outside his mansion, suspects include wife Eloise, son Jack, mistress, friends in France and our Belgian sleuth receives a letter from the soon to be deceased millionaire, found dead were else but on a golf course, Paul Renauld the unlucky. Ancient secrets contribute to criminal investigations with the police as always arresting the wrong person not to worry Poirot is nearby and will find the real butcher. As his sadly ineffective assistant the Man asks many questions discovers little, no important answers, he tries very hard... however. Still a detective or even a mediocre one seems like a fish out of water. Our good to be honest is rather out of his league... Captain Arthur Hastings sadly isn't, presumably though a survivor of the horrendous trenches looks puzzled, welcome to the Club. A little blackmail, illicit love, twins, characters hiding from the law under assumed names you need a scorecard to know the good from the bad...The author by this mystery and especially later efforts transported the genre to a higher quality, maybe they will always be considered unimportant works not worth serious studying yet the pompous view the world in a different way than us, those groups making the majority, quite naturally just need a little entertainment . I prefer the more mature Lady's books, the familiar is a comfort to the consumer, it feels like a delicious hot cup of coffee in a cold winter's day...maybe a doughnut too what's the harm?
