This is one crazy read/listen (I listened to the audiobook version). Definitely not the predictable rake reformation story or gentleman meets hellcat who is transformed into sweet vixen. This is very different.... This is a "throw all of your notions of a romance out the door" & "fasten your seatbelt for the ride." The story takes place in the 1800's in Louisiana in a time where the country had many pockets of danger. This book details the unbreakable, insatiable and compelling love story of Prince Rolfe of Ruthenia and Angline. Difficult parts of the book 1) The concept of rape in this book has been very controversial. More so, it's the treatment of women in an era where a woman was vulnerable among both men and women that I found really tough. There are some very, very sad trajectories of women in this book. It was heart-wrenching to read those parts. For a woman who found herself in a life-altering tragedy (i.e. rape, being kidnapped by men etc.), not only was she personally tormented, but there was very little sympathy from society. Therefore, there were very little choices for a woman found in this terrible predicament with minimal chances of a "happily ever after." 2) It was so sad how some great characters in the book died. I would have liked or preferred less death of people who had so much potential. Thankfully, the evil people die as well. 3) Unrequited love is a difficult thing. I was sad about a suitor's love who did not receive affection in return from his intended. I think those wounds just don't heal easy. Redeeming parts of the book 1) It's hard to tell when this book redeems itself, but it most certainly does. From the beginning this book will make your heart race. Every moment, scene & travel in the book is unpredictable and well...exciting. Even though the Hero, Rolfe starts off really bad (after all he violates the heroine), it's odd because Angline faces her situation with courage, some level of resignation and well, almost nonchalance. It was hard to gauge her emotions during the first parts of her relationship with the Hero. I'm not sure if she was psychologically protecting herself or if she really was quite taken & charmed by this man...I don't know...but, ultimately the Captive falls in LOVE with the Captor... and vice versa. I understand that message is not healthy, but perhaps it's the skill of Jennifer Blake & her nuances in Rolfe & Angline's unique situation that makes their unfolding, steamy romance become something strong, lasting and quite irresistible. There is no question that the Hero and Heroine fall hard for one another. They put each other's needs above their own and sacrifice much to keep one another safe. I think the author did a good job in writing about their backgrounds, presses and one can get a good sense of where each is coming from. 2) There are so many twists and great plot events in this book! I did not see the end and resolution coming! Jennifer Blake did a fabulous job in writing about very intriguing characters & their relationship to one another that makes this story credible and quite fascinating. I did not suspect the traitor until he/she was revealed...wow! So, crazy! Things I loved about the book: 1) It's obvious that Rolfe, from the beginning, wants and desires Angline, but there is a part where you know that this man grows to simply adore her. She becomes as necessary to him as breathing...this man can not leave her alone...He NEEDS HER. 2) The chemistry between Rolfe & Angline is on fire! It's not just physical, it's mental and intellectual. Angline is sharp, intelligent, kind-hearted and fierce. And, of course Rolfe is attracted to her person. That is, her complete being. But, in particular, I like how Rolfe's defenses are put to the side and he showers her with a poetic dialogue that really showcases the charmer he is. Their banter is charged with witty quips and intellectual challenges that I think leave both...um, intellectually stimulated, shall we say?...LOL 3) I just can't wait to read/listen to the 2nd book. I can't wait to hear about how Rolfe and Angline live their life and how the story continues with the next generation.... Narrator: In the audiobook, the narrator was good. I know her Scottish accent needs some help, but overall, she was very good.
