“[Lieutenant William] Bligh had retired to his small and windowless cabin; perhaps he had looked in on the nursery to admire the well-ordered ranks of flourishing plants and the pleasing wake of his ship through the great cabin window. As was his habit, Bligh left his door open and unlocked, so as to be immediately accessible if he were needed. Presumably, he would have fallen asleep by midnight. He was awoken five hours later, at dawn, by the weight of hands being pressed upon him. In sheer astonishment, he came to his senses to find Fletcher Christian, Charles Churchill, John Mills, the gunner’s mate, and Thomas Burkett, seaman, under arms. Bligh was roughly seized and his hands bound behind his back. ‘Murder!’ Bligh shouted at the top of his voice, as he was pushed up the stairway in his nightshirt, passing other men, also under arms, stationed outside his cabin door. Once on deck, there was a blur of confused activity, voices shouting, mocking, giving orders, whispering encouragement. Christian was calling for a boat to be lowered…” - Caroline Alexander, The Bounty: The True Story of the Mutiny on the Bounty In the vast lore of the great seas of the world, the tale of the mutiny on the H.M.S. Bounty remains one of the most famous. It is April 1789, and Her Majesty’s Ship the Bounty is on her way back home from a mission to – of all things – transplant breadfruit. Early one morning, Master’s Mate Fletcher Christian – bearing a name right out of bad fiction – leads a mutiny against his commanding officer, Lieutenant William Bligh. Fletcher puts Bligh, along with eighteen loyal sailors, into a small, open boat, and sets them adrift. He and twenty-five men remain on board. From there, two remarkable journeys unfold. First, there is Bligh, who managed to navigate 3,500 miles of open water in a boat with precious little freeboard. Meanwhile, Fletcher sails back to Tahiti, where several of his outlaw-crew decide to disembark and rejoin the Tahitian people, with whom they had previously spent five months. A handful of others – including Fletcher Christian – sail away, knowing that the British Navy will eventually come looking for them. Seemingly, he disappears off the face of the earth. There are many reasons that this tale has endured. It has adventure, top-notch seamanship, sex and violence, mystery, and – at the heart of it all – a betrayal, for at the start of their voyage, Lieutenant Bligh and Master’s Mate Fletcher Christian were friends. According to legend, Bligh’s martinet-like personality and tyrannical nature eventually eroded Fletcher’s mental health – all witnesses have him screaming “I am in hell!” during the mutiny – leading to his desperate act. That’s not quite the story that Caroline Alexander reveals in The Bounty , her narrative of an incident that can best be described as the very opposite of “quiet quitting.” In her telling, Lieutenant Bligh is far more complicated, while Fletcher Christian becomes far more opaque. *** Though it is true, the saga of the H.M.S. Bounty follows the clean lines of classical fiction. Two friends reach a point of conflict, leading to irrevocable consequences and vastly different fates. Despite the perfect linearity of the story, Alexander decides to present The Bounty as a fractured chronology. Specifically, she begins with an extended chapter aboard the Pandora , the ship sent to capture the mutineers in Tahiti. Only after following the Pandora ’s own rough expedition does she circle back to reintroduce the characters as they board the Bounty . I’m fine with authors baiting the hook with a short prologue, something to interest the reader into taking the plunge. Here, though, I don’t think it entirely works. As I mentioned above, the intro is not short, and if you’re only familiar with the broad outlines, it can be confusing. Obviously, an eighteenth century maritime mutiny is not quantum physics, but there are some complexities involved, especially since two important figures are named, respectively, Heyward and Hayward. Things get smoother – in literary terms, at least – once we’re onboard the Bounty and heading toward Tahiti. The Bounty is deeply research, and at over four-hundred pages, Alexander has the space to define the major players – not just Bligh and Christian, but mutineer Peter Heywood – and to give us a taste of life aboard a British sailing vessel. *** Alexander is a very good writer, and knows something about survival stories, having written about Antarctic explorer Ernest Shackleton. Thus, I came into The Bounty with exceedingly high expectations. Unfortunately, while this is quite good, it is also maddeningly inconsistent in terms of focus. The most startling example of this is Bligh’s semi-miraculous survival. The fury of the ocean is capable of swallowing even massive modern ships equipped with radar and global positioning. It is beyond belief that Bligh could have traversed this environment in a roofless, twenty-three foot launch. Yet, for whatever reason, Alexander’s telling of this segment is really brief, and doesn’t leave much of an impact. Compared to David Grann’s The Wager , it is downright uninspired. I expected to have a visceral sense of the hunger, thirst, and sunburned existence these guys lived through. Instead, it’s over just after it starts, and Alexander moves on. On the other hand, Alexander is really, really fascinated by the court-martial that convened to try the ten mutineers who were captured, and who survived a shipwreck on their way back to England, only to face the hangman’s rope. She uses the joint trial in Rashomon -like fashion, to constantly revisit the moment of mutiny, in an ultimately vain attempt to pierce Fletcher Christian’s psyche, and determine each mutineer’s culpability. Don’t get me wrong: I like a good court-martial. Nonetheless, courtroom proceedings lack the essentialness of the epic, men-versus-the-sea aspects. *** One of Alexander’s purposes in The Bounty is to clear the record on Lieutenant Bligh. Clearly, he was a low-grade ass, but relative to other British naval commanders, not all that bad. As Alexander makes clear, he used the lash far less than others, and also made it a point to single out the crew when they did well. At a time when ship captains had godlike powers over life and death – an age where men were impressed off the streets into seafaring service; were given awful food assuaged only by rum and water; were viciously flogged with whips or dunked from the yardarm – Bligh seems almost civilized. He also happened to be on a ship so small that it did not have the normal company of marines aboard, who would have served as his bodyguards. Another of Alexander’s themes is the role of class in the aftermath of the mutiny. At this time in its history, England was an old boy’s club with a Parliament, where a good name – unearned and claimed by chance – meant almost everything. In particular, Alexander carefully dissects how seventeen-year-old mutineer-slash-beach-afficionado Peter Heywood used his connections as leverage during the trial. *** As Alexander dutifully reports in the final pages of The Bounty , things did not go particularly well for Fletcher Christian. Eventually, he – along with eight mutineers, six Tahitian men, and eleven Tahitian women, some of them possibly forced into joining – made it to uninhabited Pitcairn Island. There, they formed a strange, at times unstable little colony, which somehow survived. Unfortunately for Fletcher, he did not really get the chance to see this. *** The Bounty strips away a lot of the romances surrounding the mutiny and its repercussions. This is all well and good, because I don’t pick up nonfiction to delude myself. Still, upon finishing this, it occurred to me that I much prefer the mythical Bounty , pitting an ultra-conformist, dictatorial captain against a free-spirited first mate, who longs to leave the cruel hierarchies of an allegedly “civilized” world for a simpler, more naturalistic mode of life. It is this version of the H.M.S. Bounty that calls to me, the embodiment of every workingperson’s dream of telling off your boss, leaving behind your responsibilities and worries – taxes, debts, politics, a broke-down car, a leaky roof – and heading out to the horizon, where a deserted tropical paradise awaits.
