This is one of those books that started off with a bang and ended with a whimper. I really was hooked for the first two parts of The Big Sky. The novel opens with Boone Caudill, a teenager, running away from his abusive pap and trying to make it on his own out into the world. He has a series of adventures and episodes, meeting some foes, some allies, as he tries to find his footing away from home and out under the big sky. It at times almost felt like a Western version of Huckleberry Finn, with Boone running away and having to make it away from civilization much in the same way as Huck does in Twain’s novel. These moments, Guthrie really captures the essence and feel of high adventure and of the West. However, the book does not keep this momentum going. I think one of the aspects that I didn’t care for was, well, Boone. Starting with Part 3, and then beyond, he becomes less and less the intriguing character. While there is a slight character arc, as Boone does change, he seems to only changes for the worse. I’m not asking for an antihero to be warm and fuzzy, but there was an inconsequential aspect to his nature, something missing, that made me lose some interest in his fate or life journey. I actually felt like the co-stars of the novel, his two partners, Jim and Dick Summers, had more character depth. I suppose that Jim is somewhat of a contrast to Boone, but I guess this helps to balance these two characters out as the plot advances. Alongside this, and I know that this book is written from the perspective of the Old West, but there were too many problems with the depiction of other characters. The Native Americans are stereotyped to the lowest common denominator for the most part: the men are often wild, untamed, and drunk, and the women in the tribes only serve as vessels for Boone and his buddies’ lust. Moreover, the adventures of Boone and his buddies seem to get a tad repetitive, especially in the second half, which tends to drag and get muddled and meandering despite the many conflicts that consume Boone. Still, I did enjoy certain aspects of The Big Sky. The writing and description of nature, the great outdoors and certain points of the plot were picaresque and illustrative. Guthrie often puts the reader right there in time and place, under the Western skies. That being said, while Guthrie’s book certainly has the feel of a Western, and certainly presents the mythological aspect of “roughing it” and the creation of the mountain man, at the end of the day his main star, Boone Caudill, is somewhat lacking in substantiality, unless being irritable or ornery qualifies for character depth. Interesting read at points, but I do not think I’ll move on in the series.
