When I was 12 and read "Bless Me Ultima" for the first time, I was moved by that book towards a spiritualism that felt closer to my own. Now as an adult, reading this book I was able to appreciate Anaya as a true spiritual explorer, and was surprised to see his concerted effort to spell out a path in (what would appear to be) pantheism. It is obvious that in writing this, Anaya struggled to bring his own competing beliefs together into one belief system. I will read this book again to really outline this belief system more but my main critiques were: He was confused on the question of the mind, body and soul and whether or not they are different expressions of the same thing. Actually, this to me is just one example of a confusion around dualism - an indecision as to whether or not to commit to the narrative of "everything is one" (unity) or "there is a universal soul expressed in many" (dualistic). Anaya does seem to fetishize indigenous beliefs to an extent - I get the impression that growing up in NM he was in awe of or even jealous of indigenous connections to the land and the various belief systems, but that he admired from a distance. He tries to bring some of this into his belief system, but to me it is a bit awkward and not very nuanced. It kind of gives the "wise Indian" trope a little bit. Last critique would be that the entire story centers around a "true" spiritual path leading the people away from the repression and control of the "authorities", yet he does not provide any room in his belief system for resistance - even armed rebellion, and instead chooses pacifism. This makes no sense to me and is frustrating. As far as what I liked about this belief system - I liked the connection to daily life, the simplicity and general lack of dogma. I like the rhetoric of "walking the path of the sun" because I thought it was a beautiful way to relate back to our need for the sun's energy in order for all life on earth to exist. I liked the lack of condemnation and religious rules that constrain people's natural rhythms. I will definitely read this one again and compare with my Gibran stories. I would love to read a biography/autobiography about Anaya.
