3rd in the series, Welsh-born 12th-century Benedictine monk Cadfael – once a soldier in the crusades before taking Holy orders – now a self-taught herbalist, apothecary and sometime sleuth, is working in his garden and storage shed in the Abbey at Shrewsbury. As Christmas approaches, news arrives that the aging Abbot has been summoned to London by the Pope’s representative, who is overseeing a restructure of the abbeys. Fearing his tenure may be at an end, the Abbot temporarily hands his duties to the supercilious Prior Robert until his future is decided. One of the pressing matters to be addressed is the allocation of a house, chattels, food and stabling for one horse for ailing landowner Gervase Bonel, his wife, stepson and two servants – in exchange for his manor and lands on the border with Wales. Though the formalities are incomplete, the ambitious Prior Robert is only too willing to accept the exchange, to further his credentials. Soon after the family moves in, Bonel is suddenly stricken and dies from a poison from Cadfael’s own dispensary, and Cadfael is confounded as he recognises the widow as Richildis, the girl he courted as a teenager, now twice married. The evidence points to the son by her first marriage, but she and others are convinced he is innocent, asking Cadfael to investigate on their behalf. His journey takes him across the border into Wales – a different language and a people who practise a Celtic Christianity unhitched from Rome. This series is an absolute delight. Written as English would be spoken back in the twelve century, with helpful maps and a glossary of medieval terms, it is easy for the reader to become immersed in the many places and characters. My own favourite: Hugh Beringar, deputy to the Sheriff of Shrewsbury, Gilbert Prestcote: he and Cadfael having a long-standing friendship. There had been few direct questions asked, and few but oblique answers. Their conversation was often as devious as their relationship was easy and secure, but they understood each other. Well recommended.
