Likes: I guess this is technically a reread because a teacher read this novel to our class when I was in elementary school. I picked the book up again because I didn’t remember much about it. I knew I liked it. I vaguely remembered the rebellious older brother, the ugly car, and the scary thing that happens at the end. The rest of the story was very foggy in my mind. Now that I’ve reread it, I can confirm that the writing and character development are excellent! Seriously, this is the most believable middlegrade book I’ve read in a long time. It’s so realistic that I’m wondering if any of it is biographical. I know that the ending is based on a real event, but I’m not sure about the rest of the story. It seems real. Even though the Watsons are “weird,” they’re not cartoonish like the characters in some other children’s books. Each member of the Watson family has a huge personality. This leads to amusing mishaps. Overall, this is a story about sibling relationships. The three Watson kids are very different from each other. Byron is angry and impulsive. Kenny is quiet and nerdy. Joetta is the baby who gets all of the attention. The kids fight a lot. Then something unexpected happens. They need to work together to get through it. Sometimes, your family members are the only ones who know how to help you. “‘Now, your mother and I made a deal when we first got married that if either one of us ever watched the 'wunnerful, wunnerful' Lawrence Welk Show or listened to country music the other one got to get a free divorce.’” – The Watsons Go To Birmingham—1963 Dislikes: I remembered the funny and scary parts; I didn’t remember the plodding pace. The characters are amazing, but it takes them a very long time to do anything. They don’t even leave for Birmingham until over halfway through the book. I wish the plot had started earlier. I feel like I spent most of the book waiting for the Watsons to go to Birmingham. It took too long for the story to deliver what the title promised. The Bottom Line: This novel fully deserves its “modern classic” label. It has some of the most realistic characters I’ve come across in a kids’ book. Do you like opinions, giveaways, and bookish nonsense? I have a blog for that.
