Scurrilous, scandalous, shady, slippery, seamy, sordid, sly, slanderous, surreptitious, sneaky…. Sure you thought politicians were all these things, but you’re not quite correct, they’re much worse ! At least Lyndon Baines Johnson, LBJ, was … in this book 2 of 4 volumes, over 3000 pages total, sometimes I wonder if any of us could withstand such an examination of our lives without at least some of these adjectives being used? ‘Means of Ascent’ describes his ‘middle years’, starting in 1941, when as a congressman, he was road blocked career-wise as politics in the US Congress was dictated by seniority, and you needed someone to retire, or die, in front of you to get ahead. Not to mention he bragged so much about defending the US in the event of war, that he had to join up despite every effort to avoid it. So he concentrated on ‘Means’ which involved acquiring wealth, which he did one way by strong-arming the purchase of an Austin, Texas radio station then using his political power to make it a profitable enterprise. All the while telling the media, who actually believed him with no investigation, that it belonged to his wife and he had nothing to do with it. The primary way to gain influence to LBJ was to buy advertising time on that radio station, thus laundering the intent. Since I live in LBJ-land, central Texas, it’s of extra interest to me that local towns and business are part of the story, the radio station is now call KLBJ-AM & FM, and there are many other tributes such as Lady Bird Lake and references to a popular grocery chain, HEB, which bought time on the station to gain access to hard to get food supplies during WW2. After securing finances, LBJ gets the opportunity to run for a senate seat. It’s quite a battle and a great look at politics of the era, and how methods were changing from down-home speeches in county courtyards to TV, helicopters and other forms of media. Author Caro has a great summation of the man: “ His morality was the morality of the ballet box, a morality in which nothing matters but victory and any other maneuver that leads to victory is justified, a morality that was an amorality. “ It’s a fantastic tale, a good read and I can’t wait to get on to book 3.
