Oh book, how I hate thee, let me count the ways... This is generally recommended to fans of Georgette Heyer, but instead of the expected historical romp, with funny repartee, misunderstandings, silliness, growing on the part of one of the MCs, lively secondary characters, historical detail that colours the world in which this takes place, this turd delivers a milquetoast heroine; a hero who is a non-entity, whose personality and looks are so nondescript that I wondered if perhaps the author just left that space as a placeholder until she came up with an actual character, only forgot to then do so; a premise that is preposterous in the extreme; and a cartoonish villain. There is no plot. The dialogue is wooden, graceless, boring and lacks even a hint of an attempt at wit. To recommend this to fans of Georgette Heyer is like recommending panto to fans of Shakespeare. Two cousins who look alike decide to do a switch, so that the insane, villain cousin (whom our moral, just, beautiful and perfect heroine somehow still likes) can go away and do something stupid somewhere, it doesn’t matter what (although whatever she is up to sounded much more interesting than anything that was happening with holier-than-thou cousin, but anyway...). So the good twin, Juliet, agrees to impersonate her stupid twin, Josephine. Josephine is married, but neither her husband, Hyde, nor the servants suspect anything when the twin replace each other, even though Juliet is the polar opposite of Josephine: kind, considerate, intelligent, caring and seems to give a damn about the husband, unlike his actual wife. Somehow this tips nobody off, because Juliet says something stupid once in a while to remind everyone that she is the stupid twin. Time passes really quickly, there is the requisite duel, which seems pointless anyway, but the husband is wounded, and Juliet saves his life (of course). But then, before the husband is recovered, Josephine returns, and of course all the servants love Juliet at this point, and Josephine goes to parties instead of taking care of her husband, because she is a cartoonish villain. As you read on, questions start piling up in your head, and not the good kind of questions, the answers to which you wait for breathlessly, no, they're the frustrating sort of questions, which make reading this book impossible, because they are the fundamental building blocks of this story, and without a good explanation you've no reason to care for anything that happens: 1. Why the hell does Juliet agree to the scheme? Josephine said she’d help her out financially whether Juliet agreed to the switcheroo or no, so Juliet has exactly 0 motive to do something so against her morals and character. 2. How does nobody recognise the switch? They are cousins , not identical twins. It’s impossible that their voices are alike, their mannerisms, the way they laugh, the way they smell, eat, drink, dance, the sort of things that make them laugh… a thousand things! The notion that a husband wouldn’t recognise that his wife had switched places with her cousin is beyond preposterous. And yes, Hyde and Josephine are estranged, but they do live together and see each other every day. 3. Why the hell did Hyde marry Josephine in the first place? He is a saint (described so in the book, I kid you not) and she is a selfish moron. They have nothing in common, don’t seem to like each other, aren’t even attracted to each other… what the hell happened there? 4. Why does Hyde duel Fonseca? It’s implied of course that Josephine had an affair with him, but Heyer heroes who dealt with similar problems were able to do so without bringing a whole lot of scandal on their heads, why can’t this guy? Stupid mofo. Ugh, so many things that annoyed me, but these are the main ones because they are the pillars on which this story rests, and the motivations here are just… just absent really. I mean why? Honestly, author, why? Mostly what was missing was a firm narrative voice – something to describe the scenes to you, to explain the motivations, whether they are real or perceived, something to guide you through the story, keep you hooked with a central mystery or a central problem that needs solving, while little things happen around it. Instead, you have the virtuous heroine, who is competent at all things womanly, who has no personality, whom you are supposed to root for because she is virtuous. Also a dull virtuous hero, who is also wonderful and has all the charisma of a wet sponge. Juliet falls in love with him the moment she sets eyes on him (pretty much), so there’s no relationship development. Essentially they are perfect for each other and Josephine’s in the way. I guess I was kind of attracted to the setting of this novel, but actually this turned out to be a big mistake. The attitude to black people in this book is straight from Gone With the Wind. Sure there are black people who are servants, but don’t you, reader, worry your pretty little head over them, they’re all there voluntarily, because our hero had freed them all and they all stayed because they just lurved him so much. Ugh. Sure. Who wouldn’t want to clean this guys poop out of his chamber pot? Sign me up! In Georgette Heyer social inequality is there, of course, and there are servants, as is period-appropriate, but they had personalities, and they had a purpose in the plot of the novel. I am not saying that Georgette Heyer’s attitude to them in her stories is progressive, I am only saying that from the perspective of story telling they are treated like people, with agency, who affect things, who have their own problems, their own families, wants, needs, lives, pasts, ambitions, likes and dislikes etc. Here we just have a bunch of smiling faces, whose only care in the world is their Master. And it’s worse than in Heyer’s world, of course, because they are former slaves. The novel tells you that Hyde freed them, but there is no mention of whether he paid them for their years of free servitude, and if their lot had in fact improved in any material way. It’s just a side issue, and, more insulting than anything else, it’s a side issue used solely for the purpose of emphasising our hero’s goodness. The writing isn't bad, as in the sentences are grammatical and clearly the author is a literate person, but it is bad in the story-telling sense. It completely misses the point of these kinds of stories, and delivers nothing of what could reasonably be expected of it. Worst of all, it is just a chore to read. Show more
