Women’s history month is fast approaching, and I could not resist to start my annual reading women authors in March a few days early. Between denser reads I enjoy reading mysteries as a palette cleanser. This keeps my brain sharp and keeps me from falling into a reading rut. I find almost no better way to honor women’s history month than to read the Queen of Crime, Agatha Christie. Nearly every mystery writer of today can trace their influences back to Dame Christie, and each of her cases adds a new layer of intrigue. I have enjoyed cases featuring the Belgian detective Hercule Poirot for years and decided to fill in the gaps with Murder on the Links, an earlier case of Poirot’s I previously overlooked. Fresh of his case at Styles, Poirot and his assistant Captain Hastings are summoned to Merlinville, France, a seaside town, by Monsieur Renauld as he fears that his life is in danger. By the time he arrives at Renauld’s Villa Genevieve, he has been murdered. Rather than protecting his client, Poirot assists in investigating his murder. Even in his earlier cases, younger detectives refer to Poirot as a fossil, a has been whose methods are antiquated. In this case, we meet local detective Giraud, a go get them type who claims to know whodunit, how, and why from the get go. Giraud exhibits charisma and pizazz as a modern detective, leading Hastings to question his mentor’s methodology. A retired Belgian detective who runs a private investigator firm in London, Poirot often appears lost in thought, yet his little gray cells are hard at work throughout the duration of a case in order to bring the true criminal to justice. At first glance, it appears that Monsieur Renauld’s son Jack murdered his father over anger of being cut out of his will. Should both parents somehow die, he would stand to inherit a vast fortune. Two women have fallen for Jack, and it is unclear at first whether either of these women are in love with Jack or with his money. Poirot figures it out immediately and has to piece together clues. Giraud on the other hand sees things in black and white and leads Captain Hastings down a trail of false clues. Complicating the matter is that Hastings has also fallen in love with a pretty young girl who calls herself Cinderella. Poirot warns his protege of falling in love for the wrong reasons as the presence of a woman who cloud his judgement of a case, a judgement that is already fuzzy due to the presence of pseudo detective Giraud. As a result, Poirot and Hastings are at odds for most of this case as Poirot races to solve it before the French convict the wrong person. As with many of her cases, Christie leads readers down a multi layered trail that evolves as Poirot cracks the case. Here, the murder occurs on a golf course in what Poirot calls a “bunk-air”, yet golf links has a double entendre, linking the Renauld case to one that occurred twenty years in the past. No one is who they seem to everyone except Poirot as he has been solving crime for decades and has a lifetime of detecting experience to compare to his current employment. Hastings lack of use of his little gray cells is apparent throughout as Poirot urges him to think things through rather than to leap to the first conclusion that comes to him. As this is the first mention of Hastings in the Poirot series, it is clear that Christie has meant for be an able sidekick; however, he is more the type to solve things by accident, allowing for Poirot to do the more serious detecting. Even from these earliest of cases, Christie reveals that Poirot does not overlook even the minutest of details as he sees the case to its conclusion. In his words, a clue of two inches is just as important as one of two feet, putting the framework in place for Poirot to be known as one of the greatest detectives in literary history. It is hard to believe that Agatha Christie published her earliest cases nearly one hundred years ago. Her first cases were written in the early 1920s and have stood the test of time as Hercule Poirot and his mustache have endured as among the most recognizable literary profiles. I did utilize my little gray cells and avoid a reading rut as I read along to discover whodunit. It is always fun to read an Agatha Christie murder mystery, and it is far from my last journey with her. As such, women’s history month has commenced and I am excited for the reading adventures the month has in store for me. 4 stars
