The Chicago Bulls were one of the least popular franchises in the NBA - until they drafted Michael Jordan. Jordan was selected with the third overall pick in the 1984 NBA draft, after playing three years at the University of North Carolina under coach Dean Smith. Jordan was truly a special talent, who was a fierce competitor. His drafting, along with the selection of Scottie Pippen, entirely changed the future of the Chicago Bulls, and made them into title contenders. In 1984, the Bulls were still considered the laughing stock of the league, as they had not won a divisional title in more than twenty five years. Jordan came in and was determined to leave his mark. He won Rookie of the Year in 1984, and was just getting started. However, Jordan was a horrendous teammate and refused to pass the ball. This became a defining aspect of his career, and his teammates hated him. Jordan hated being second rate to anyone, and if he was not leading the team in shot attempts, he would go into a rage. Jordan was a ruthless competitor however, and he took that passion all the way to the golf course. Jordan became an avid golfer and spent much of his free time on the course. Jordan was known to have a 7:00 am tee time on a day, and then show up to his Bulls game at 3:00. During every single break in the season, MJ goes back home to North Carolina to play golf. Jordan does not participate in any All-Star events other than the main Sunday night game, purely because he has to golf. Jordans golf addiction has bloomed into hopes of becoming a PGA pro one day. Jordan spends so much on golf, and goes so frequently that many clubs have begun to waive fees for him, just so he will come and play their course. A big element of this book is Jordan's teammates, and their lives and careers. Scottie Pippen is often talked about, and his financial paranoia is very prevalent. Pippen grew up in rural Arkansas, and was extremely poor. So Pippen demands that his contracts get signed as soon as possible, to ensure he gets paid, and to ensure he does not run out of cash. Scottie also is terrified of a potential injury, whether it is bad, or very slight. If he misses one game, or misses out on any paychecks, he becomes very worried that he will fall back into poverty. Scottie also pays for many things for his family, and feels obligated to do so. The Jordan Rules is an in depth view on what the Bulls were like, while Jordan was on the team. Jordan was certainly an exceptional athlete, but he was a horrible teammate and was widely known for being extremely greedy. Jordan practically ran the Bulls, and could scare the management into making choices. It wasn’t until Phil Jackson became head coach, that the Bulls got any real source of leadership and discipline. The Bulls did finally win their title, and many more with Jordan, but it was always a battle to keep Jordan happy, and somehow win games.
