The Joyful Christian is an anthology of selected writings by CS Lewis on topics related to Christianity. Wiliam Griffin from Macmillan Publishing selected brief essays from a total of fifteen of Lewis’s published books. The Editor focused attention on subjects that illustrated Lewis’s most important contributions to Christian thinking. He chose essays from the following six books that I have read: A Grief Observed, Mere Christianity, Miracles: A Preliminary Study, The Problem of Pain, The Screwtape Letters, and The Four Loves; and nine additional texts that I have not read. I will limit this review to Lewis’s discussion of Tao or karma, as additional examples of his proposed Law of Human Nature, and his characterization that this Law is ‘universal’ (worldwide and throughout recorded history). What about the specific examples of this Law? • “The Chinese… speak of a great thing (the greatest thing) called the Tao. It is the reality beyond all predicates, the abyss that was before the Creator Himself. It is nature, it is the way, it is the Road. It is the way in which the universe goes on, the way in which things everlasting emerge, stilly and tranquilly into space and time…” • “This thing which I have called for convenience the Tao, and which others might call Natural Law, or Traditional Morality, or the First Principles of practical reason, or the First Platitudes, is not one among a series of possible systems of value. It is the source of all value judgments. If it is rejected, all value is rejected. The efforts to refute it and raise a new system of value in its place is self-contradictory. There never has been and never will be, a radically new judgment of value in the history of the world. What purports to be new systems or ideologies, all consist of fragments from the Tao itself…” • “The following illustrations of the Natural Law are collected from sources such as come to the mind of one who is not a professional historian… The list makes no presumption of completeness… But I am not trying to prove its validity by the argument from common consent. For those who do not perceive its rationality, even universal consent would not prove it.” Illustrations of the Tao: Lewis provides specific examples drawn from his knowledge of world history and literature. He tells us that it is meant to be illustrative. 1. The Law of General Beneficence – the moral obligation towards charity, kindness, and mercy towards others involving mankind, in general I think that the restatement of the Golden Rule (what Nasim Nicholas Taleb calls the Silver Rule, or Rabbi Hillel famously said summarized Torah) “Do not do to others that which you would not want done to you”, is among the most concise single statements of general beneficence. If not universal, it is very common among human cultures. 2. The Law of Special Beneficence – involving specific relationships such as family and country It seems to me that marital relationships and parent-children relationships are areas where cultural differences and non-universality are more obvious. 3. Duties to Parents, Elders, Ancestors 4. Duties to Children and Posterity - Is the only acceptable role of sex to produce more believers? Does any society approach this goal in practice? 5. The Laws of Justice • Sexual justice – the sanctity of marriage across traditions – woman’s role? And specifically, a woman’s equality with her husband? • Honesty including theft and false witness • Thou shalt not kill versus Thou shalt not murder – what constitutes self-defense? 6. The Law of Good Faith and Veracity -Further variations on honesty and fraud 7. The Law of Mercy - How one treats the poor, the weak, the infirm, and women 8. The Law of Magnanimity - Courage in applying the Law of Mercy 9. When is it Right to Choose Death? When is Honor or some other concept like Faith, more important than continued living? 10. The Place of Wisdom - If Wisdom comes with age, what is the proper role of the elderly? If I read him correctly, it is Lewis’s thesis that the obvious and universal nature of this (these) Law (s) of Human Nature is precisely what makes him posit a Creating Mind or God. This incomplete rendition is teeming with examples that I think are neither obvious nor universal. They testify to the variety of man and his/ her cultures. Conversely, finding common themes among very different cultural codes buttresses the counter-argument that humans could come to these principles from many directions. Perhaps, no single creating mind is required? Among the positives I take away from this book is the notion of transforming one’s life for the better through the practice of religion, what Lewis calls ‘nice people versus new men?’ And the notion that psychotherapy and religion are not necessarily in conflict. One can use both to learn to make better choices. Grieving is still painful even when you say you believe in the immortality of a soul or spirit or Zoe. Even after reading The Joyful Christian, I would recommend reading or rereading A Grief Observed for people who want to believe in Christianity after a loved one dies… and are having difficulty believing in immortality or forgiveness. Reading CS Lewis’s books is like being invited into the lecture hall of a brilliant mind where one is privileged to watch a believer wrestling with his faith, and wrestling with his God. After studying these books for years, I am not saying that I agree with each of Lewis’s assertions or that I expect any other critical thinker to find universal agreement within his writing. I am saying that studying his work is likely to be worth the effort, particularly if you have struggled with religious dogma and faith. I wish you Godspeed.
