Rating: I rate this book 4 out of 5 stars for: - the fascinating and unique subject matter - the explorers’ efforts to balance respectful handling of Mallory’s remains with their compulsion to gather artifacts and collect evidence, all while striving to not be overwhelmed or undermined by their own strong emotional responses to the situation - Anker’s detailed reasoning about his opinion on the likelihood of whether or not Mallory and Irvine summitted Everest - Anker’s explanation of how his mountaineering experiences have impacted his life and worldview Recommendation: I think this book is intended for, and best suited to, an audience that already has an interest in mountaineering and/or Everest. The writing style isn’t overly engaging, so the subject matter does the heavy lifting. There are passages where Anker describes particular mountaineering adventures in great detail and at some length, using a lot of jargon that goes undefined. Because I have no background understanding of mountaineering, I think the jargon led me to miss the full significance of these sections. Peeves: Only one thing stood out as irksome to me. The chapters have alternating sections written by either Anker or Roberts. Some of Roberts’ sections were long enough that I lost a sense of what the prior section by Anker had been about. At times, this led me to feel a disjointedness between their two narratives. I had to skip back to the last section by Anker and scan it quickly to remember what he had been discussing before I moved on to his next section. This might have happened about 2-3 times for me. Praise: I enjoyed Anker detailing his career as a professional climber sponsored by The North Face and explaining how his mountaineering experiences have shaped his worldview and influenced his values. I appreciate Anker’s brief mention of him embracing Buddhist philosophy and practices. Anker gives an engaging account of his participation in a mission to rescue a Ukrainian climbing team that was endangered in harsh conditions on the mountain during his expedition. He expresses admiration for the strength and passion of Ukrainian mountaineers in general. While discussing the life risking circumstances they encountered, he chooses not to criticize, but to consider them with compassion and understanding. Significant Quotations: “With the sole exception of Amelia Earhart, no lost explorer in the twentieth century has provoked a more intense outpouring of romantic speculation than George Mallory.” ~David Roberts “As a North Face representative, Conrad travels around the country, giving slide shows, taking potential clients out for a day of easy skiing or climbing, or giving a climbing demonstration on an artificial wall. He can be sardonic about the work, which he sometimes alludes to as ‘the petting zoo’. Yet, in his habitually earnest way, he waxes enthusiastic about his encounters with a public avid to taste adventure, even if vicariously. ‘I can use my slide shows and ski outings as a chance to share my outlook on life, which is fundamentally Buddhist. People come to see slides of me climbing, to share my adventures, but I can use the opportunity to talk about being a good person, about how anger and hatred disrupt an expedition, and how sometimes it takes a little more effort to be positive than negative, but that it’s ultimately life-enriching. I’d like to take what notoriety or fame comes my way and turn it into something good, as for instance Sir Edmund Hillary has, building schools and hospitals in Nepal. I’d like to share what mountains have done to change my life, and become a spokesperson for goodness.” ~David Roberts “I wouldn’t call myself a Buddhist, but I have a great admiration for the religion. The Dalai Lama says his religion is kindness. If you’re going to be kind to yourself, be kind to your friends, to your partner, your family, the animals, the trees. I believe in that. I also believe in karma. It’s not just a matter of the right actions; you have to have the right intentions as well.” ~Conrad Anker “The Ukrainians were good climbers – full professionals, to the extent that one can be a professional climber in Ukraine…Finally, they took off his gloves and boots. The hands and feet weren’t completely black, but they looked bad. What nonplussed me was to see that on the lower part of his body, Volod had only long underwear on, then fleece pants, then Gore-Tex pants. No down suit on his lower body. That serves as a reminder of just how important mountaineering is in certain impoverished Eastern European countries. …all those countries have produced superb Himalayan climbers, who’ve succeeded without even being able to afford proper equipment, let alone having the luxury of being sponsored. There’s a tremendous amount of national pride involved in their efforts.” ~Conrad Anker “The Lord is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in love. He will not always accuse, nor will he harbor his anger forever; he does not treat us as our sins deserve or repay us according to our iniquities. For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so great is his love for those who fear him; as far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us. As a father has compassion on his children, so the Lord has compassion on those who fear him; for he knows how we are formed, he remembers that we are dust. The life of mortals is like grass, they flourish like a flower of the field; the wind blows over it and it is gone, and its place remembers it no more. But from everlasting to everlasting the Lord’s love is with those who fear him, and his righteousness with their children’s children…” ~ Excerpt from Psalm 103, the prayer of committal read by Andy Politz over the expedition team’s makeshift grave for for George Mallory.
