I liked The Quick and the Dead a whole lot. I like it for the things that are hard to describe why I liked it a lot. Like, all of the characters, every single last one of them, speak as if they are in a novel where everyone speaks like they are in a novel. This could have irritated the fuck out of me. I hate it when authors use their characters to tell people about all of the stuff they wanted to say and never found one big place to do it all before. I really hate, pretty much more than anything else an author could do, when they just tell us what it is they want to say instead of doing it where I'll get to feel like a human being interacting with the precious innermost thoughts and feelings of other human beings (and animals). This happens in The Quick and the Dead BIG TIME. Even when they were five. If I was in a different mood I could have gone off and felt sour comparing five year old me to five year old Corvus. It's a pain in the ass to be me when it's touch and go if you can relate to book characters. If they are just too precious for words and I want to die because I could never live where they live. Well, I was in luck. This Arizona (and some even live in the same shitty state as I do, at times. Yes!) sucks. They are in an unforgiving painting that some dude copied off another dude on tv and planted on a cheap hotel wall in some dead end town (a cul de sac, even worse). So it is messy and you step out of it a lot for people to say big time stuff. It's about big time stuff like being dead, too. Throwing yourself and stopping to look to see if you're doing right based on how the other assholes are doing it. I loved that out of the messy and taking time to look meaningful times there are getting to know them stuff that seeps through the cracks or seams. I should say something like looking into the eyes of the dead armadillo (I've seen more of those than anyone should ever have to) on the side of the road as you drive past. This is that kind of atmospheric and Williams would absolutely care about the dead armadillo on the side of the road. [The precociously loveable and annoyingly precocious eight year old Emily stages a wonderful protest over the museum of stuffed animals. That's right! Because only evil people think that animals should be killed and stuffed for their entertainment! The proprietor objects to the last line in her protest poem. I thought it should have likened him to Hitler, or something.] I loved that in between all of the posturing you get to see how it is hard to maintain the pose. There isn't glamour in being soul sick, grieved, crazy and wanting someone to follow you to somewhere else so you can like how you look better in the latest stance. Yeah, the stuff about the mouth pieces of the dead and are gonna die (that's all of us) didn't move me as much as what they already had to go through. I considered the bitter ghost Ginger to be a boring subplot until I realized near the end that she wasn't, er, a subplot. I don't care if The Quick and the Dead was about that. Williams can write as pretty as about any author I can think of. And I don't care about that and I love her even more for that. I was there for the ones that I couldn't help but care about. I will be there for everything Joy Williams has ever written if I get to be there like that. The way Alice sees herself juxtaposed with how (astute in a materialistic way) Anabel sees her (scary). Corvus' grief, held up as needed strength by Alice (it was downright touching how she reveres her) and is she going to break to everyone else. Lying inbetween each other. Ideals and ideas aloud to where they become those birthdway wishes spoken too soon. Everybody talking and talking and you can hear who isn't listening. I was really impressed with how Williams did this in spite of all the mouth piece stuff that I usually hate sooooo much. And she does it with nearly every apparition in the scene. P.s. This is the third novel that centers around an old folk's home I've read about in a couple of months. Maybe my neighbors are influencing my reading choices with subliminal messages. P.s.s. I read on wikipedia that Williams used to teach creative writing right where I live. I don't know if I like that. I'm going to imagine her students as these flip flop wearing t-shirted fools who only care about writing pretty. I wonder what she told them. I don't know if you could teach the good things about Joy Williams. Oh, and she wrote a book about Florida natural history. I'm definitely going to read that (she has my interests!). Okay, so that was an exciting wikipedia research day. P.s.s.s. Alice reminds me of my friend and I don't mean that she killed all of those cats.
