I did not know this was such a controversial book when I picked it up. I was ready to take a break from the learning I have been doing about dyslexia this year and focus on the implementing of the techniques I've deemed beneficial to our situation. Based on something that had noticeably come up, I decided to look into the phenomenon of switching small words in reading that some dyslexics do (reading aloud "the" instead of "a" and the like). He can correct himself right away when pointed out. There is no trouble actually knowing what these words are. I have since become more comfortable with this happening and feel okay about a way forward with improvement. But anyway, in this process, I stumbled on this book. Before I get too deep into my thoughts, I decided to write down some quotes as I was going through the book. I had looked at reviews here on GoodReads beforehand and still decided to read the book. I thought it would be helpful to see the kind of specifics that some people are talking about. (I even hopped onto the computer to type!) I read and wrote quotes from the newest edition available to me, with a publication date of 2010. QUOTES: "Each case of dyslexia is different because dyslexia is an unintentionally self-created condition. No two dyslexics have created it exactly the same." pg 6 "By now his disorientation has created a feeling like dizziness. He is feeling sick to his stomach, and the words and letters are swimming around the page." pg 24 "In fact, despite the current popularity of phonic methods to teach reading, dyslexics usually do better at sight reading, where they simply recognize an individual words as a concept." pg 33 "Instead of turning spelling into a contest, it's better to simply point out the difference between the word the student wrote and the correct spelling (or spellings) in the dictionary. Eventually, corrected dyslexics will figure out on their own how to spell words as they read." pg 40 "Dyslexics often see the letters three-dimensionally, as if they were floating in space." pg 38 "The result of orientation is an accurate, consistent perception of the environment, including two-dimensional words printed on a page. When the dyslexic is oriented, the words on the page are perceived correctly, without distortion. Data can be received accurately." pg 64 "The symptoms of dyslexia are manifestations of disorientation, so terminating the disorientation also terminates the symptoms. The reading skill of most dyslexics improve dramatically as soon as they begin to use this simple process." pg 65 "... the dyslexic will no longer have a learning disability. The root causes of the disability have been eliminated so compulsive solutions are no longer being triggered. .... At this point, it would be safe to say that the person's dyslexia is corrected." pg 69 "The main senses that become distorted are vision, hearing, balanced movement, and time. Common examples of disorientation include motion sickness, the sense of falling when on an escalator or at the edge of a cliff..." pg 124 "Shapes and sequences of letters or numbers appear changed or reversed... letters and numbers appear to move, disappear, grow, and shrink." "... I could intentionally increase and decrease the severity of my dyslexia symptoms." pg 127 I have discussed a lot with an online group for homeschooling dyslexic kids since reading this and not sure I want to go too deep into all my thoughts on here. It would just be too much. Some of my main thoughts: This goes against a lot of the most current research, and some of the top specialists, on what dyslexia is. I hesitate to say his descriptions are untrue as I have found some people who really do identify with it, but I would by no means say this is the definition of dyslexia. The author himself says he's corrected his dyslexia and that some people label him as autistic. He has described challenges in his life that seem to relate to a lot more than just dyslexia and the more widely spread definition involving phonological processes. I had heard the argument that this book is about one type of dyslexia called "dyseidetic dyslexia" and if this is the case, it needs to be more clearly told in the book. He uses the all-encompassing term "dyslexia" which has been described in a much different way by head researchers. If going by Google searches on terms, we deal in our house with "dysphonetic dyslexia" so it is no wonder that I do not relate to the book's details. But if there really are terms that need to be more specifically addressed, I believe they need to start doing so right away. Learning about dyslexia after an evaluation and label given is confusing enough as it is. I had not realized before reading this book, that there really are people out there still with completely different definitions. If you have a child that was identified as dyslexic and shows obvious low phonological memory or other phonological traits, I do not believe this book would benefit you. I also do not recommend it to be your first book on the subject. If you have read the quotes in this review and believe it does pertain to your situation, it could be beneficial to you. My main qualms are: the idea that dyslexia can be corrected, that this is what dyslexia is (with no differentiating from other diagnoses/symptoms), and no reference to the phonological process whatsoever. I do not know anything about Ronald Davis' practice or his methods that seem to help some people or even much of him as a person. I am just commenting on what I read in this book. If there are really subtypes of dyslexia and different ways for it to be understood, I really think they should start to become more widespread in literature and with the professionals who administer evaluations. If you have read the book Overcoming Dyslexia by Shaywitz, this book is very, very different. I'm trying to keep an open mind and keep learning. For our situation, The Gift of Dyslexia does not pertain to us and addressing the phonological process instead very much does. Take what helps and stay curious!
