The cover of the reprint of Dean Koontz’s 1981 novel “The Eyes of Darkness” askes the question: Did this thriller predict the coronavirus virus? In some ways it did, but that revelation doesn’t come until towards the end of the book. Most of the novel is a thriller, and like a lot of Dean Koontz novels, it’s a chase novel. The book starts with a showgirl named Tina Evans, who is divorced after her son died in a bus crash on a field trip. However, that notion that her son is dead starts to come into question when random messages that he’s not dead starts to come to her through various supernatural means. She starts to see on a chalk board in her deceased son’s room that he isn’t dead, a comic book that eerily matches her dreams and a song that plays in a diner that starts to skip to the same lyrics repeatedly. Tina starts to think maybe her son isn’t dead after all. She meets a lawyer named Elliot, who at first thinks she’s just a grieving mother who is losing her mind, but he becomes convinced that maybe she is onto something when two mysterious men show up at his house, trying to drug him with a shot in his arm. Maybe Tina’s son is alive, and the government is trying to cover this up for some reason. The two men who show up in his house are creepy and had me wondering what exactly they were doing there. They end up going on a trip up to the mountains where the field trip took place and find there’s a conspiracy surrounding Tina’s son. I got some Stranger Things type vibes from this book, though the government conspiracy and romance between Tina and Elliot came off a bit cheesy. There’s also some crazy stuff about government funds being misdirected towards secret projects instead of the intended use. There are also some dated references, as reasoning that the period this book took place was strange enough to cover up children being used as experiments. What doesn’t date the book is the prediction of the COVID virus which comes off well. However, Koontz is still good at pacing his books, and while this book does come off a bit dated, it’s still a solid page turner.
