"You want to catch the lion, first you tether the goat." - Misha Gavron If a good book is one that immerses you in the fictional world it creates and makes you see and feel every moment of the characters lives and actions, then The Little Drummer Girl is a study in what a good book should be. I wondered if I would be swept up in it again as I was when I was young, romantic and impressionable. The answer is a resounding “yes”. I have long counted it as a favorite, unforgettable book, and I am happy to say I was right, it is that. John le Carre does not write one dimensional stories or cliched characters. He is Janus and well able to show you both sides of the coin. He can make you feel that there is no right or wrong, good or bad, only very flawed people trying to fight the demons both inside and outside of themselves. Charlie, our drummer girl, is an English actress, living the Western life and dabbling in political outrage, but in truth, naive and simple. How she comes to be deeply involved in the Middle East conflict between the Israeli and Palestinian factions is as complicated as the conflict itself, and John le Carre is a masterful writer to pull off this entanglement with all the detail and accuracy that is necessary to make it both believable and spellbinding. Just as Smiley is not your typical British spy, Charlie is not your typical asset. In the midst of all this hatred, she is motivated by love. She is beyond her depth and she convinces herself that she can handle this by thinking of it as another role she is playing, but this is not a fantasy she can control. And what of Joseph, her handler; what does he feel, how much of this is just a role for him as well? If I were making a short-list of underappreciated writers, John le Carre would be up at the top. He is one of those writers who can spin a tale that holds you enrapt, while beneath the fascinating story he always has an important issue to address, something worth saying that needs to be said. He is a purveyor of human nature, a soul-searching magician, a trafficker in literary style. Yes, this one stays in my favorites folder, with all the enthusiasm and love that I felt for it the first time around. Couldn’t ask for more.
