So the thing about Georgette Heyer's romances is this: I like them, but I have to space the fuckers out. She's really only got like eight characters, and only two kinds of romantic heroes (the scandalous rake, usually lots older than the heroine, and the rarer dandy), and her stories all seem to follow the same beats, so if I go straight from one Heyer romance to another, it's impossible to ignore the creative recycling, which I can only bear if I can ignore it. I had the same sort of problem with Pistols for Two, a collection of eleven short stories; rushing through the book in one go was probably the worst thing I could have done. Don't get me wrong: Heyer is consistently entertaining and frequently amusing, and I enjoyed nearly all the stories in this collection. But they're so very predictable, and so many of them are so very much alike - oh, my goodness, so many ill-tempered rakes in their mid-thirties falling desperately in love with teenage ingenues who have fallen into dire straits! Is it any surprise my favorite story is the one in which the middle-aged rake proposes to a middle-aged widow who is in no danger at all? - that they start to blend together by the end of it all. Of course, being short stories and not, as you might suppose, novels, this collection is rather bereft of the improbable subplots, the cast of wacky supporting characters, and the complicated hijinks of a full-on Heyer novel, which is a bit of a shame. I like Heyer's romances, but I love her sense of humor, and you don't get much of that here. All the absurdities and the wit have been pared down or outright disposed of in order to streamline the plot, and without the comedy - without that enormous supporting cast to liven things up - it isn't really the same. Favorite stories: A Husband for Fanny, in which the widow Wingham nearly gives up everything to see her daughter married well, To Have the Honour, in which the hero is a well-intentioned doofus and also not fifteen years older than the heroine (I don't have a problem with age differences and actually rather like them in fiction most of the time, but seriously, enough is enough, Heyer), and The Duel, in which there is a twist I genuinely did not see coming, though I think that's more to do with the fact that I'm an idiot than anything else. I'm also rather fond of the title story, Pistols for Two, which is surprisingly and delightfully slashy. *2.5 stars.
