David Brin would make any shortlist of my favorite public intellectuals. He is a man of many quirks, a loquacious contrarian fond of bizarrely placed punctuation and enthusiastic but sometimes strained prose. Those qualities, which so often show up in personalities that grate the ear and bore the mind, somehow come together in Brin with a kind of obnoxious harmony, one that taunts readers almost as much as it seduces them. The Transparent Society is Brin's only nonfiction book, and while it is too dated to cite as a useful reference for understanding the details of the contemporary privacy debate, the central claims are as relevant as they were when the book was first published in 1998. Brin takes a hard look at the assumption––held by liberals, conservatives, and libertarians alike––that personal privacy in all its forms is a right worth fighting for, and finds it wanting. It's not that Brin thinks personal privacy isn't valuable, just that...well, it's complicated. While that answer is in some ways a cop out, it's also a hallmark of Brin's approach, one that is both annoying and an indicator of his genuine desire to avoid oversimplification. Even if he does fail to paint the perfect picture of how we might shine a light into all the dark places where societal ills take root, Brins offers a set of highly unique and useful methods for framing the privacy debate. The first of these is the idea that the desirable elements of modern society are all predicated, at least in some way, on the continued existence of public spaces in which citizens can debate whatever they like with impunity. Put more simply, criticism is the only known antidote to error. Societies must jealously safeguard the free expression of citizens because collective critique is the best way to foresee mistakes and fix existing problems. This aspect of neo-Western culture, Brin argues, is what truly sets us apart from the monarchies and feudal systems of the past (as well as those still existing around the world), in which dissent was traditionally dealt with via ostracism, torture and death. While I think it is important to acknowledge this positive development, I also don't think it's particularly insightful. Where Brin's argument is new to me, however, is how he uses freedom of expression as a background for understanding the issue of privacy. He contends that privacy, while important for many reasons, is not something that is worth giving up certain freedoms for. He also rejects the suggestion that we should spend huge amounts of time and resources on elaborate encryption methods when we've yet to discover any kind of cryptographic system that can't be hacked. Instead, Brin propounds a Transparent Society, one in which cameras are ubiquitous and most kinds of personal information are readily available to anyone who cares to inquire. Before you reject this idea out of hand, as I'll admit wanting to do myself, consider the crucial point that the Transparent Society, if enacted properly, would empower normal citizens to get information about and keep track of public officials and important players in private industry. Given the high probability that people with enough power and money can already find out anything they want about average folks, Brin's proposal doesn't seem like such a bad deal. I'd definitely be okay with certain elements of my personal life being open to public scrutiny in exchange for access to real information about individuals running for public office or chatting in corporate boardrooms. In the world of two-way transparency between normal people and the elite, the elite have much more to lose. And they know it, which is why I believe Brin's ideas haven't had much traction in the decade and a half since this book's publication. The details of exactly what information would be available in this kind of system should be a matter of lively debate, but I find it difficult to argue that some version of this scenario isn't preferable to what we have now, with the NSA enjoying virtually unfettered access to personal information and private companies collecting huge amounts of private data in exchange for free services. It's hard to imagine something like the 2008 housing crash happening if private banks were mandated to open their books to the public in exchange for the privilege of lending in public markets. We have much to gain from collectively keeping an eye on such entities (both public and private), and they have comparatively little to gain from watching us (which we know they can already do, thanks to Edward Snowden). Imagine the telescreen from 1984 , except that it's a two-way camera that allows you not only to see if anyone is watching you at any given moment, but also to track the behaviors and movements of your observers. Suddenly Orwell's dystopia seems far less menacing (though, admittedly, still a bit weird!). Another useful way Brin thinks about privacy is using what he calls the "T-cell analogy," which likens a properly functioning critical populace to the human immune system. The immune system is not a top-down hierarchy in which subservient cells report to a central authority organ responsible for bodily health. Rather, it is a distributed system of highly diversified and specialized cells that individually patrol the body, searching for intruders or aberrations and setting off chemical "alarms" when they come across something they perceive to be dangerous. According to Brin, a vibrant and robust human society functions in the same way, with vast numbers of individuals trained, either professionally or through avocational pursuits, to sniff out errors and alert the rest of the population to potential problems. It's not a perfect system, but if the basic model was good enough to get humans through millions of years of evolution, there's probably something to it. And just as the immune system can itself be targeted by auto-immune diseases like AIDS, "T-cell" individuals can misfire in plenty of ways that can cause more mayhem than beneficence. The analogy has its limits, but I think it's a great way to illustrate the problem, and it also provides a positive narrative for people dedicated to self-education and cultural critique. People take pride in learning how to do things well, and even amateur-expertise usually comes with the added bonus of being able to detect when someone else is doing shoddy work or peddling snake oil. All this contributes to the creation and maintenance of "reciprocal accountability," which Brin identifies as the backbone of a hale democracy. When hordes of educated people are allowed to see into one another's metaphorical (and literal) backyards, the result isn't just a lot of gossip, but also a kind of finicky progress. As time goes on, we get more comfortable with each other and become thankful for the absence of misdeeds that previously would have taken place behind closed doors or heady firewalls. Such an open world could certainly make public debate even messier than it is already, and we may go through periods of political deadlock like we've seen in recent years, but that still seems better to me than allowing elites to dictate from behind state podiums or corporate desktops. It's not a zero-sum game in which some people win while others lose, and not a world of forcing ourselves to accept simplified trade-offs between liberty and privacy, but something richer and more baffling where the benefits of openness are zealously democratized. This future is not an easy one, but it's more hopeful than one in which money and influence continue to buy better toys and increased access while people of normal means become ever more detached from society's actual workings. As I'm sure you can tell, Brin more or less won me over. Many of his arguments seemed crazy at first, but Brin's reasoning helped me see that he really is on to something. I don't think this book is particularly well-written, and I also think most of the concrete examples, which were relevant in the late 90s, are probably not as salient as they once were. Brin admits his own frustration at not being able to prescribe specific courses of action to bring the Transparent Society into being, but it's hard to ask that kind of thing from just one man. In keeping with his general approach, Brin thinks it will take a multitude of smart, dedicated, and diverse people to generate a movement powerful enough to bring our collective demons into the light. I agree with him.
