What did I know about the battle of Waterloo prior to reading this novel? Nothing. Nothing at all. I didn't even know who the Duke of Wellington was! But thanks to this wonderful masterpiece by Heyer, I now feel a lot more educated!:) This was just brilliant. The main character, Captain Audley, was in my opinion extremely appealing and the wonder is that he fell in love so quickly with the outrageous Lady Barbara. Bab was an excellent character (and in true Alastair fashion, incredibly notorious!), but she was so different from the kind, respected Captain Audley that I really wondered what on earth he saw in her that attracted him so much (except for the fact that she is divinely beautiful, but since Audley is supposed to have more sense than to fall in love with a woman because of her appearance, one really wonders!). Nevertheless they have a beautiful love story quite à la Heyer, and as the war rages and Barbara starts to show a more compassionate side, I was actually quite in favour of her match with Captain Audley. As for the actual historical part of An Infamous Army , Heyer's retelling of the battle of Waterloo was so detailed, so intense and so overpowering that I felt as though as I was right there on the battlefield, with the Duke of Wellington who seemed to be everywhere at once without getting hit, Captain Audley who had to deliver endless messages through the masses of dead bodies and abandoned equipment, and the whole of the Allied forces, struggling to hold the line against the French troops. Since the battle doesn't happen until about 3/4 of the book, I was beginning to doubt whether or not Heyer meant to describe actual battlefield action, and well to be sure it was a lot better than I had imagined! I enjoyed the military descriptions prior to battle very much as well. It was great to see how the Duke was getting ready. I remember that Lady Worth was surprised at his giving balls and enjoying himself out of office, but I don't blame him in the least. It must have been very hard to be in charge of the army, and I think he needed to go to balls and all that in order to stay sane. I liked his relationship with his fellow aides-de-camp, whom he called his "family". It created such a nice sense of unity and collaboration. One could tell that even though the Duke was above them in terms of social classes and military grades, they were all good friends and went beyond their employee / employer relationship. That being said, however, Wellington's strong bonds with his co-workers only made it all the more sad when some of them died. As good as An Infamous Army is, it remains a war novel, and war novels are, well...very sad. I wanted to cry every time an important military died. ): " Though his staff fell about him, he continued to ride up and down his lines, rallying failing troops, restraining men who, maddened by the rain of deadly shot, could hardly be kept from launching themselves through the smoke in a desperate charge against their persecutors. 'Wait a little longer my lads: you shall have at them presently,' he promised. 'By God, I thought I had heard enough of this man, but he far surpasses my expectations!' Uxbridge exclaimed.' It is not a man, but a god!'" Wellington was expected by the Brussels population as some kind of demi-god. He didn't turn out to be what they had expected when he first puts an appearance at a gathering in Brussels, in the beginning. Well, had all these people seen him fight on the battlefield, they would have thought like Uxbridge. Honestly, people back in the days greatly surprised me sometimes. Everyone comes to Brussels before the war, when they can be of no particular use, but simply want a little bit of action (but not too much!) and amusement, and they all FLEE during the war, when they actually have the chance to help the wounded soldiers who come back in the city, looking for help and shelter! Like Lord Worth said: " ' My opinion of the human race has never been high, but the antics that are being performed at this moment exceed every expectation of folly with which I had previously indulged my fancy.'"
