I've been really in the mood for creepy books leading up to Halloween. This book had been sitting on my shelf for a few years, so I figured I would give it a try. And for anyone thinking about picking this up, it is book 7 in a series. I was unaware of that until 3/4 of the way through the book when I looked at the copyright date. The characters kept talking about how rich someone needed to be to own a cell phone lol it was written in 1999 and oh how times have changed. That's when I saw the portion about other books in the series. This can totally be a stand alone, but the author eludes to some past trauma that occurred in other books that affects the main character's decisions in this book. Also, the author doesn't spend a lot of time describing certain characters because if you're a reader of the series, you already know who they are. However, this book can definitely hold up as a stand alone. This book starts off with Irene Kelly, a reporter, being a member of a large group who goes hiking into a remote portion of the Sierra Nevada Mountains to find the remains of a serial killer's victim. Irene had been following this particular victim's story from her disappearance 4 years before, so when Nick Parrish cut a deal to lead investigators to her body in exchange for life in prison (rather than the death penalty), she goes along on the expedition. However, this expedition was part of Parrish's plan all along and the hiking trip goes horribly wrong (i.e. he laid some traps, people die, he gets free, and starts hunting Irene). If that was the entire book, I would have been SO HAPPY! I loved the first half of the book when they were in the mountains. It was creepy, suspenseful and completely original (to me anyways). But then, the second half of the book happened. While I hate spoiling things, in this instance, I feel like it may be necessary. Irene (and maybe a few others, maybe not) are rescued from the mountains and Parrish escapes. The whole second half of the book is filled with Irene dealing with the PTSD of surviving the excursion and then Parrish eventually stalking/hunting her to finish what he started. I was so bored with the second half of the book. I was bored of listening to her talk to her therapist. I was bored reading each and every time she saw Parrish's face when she was at the grocery store or sitting in traffic. And I was bored with the very slow cat and mouse game that was played while waiting for the big finale. And the finale really wasn't as impressive as I thought it would be. The author spends a lot of time showing how smart and prepared Parrish is. He had planned for almost everything but somehow, the ending seemed like it was so haphazard. And I managed to guess the twist at the end. It wasn't a bad book and I may read something from Jan Burke in the future, but it wasn't my favorite.
