Tomorrow's God by author Neale Donald Walsch has been excellent to read and its content is perhaps our greatest spiritual challenge facing all of us as we enter significant changes in our lives. These changes prepare us for the dawning of Aquarius and the incoming 7th Golden-Age of mankind. All happening now with the increase in vibration to all of us through the receiving of higher aspects of consciousness The book addresses many 'age old taboos' and mysteries of life, which seemingly, revolve around our cultural conditioning, myths and inherent beliefs we tightly hold on to. The book is meant to save the world - if we will let its knowledge and wisdom enter our ego-mind dominated intellect - by coming full circle, taking old wisdom and bringing its understandings into 21st Century living. You might find that you resonate with some of the topics and discussions explored in the book, which results in the bringing out of a new you! The book essentially addresses a new spirituality that is destined to take hold in humanity's collective consciousness in the near future. It seems the trigger point will be the securing of a critical mass of our population who will raise their consciousness to new horizons of living in peace, love, harmony, joy and new creative methods of teaching our children will be a critical component in all of this. The author tackles the understanding and wisdom behind the age old term Enlightenment.It seems there is no one way to enlightenment, only what feels right to you in this present moment. For me the coverage of the Universal Law of Relativity, from the dogma that has been linked to the fall from grace of the mythical characters of Adam and Eve - the eating of the forbidden fruit from the tree of knowledge - has been excellent. I am in no doubt that this Universal Law can and will bring forth your desires once you understand its significance to the Law of Creation. The book also covers how the deviation of our will to God's - the 5 aspects - prevent us, through inner resistance, from securing our desires in this life time. A good read for anyone earnest in seeking truth of the soul in these enlightening times. Namaste & God Bless Denis J (Author of the '3-3-3' Enigma: An Invitation to Consciously Create Your Experience)
