There were actually some fascinating things in this book, even if it was a little boring and dry at times--the clash of cultures between the matriarchal Tribe of the Red Deer and the patriarchal Tribe of the Horse, the goddess religion, the cave painting, the prehistoric animals, etc. (I'm always a sucker for anything prehistoric, since I grew up with lots of documentaries like Walking with Dinosaurs and Walking with Prehistoric Beasts . But, alas. Another book ruined by the male love interest. Literally the only thing I like about Mar is that this is what he looks like in my head: (Sidenote: I should start picturing all douchey romance heroes as Brad Pitt from now on. It makes things much more bearable.) I was going to say that he's acting like a caveman, throwing the woman over his shoulder and taking her back to his cave... but he's literally a caveman throwing the woman over his shoulder and taking her back to his cave. But that is still no excuse! Because, that's the plot: the Tribe of the Horse's women died from poisonous water, so they had to go kidnap women from another tribe so they wouldn't die out. Although, it turns out that they actually do have plenty of women left, so I don't really see why they had to go on a kidnapping spree. I should've known better than to read this. The captive bride thing just really pisses me off. (See my review of The Hollow Kingdom. ) The guy is such a misogynistic bastard: Alin: "So it is to be rape then." Mar: "That is up to you. It doesn't have to be." "Be a good girl and wash it for me." "Good girl." And Alin was annoyed to find that his praise pleased her. Alin, honey, that's not praise. That's condescension. I mean, I guess I'm kind of biased, because a guy saying "good girl" at me just really pisses me off, but still. Anyway, I enjoyed the prehistory stuff (historical accuracy, or lack thereof, aside) and the cultural/religious conflict, but the romance just killed the book for me. That, and that it was very boring. I didn't actually finish the book, so I don't know if the women ever succeeded in changing the men, or if the men ended up changing the women, but at this point, I don't really care. (And besides, we all know that the patriarchal "Sky God" religions ended up beating out the mother goddess religions in the end, unfortunately.) Also, the way the sex scenes were written kept making me laugh: " He felt his phallus stir and become erect at his thoughts. " " he felt his manhood rise hard and taut with life. " " he felt the hair on the back of his neck stand up as straight as his phallus. " " ... his sap waking her womb with life for the tribe... " How do they even know the word phallus? But, authors, never call it that... ever. Please.
