I read Kaffir Boy: An Autobiography some years ago, and have wanted to read his sister's story since then. It did not disappoint. Miriam, like Mark and their parents, is very smart, but that was not a giant advantage in South Africa under apartheid. By the time this book gets started, Mark has left for the USA, leaving his family, including much younger Miriam, to try to scrabble out a living in a horrible situation. The oppression by the whites is despicable and dangerous. The black people are left poorly educated, in deep poverty, with alcoholism, theft, and violence rampant. For the kids, school is a source of abuse, with a policy of nasty corporal punishment that affects even the best kids. Miriam's mother is a devout Christian, and Miriam joins her in this mid-childhood. Their faith somehow gets them through with their ethics and kindness intact. Miriam has a dream to become a nurse and help people. Black people, especially young ones, in the settlement had an intense revolutionary spirit, and acted on it, with demonstrations and other actions. The white police were brutal and didn't mind killing hundreds of black people at a time. Unfortunately, there was rivalry and suspicion between the different groups and especially toward people suspected of being informers or collaborators, leading to more deaths and injuries. Miriam and her friends and fellow students were forced by the nearby biggest faction to join in dangerous actions. Between that, domestic violence, and crime driven by poverty, she lost many friends while they were still teenagers. I did have one...misgiving? The book was billed as "a memoir by Miriam Mathabane as told to Mark Mathabane." Miriam's voice comes through clearly. But I suspect that Mark had his own agenda for the book, and added a lot about the history of the time that may not have been in Miriam's voice. It did pull things together and give more perspective, and probably made it a better book. But I might have rather read Miriam's words and thoughts, with his maybe as commentary or set off some other way.
