17th book of 2024. Even though I knew this book was a metafiction, it surprised me by its form. Fowles is proving his mettle here, that even by having a narrator in the 20th century writing a book about the 19th century, a pastiche of Hardy, we could say, full of interruptions and modern-day similes and metaphors, he managed to sweep me into the story regardless. At one point, in Chapter 13, no less, he [the narrator] remarks again that everything we are reading is made-up. All the characters and all the action is simply in his imagination. We are literally pulled out of the story, lifted into the clouds and shown that what we are looking at is not life itself but a facsimile, a board game with little plastic figurines. In this respect, the narrator can muse on the nature of creation and writing. And yet, when Chapter 14 begins and we are dropped back into the world, within the span of a few pages, I'd forgotten all this fourth-wall breaking and was absorbed once more. In truth, it annoyed me, not because I found the interruptions distracting (well, they are), but because I found Fowles's talents annoying. How is he pulling this off? And as the novel goes on, that question only grows larger. Eventually, his modern-day similes didn't even strike a funny note with me. I read his comparisons to Nazis, atomic bombs, computers and whatever else in the 1800s setting as if it was commonplace. So, if you like your postmodern books, this is for you. The story itself is a serious bit of fiction but it's wrapped up in a game. It doesn't lack emotion, or heart. It becomes a rumination on Victorians and their values, writing and the idea of 'reality' and how we look at history and the past. Humans have always been the same but their external worlds have been very different. The Victorians on the page in this novel are so real despite being constantly reminded they are fake because Fowles shows how full of repressed sexual desire they are, how they wish to break the chains of their conventions and class. Who knew the Victorians wanted to have as much sex as we do now? But all in all, I think I prefer The Magus ; there's something magnificent about that novel, its Greek setting, the mythical prose, and the plot that borders on the psychedelic. In the first fifty pages I was convinced I wouldn't like this, but Fowles swayed me in the end. It gets off to a slow start and it takes time to realise the game, but once you know the rules, it's enjoyable.
