3 stars = Good and worthwhile but something held it back from being great. She made one think of hot, tumbling love and sensual sport, but she made one think of spiritual matters too… This is a well researched historical fiction novel based on the actual romance between a commoner, Katherine Swynford, and the Duke of Lancaster, John of Gault. The author explains before starting the story that she tried to keep everything possible historically accurate where known, right down to the names of random business visitors being pulled from the actual records. I love historical fiction, doubly so when based on real events, actual historical figures, and with attempts to maintain accuracy. His purpose became a staunch ship, steered by his skilful brain, and gliding relentlessly forward along the cold channel of his fury. Mostly, however, this is a romance novel with Katherine and John’s story being central throughout the book. Personally, I enjoyed the historical elements of the novel more than this central component, mostly because I did not ship the couple. They become smitten hardly knowing one another but as a reader, I saw lust rather than the deep love between the two of them we are told exists. To the Duke as to all his family, marriage was a commercial transaction, a peace-time weapon for the acquisition of new lands and the extension of power. Love of one’s mate was entirely fortuitous, and lovable as was the Lady Blanche, the Duke might not have felt for her such keen devotion had she not brought him vast possessions. It includes a lot of researched details that help with transporting you to the medieval 1300’s. You have a good idea of the time’s food, fashion, and overbearing religious piety and guilt from the author’s descriptions. Politics, however, are always in the background, just out of reach from curious minds that want to know more and largely ignored to focus on daily minutiae and emotional soliloquies. I would have preferred to know more about the political machinations of the time, but it makes sense that Katherine would have not been interested or aware of them, and since she is our narrator, neither do we. I do not feel I learned as much from this novel as a result, unlike a lot of historical fiction based on actual events. She would be a dutiful wife, she would accept the hard lot that fate had given her, but yet she would be free. Because he loved and lusted and floundered, while she did not, she would be forever free. As with all novels I read from this time period, I found life back then to be suffocatingly small and oppressively limited. While reading about overt ignorance (alluring women clearly are using witchcraft to snare men) is frustrating, especially since seven centuries have not been enough to stamp it out completely, I am always so grateful to be alive now versus in the past. It seems all there was to life back then was raising babies of whatever man you were made to marry, toiling for the gentry and being made to feel constant shame and inadequacy by a corrupt church. We may still have a long way to go to reach equality and enlightenment, but at least my life is my own and I have far more choices for how to live it than any medieval queen could have dreamed of. ------------------------------------------- First Sentence: In the tender green time of April, Katherine set forth at last upon her journey with the two nuns and the royal messenger. Favorite Quote: God is made of wrath, not love.
