“When another generation shall have doubled the census of our city (NYC), and to that vast army of workers, held captive by poverty, the very name of home shall be as a bitter mockery, what will the harvest be?” So concludes Jacob Riis Chapter 2 (“The Awakening”) of his treatise. The question – or so it seems to me at least – remains as legitimate today (2015) as it did when it first appeared in these pages (in 1890). The image of Francisco de Goya’s “Saturn Devouring One of His Sons” springs immediately to mind as I read How the Other Half Lives , but also as I consider the present-day predicament of so many young college graduates, only recently arrived in New York, and now setting out to seek their fortunes while saddled with the twin challenge of horrendous educational debts and almost extraterrestrial monthly rents. What do we think the harvest of that will eventually be? In the very next chapter, we find: “New York’s wage-earners have no other place to live, more is the pity. They are truly poor for having no better homes; waxing poorer in purse as the exorbitant rents to which they are tied, as ever was serf to soil, keep rising” (p. 23). Written over 120 years ago, this could just as easily be a back-page story in yesterday’s newspaper. Only the dollar figures would have changed. (Side-note of no particular relevance: I believe this is the earliest instance (other than in Exodus 2:22 of the King James version of the Bible] of the expression “stranger(s) in a strange land” – later used by Robert Heinlein as the title of his famously successful SciFi novel – I’ve ever read [on p. 23].) A most interesting note occurs on p. 124 (and in the extensive footnote on p. 227) with regard to Tompkins Square Park. For those of us who remember it not so long ago as another of Manhattan’s needle parks – and presently as a stroller park for young Hipster/Yuppie mothers from the East Village – Riis’s ‘cautionary tale’ may strike up the band: “(t)he changing of Tompkins Square from a sand lot into a beautiful park put an end for good and all to the ‘Bread or Blood’ riots of which it used to be the scene, and transformed a nest of dangerous agitators into a harmless, beer-craving band of Anarchists. They have scarcely been heard of since. Opponents of the small parks system as a means of relieving the congested population of tenement districts, please take note.” Yes. And city planners/developers who replaced those tenement districts with the so-called ‘projects’ – the ugly, life-stifling and starkly rectangular evidence of which still exists in that neighborhood and at points further east, not to mention here in Brooklyn, in Queens and in the Bronx – please also take note. Affordable housing for those who keep your service industry humming is a good thing; downtrodden and neglected buildings and neighborhoods are not. And what does Jacob Riis have to tell us about the plight of the fairer sex in this most heartless of cities? On p. 180, we find “(t)o the everlasting credit of New York’s working girl let it be said that, rough though her road be, all but hopeless her battle with life, only in the rarest instances does she go astray. As a class she is brave, virtuous, and true.” Best, however, to read the entire chapter (“The Working Girls of New York”) on pp. 176 – 182 to understand the bigger picture of how most women suffered and slaved in the New York of Riis’s time – and then to read some of O. Henry’s short stories to get a fictionalized account of the same. Please allow me to finish up this review with three additional citations – two from the penultimate chapter (“What Has Been Done”) and one from the final chapter (“How the Case Stands”) – in an effort to tempt you, a potential reader, to undertake your own investigation of this most excellent treatise. “The day is at hand when the greatest of all evils that now curse life in the tenements – the dearth of water in the hot summer days – will also have been remedied, and a long step taken toward the moral and physical redemption of their tenants” (p. 199). “This drift of the population in the great cities has to be taken into account as a steady factor. It will probably increase rather than decrease for many years to come” (p. 204). “Once already our city, to which have come the duties and responsibilities of metropolitan greatness before it was able to fairly measure its task, has felt the swell of its resistless flood. If it rise once more, no human power may avail to check it. The gap between the classes in which it surges, unseen, unsuspected by the thoughtless, is widening day by day….Against all other dangers our system of government may offer defence ( sic! ) and shelter; against this not” (p. 218). If any or all of this sounds bitingly familiar to you now, in the year 2015, you have only to remember that How the Other Half Lives was published in 1890 to be able to appreciate this evidentiary piece of prescience, not to say prophecy. RRB 08/22/15 Brooklyn, NY
