This is an older explanation of quantum physics for non-specialists, and doesn’t have the latest findings and theories, but if you want to understand the fundamental issues, it is one of the best. The writing is very clear and the mathematics minimal. I especially appreciated the origins story, from Max Planck and Einstein, through Schrodinger and Dirac, to Bell. Two pages of glossy white photos are tipped in at the center of the book, showing the “founders.” I’ve read several popular books on quantum theory and this is the one that got me closest to the foundational issues of wave-particle duality, measurement uncertainty, superposition, and entanglement. I had not realized, for example, that Schrodinger’s waveform theory of electron behavior was arbitrary. There was (and is still) no intuitive reason to suppose that electrons should be described by classical wave mechanics, but Schrodinger devised wave equations that fit the data. So now, when we say that electrons can behave “like waves,” all we mean is that certain equations fit the data. There are no actual waves. If you begin visualizing electrons like waves on an ocean or sound waves in the air, you’re way off. The so-called waves are only mathematical. And that is a central theme of the book. According to Niels Bohr and the “Copenhagen Interpretation” of quantum theory, there is nothing “beneath” the data. We have the measurements and the mathematics to organize them. There’s nothing to know beyond that. The title of this book would be nonsensical to him because there is no “quantum reality.” Schrodinger agreed. There is no “wavelike” reality. Physics is only about experiments and their data. Despite that pillar of scientific faith, which is held by most physicists today, Herbert devotes the second half of the book to various interpretations of quantum reality. He considers Einstein’s famous objections to Bohr and the search for hidden variables beneath the measurements. He looks at von Neuman’s conclusion that human consciousness must underlie quantum behavior. He considers David Bohm’s neorealism, Heisenberg’s duplex theory, and Bell’s non-locality conclusion. Herbert does not choose a favorite interpretation, and all have serious problems, and in fact, maybe Bohr was right all along: maybe there’s nothing to explain. Perhaps reality is nothing more than measurement and mathematics. Herbert, Nick (1985). Quantum Reality. New York: Anchor, 250pp.
