In Angel Rock by Australian author Darren Williams, we are introduced to Tom--a boy just turned adolescent. He hasn't had an easy life...his mother is often gone pursuing her dubious occupation, his father abandoned them, and he now as an un-easy truce with his logger step-father who loves to drink more than he loves him. He *is* loved by his four year old half-brother Flynn though, and well he should be as he is responsible for much of his care. Dragged along to help with logging one Saturday afternoon, the boys are dropped back off miles from town so that Tom's step-father's friend can more quickly return to carousing. Attempting to walk home they become lost in the surrounding wilderness. The first third of the novel chronicles both the boys' attempt to find their way home, and the search efforts in alternating chapters. (not spoiler alert b/c this is all on the cover blurb). Tom eventually wanders onto a farm a week after becoming lost, with a decent knock to the head, multiple scratches/abrasions, and no memory of how he became separated from Flynn. Treated by the town doctor, questioned by the local law officer "Pop", and then released to his step-father, Tom is subjected to an episode of emotional & physical abuse at the hands of grieving Henry. This scene will stay with me a long time, and is a vivid example of William's skill in creating scenes and moods. "Where's Flynn?" Henry sobbed. "Where's my boy?" "I--" Without another word Henry stood him against the door and pressed his face hard against the wood. With a high little moan each time his arm lifted and with tears streaming down his cheeks, Henry swung the belt in a figure eight, the meat of it striking Tom across the back, the buttocks, the legs, twice each revolution. The pain was worse than kicking your toe into a table leg, worse than falling off a bike and skinning your knee, worse than biting down very hard on your tongue, but still nothing like the pain flooding his heart." And so for the most part, the town gives up on finding Flynn, assuming the worst. However, a detective from out of town, Gibson, drives in on the trail of another mystery...the apparent suicide of a girl from Angel Rock who fled to Sydney. Whether or not the two events are connected, and if so how, make up the majority of the remainder of the novel. Along the way, we are told snippets of a disturbing backstory that only adds to the haunting mood of the book. Williams gets 4 stars for mood/narration, 3.5 stars for dialogue, and 3 stars for plot progression. Overall, I gave the book 3.5 stars or "Very Good", and I recommend it to anyone looking for a mystery that is more psychologically driven than event driven. I'll end my review with another quote, this one is Pop talking to Tom about the death of his (Pop's) father. "I was ...heartbroken by that at first, that he'd died alone, but then I remembered what he'd always said. He used to say he didn't want to be a burden and he used to say that while his wife--my mother--was in his head, fresh and young as the day he'd met her, he'd keep going, but the moment her memory started to fade he'd know it was time to go. He couldn't bear the thought of that happening. I knew then that he hadn't died alone up there, but that she'd been with him. It did me good, that. It made it easier. It made me realize that a memory like that, of someone who's gone, can help you for the rest of your whole life. That's what I tell Gracie about young Darce, and that's what I want you to consider as well."
