Notes on the book with an emphasis on prominent characters. "Family" was written by Ba Jin in 1931. It is the first book of a trilogy, followed by "Spring" and "Autumn". The story centers on the Gao family in the late 1910s - the era leading up to the May Fourth Movement - with particular focus on three young brothers (Juexin, Juemin, Juehui) as they come of age. The youth in this story are nearly all destroyed, either physically or spiritually, by the machinations of their elders and the prevailing social order. Forced marriage, suppressed love, suicide, abandoned studies, neglect, and other calamities cut down these young protagonists like the axe to green saplings. All the while, these youths bear witness to their elders' blighted and corrupt practices - sustained by long bent and broken social institutions of the time. That said, not even the most powerful of the elderly are immune to the family's decrepit condition. Lao Yeye [Grandfather], the patriarch with no tolerance for subordination, is the most deliberate example provided by Ba Jin. Succumbing to illness following a particularly strong bout of rage, Lao Yeye collapses and is confined to his bed chambers. His young wife, dependent on him and therefore exasperated over his condition, hires a medicine man to drive away the "ghosts" that are ailing him. The exorcist, however, proceeds to light noxious incense and make a racket in Lao Yeye's bed chambers, disrupting his rest and worsening his health. Helpless to defend himself from such superstition, and with all other family members cowed by his wife's desperation, only Juehui resists her demands and the exorcist's prodding and prying. The youngest brother's rebellion is the only thing that gives Lao Yeye a modicum of rest as he slowly slips away - earning his wife's enmity but also the old man's appreciation. Lao Yeye realizes the rot overwhelming his household, a rot he has no power to dispel. Juehui is the only hope in spite of his lack of "filial piety." Juehui and his brothers, the youngest generation and consequently the least corrupted, are the only one's capable of escaping the Gao family's death spiral. Juexin, however, is too thoroughly bound by his status. He embodies the sacrifice mentality that pervaded many intellectuals of that era. Bound by duty as the eldest brother and inheritor of the family title, he is also subject to an arranged marriage, unable to choose the girl he loves. The birth of Juexin's first son further binds him to social duty, cementing his position between the younger and older generations. He is subject to the frustrations of both sides, and is punished accordingly. However, his misery is just as much inflicted as permitted. While pitiable, Juexin's lack of courage arouses a degree of loathing, many of his troubles would be overcome or at least lessened if he dared to assert himself more vigorously. Instead, Juexin becomes a pawn and punching bag, losing more and more of his character in the process. This loss culminates with his own wife's passing during childbirth. Already humiliated by the family politics that sent her to a remote hut outside the city, Juexin is denied entry to the room before his wife takes her final breath. Juemin, as the middle brother also sits between his brothers in terms of disposition. However, falling in love with his cousin Qin drives Juemin to go into hiding and renege on family duty. While initially somewhere between Juexin's sacrifice and submission and Juehui's iconoclastic defiance, he ultimately chooses to side with idealism. This choice fortuitously pays off with Lao Yeye's unexpected change of heart on his death bed: granting Juemin permission to marry Qin. Juehui, the most ardent to defy the societal order and determine a new future for China's young generation, embodies the lofty idealism of his generation. While already on this course before Mingfeng's death, Juehui fully dives into his cause following her suicide. Her death marks him, driving his resolve to carry out change in the social order. No other character is as resolute and stubborn as he is except, perhaps, Lao Yeye. Juehui thoroughly represents the firebrand youth of the May Fourth movement. He refuses to give any quarter to what he considers antiquated conventions of society. Where he finds no direct way forward to promote ideals, Juehui does not desist but rather seeks another way to progress. If still unsuccessful, he does not hesitate to bring the issue to a head, disregarding the consequences that, ultimately, Juexin may have to bear in his stead. Beyond the three brothers, several female youth feature prominently in Ba Jin's novel. With the exception of Qin, these girls all face fates more miserable than their male counterparts. Mei, Juexin's first love, is devastated by her lost chance to be with him. After being married off to another man outside the city, she returns after his untimely death after only a year of marriage, greatly aged in spirit. She eventually wastes away from consumption (Throughout the book, I was a bit put off by Ba Jin's heavy-handed use of some literary tropes - I felt the gravity of Mei's death was lessened by this.) Mingfeng, who bears witness to Mei's suffering, resolves not to meet the same fate. When she is informed of her impending arranged marriage, not only separating her from Juehui but also sending her to the house of an ill-tempered geezer, Mingfeng does not lose her resolve. Unfortunately, she fails to notify Juehui of the situation. And as for Juehui, he utterly fails to recognize her miserable state of mind until it's too late. Mingfeng's martyrdom is wholly needless and yet encapsulates the perceived fate of many of these youths: either die spiritually only to walk the earth as a shadow of once bright and lively dreams or take one's own life directly, preserving the ideal and denying a lifetime of sadness. In another light, she is both the victim of society in its present form, as well as the promises that had been instilled in this generation but could not be realized. Qin might be described as the lucky one. However, she has her own portends, most significantly her coughing up blood every now and then. Qin also strikes me to be much akin to her love, Juemin, with regards to her outlook and character. Unlike most of the other girls, Qin is quite active on the side of promoting new thought. She is witty and intelligent, but more importantly shows a willingness to express her opinion on what are considered radical new ideas, e.g. cutting one's hair. However, she does not go to the same lengths as Juehui or others to actually realize these ideas. (One of her classmates does cut her own hair, Qin does not). Qin gains a self-awareness that while she is a proponent for the actions that may result in a new society, she herself is not quite willing to follow through with certain actions and their consequences. Yu, Juexin's wife also becomes a victim of the Gao family's dysfunction. A faithful wife and caring mother, she shares Juexin's burdens as he suffers the consequences of playing middleman in the conflict between his brothers and their elders. She never complains and, like Juexin, resigns herself to her own position. However, as his wife, Juexin is unable to shield her from the troubles of the family. Her victimhood is finalized with Lao Yeye's death. The late patriarch's young wife, not willing to forgive Juehui's defiance with the exorcist, enacts revenge by forcing Juexin to send his wife outside the city to give birth. With Lao Yeye's body yet to be interred, Yitaitai claims that a childbirth in the same house would negatively effect his spirit. She gains the support of family elders to remove Yu from the house, elevating the stress of an imminent childbirth on Yu's mind and body. Cruelly, even as she lies dying from complications during labor, the women of the family deny Juexin entry to comfort her. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
