One might assume that working as an intelligence analyst in the Office of Strategic Services during World War II would leave one little time for much else. Yet Arthur Schlesinger managed to pen the Pulitzer Prize-winning The Age of Jackson during his two year stint with the CIA precursor, published in 1945. Schlesinger would go on to become one of the most influential and recognizable historians of the twentieth century, rubbing shoulders with presidents and even becoming Kennedy’s so-called “court historian”. He would even win a second Pulitzer in 1965 for A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House . The Age of Jackson is really a biography of an idea, focusing on the concept of “Jacksonian democracy” as it influenced politics, culture, and identity in antebellum America. Schlesinger succeeds in bringing the era and its players into action in a lively, approachable way, and reveals how this new brand of democracy permeated every facet of society. It was, as Schlesinger shows it, a movement to protect or empower the laboring classes against the wealthy elites who sought to exploit and disenfranchise them. One of the book’s central arguments is the refutation of the thesis that Jacksonian democracy’s roots laid in the frontier West. Schlesinger calls this a “legend” and instead convincingly argues that the idea was more potent to northern states where there had been a long established wealthy class (307). Schlesinger is a gifted writer and clearly knows his time period, but The Age of Jackson is a work of popular scholarship, intended for an educated general readership embroiled in a war against fascism. The book is rife with conjectural details used to spice up the narrative quality of the text, such as: “when Van Buren entered, his face brightened and his eyes flashed” (7). Schlesinger, in voice and in bias, is as present throughout the work nearly as much as is Jackson. Schlesinger does not simply give an account of Jacksonian democracy; he becomes its advocate. Yet the book, like the author, is very much a product of its time. Certain aspects of the monograph reveal this, such as Schlesinger’s treatment of people of color. Native Americans are essentially absent, including the Indian Removal Act, which would have looked poorly upon the notions of populism during Jackson’s administration (for the following administrations, he is not so withholding, therefore saving the face of Jackson – a point which will be expanded upon later). Though Schlesinger acknowledges the evils of slavery, he accepts the notion of white supremacy of his own time. In its opening pages blackface minstrelsy is described in the language of warm nostalgia (4) and the only time in which blacks are actually addressed is in the form of benevolent enslavement. His description of the slaves’ reactions to Jackson’s death will likely make the modern reader chew back their bile: “A long wail of anguish rose up from the slaves in the house and echoed through the fields and stables” (447). This leads to one of the book’s greatest biases and faults, which is that of its depiction of the man, Andrew Jackson. Schlesinger becomes so committed to the concept of Jacksonian democracy that he becomes equally committed to its namesake, and in the end becomes unable or unwilling to distinguish the person from the principle. Jackson is not simply a general and statesman, he is a democratic prophet, wrapped in religious language: “The people called him, and he came, like the great folk heroes, to lead them out of captivity and bondage” (43). This is strong, stirring language about a man who himself owned humans in bondage and never appears to have questioned the morality of slavery. His Jackson is his contemporaries’ Hollywood hero – rugged and inspiring awe with his manner and wisdom wherever he goes. Even long after Jackson becomes president, Schlesinger continues to refer to him affectionately as “The General” (88). Jackson’s character deficiencies and political missteps are conspicuously absent. Other figures too become little more than their professed principles, often introduced with two or three paragraphs of irrelevant though memorable trivia, such as who was found to own porn when they died, before Schlesinger proceeds to judge their character and worth upon their commitment to Jacksonian democracy. They are clear protagonists and antagonists, the former committed to Jeffersonian and Jacksonian constructs, the latter to Hamiltonian ideals and Clay’s American System. Schlesinger’s language likewise lets the reader know who to accept or oppose, for whereas Jackson is sincere and benign in his execution of authority, Nicholas Biddle, head of the Second Bank of the United States and Jackson’s nemesis, is shown to be “drunk with power” (87). In at least one way, however, Schlesinger is atypical of the American public for which he was writing, though perhaps not of the intelligentsia of which he was a part. A predominant thread which runs through the narrative is Jacksonianism taking the form of anti-clericalism, which “thus assisted in the growing secularization of society” (360). Schlesinger clearly saw this as a positive force and outcome, and he dedicates many pages with accounts of agnostics and skeptics, even giving attention to the book’s sole prominent female, Fanny Wright. Anti-clericalism was a form of anti-aristocracy; it was in labor’s interest to oppose the clergy. As Schlesinger writes, “union leaders were generally atheists” (194). Victories against religion, such as that against the Sabbatarians, were victories for democracy. (Notice, if you will, the above quote about Jackson which clearly alludes to Moses, who is referred in secular terms as a “folk hero”). While an anti-theist reader (such as this one) can certainly sympathize with this stance and find it refreshing in a work published in 1940s America, Schlesinger’s contempt for the faithful can discolor his language in such a way that it reveals too greatly his bias, such as his treatment of Abolitionists: “The religious antislavery men, caring more about the Negro than about white men at home, were infecting large sectors of the Whig party” (453, emphasis mine). Leaving aside the asinine suggestion that caring predominantly about people of color was a character flaw, Schlesinger’s words drip with a contempt that, like many of his judgments, hardly seem justified. While Schlesinger’s biases are never hidden, one of them, though it is suggested throughout the work, is put forthright at the end of the book. Schlesinger, a committed Democratic partisan his whole career, is writing with a clear agenda. An admirer of FDR’s New Deal programs during the Great Depression, Schlesinger attempts to link the spirit of Jacksonian democracy with that of Roosevelt’s economic interventions meant to help the laboring classes in the 1930s. The Age of Jackson is, in essence, a diatribe against conservatism and a defense of liberalism coupled with strong executive policies designed to break the powers of the wealthy elite. As Schlesinger sees it, by Jackson’s time “a century of bitter experience in the democratic fight finally led liberalism to uncover what Jeffersonians had buried: the need for strong government,” for “it grew increasingly apparent that workingmen required protection from the mercies of their employers”. This “called for government to take a much more active role in economic life” (520). So begins a cycle which Schlesinger puts forth unambiguously: “In the past, when liberalism has resolved the [economic] crisis and restored tranquility, conservatism has recovered power by the laws of political gravity; then it makes a new botch of things, and liberalism again must take over in the name of the nation. But the object of liberalism has never been to destroy capitalism, as conservatism invariably claims – only to keep capitalists from destroying it” (522). Recent Democratic initiatives following the global recession of 2009 could easily have adopted the same language in their justifications. But no matter how much a liberal might be tempted to embrace it, the reading cannot stand firmly upon critical inspection. Schlesinger’s assertions suffer most profoundly in his general failure to clearly define what he means by “liberalism” and “conservatism”, other than the former being good Jacksonians and the latter their political enemies. Even if this antebellum association could be justified, these definitions do not carry concretely through the following generations, and Schlesinger is using a scholarly slight-of-hand to suggest that they do. He does this again as he conveniently overlooks the similarities of the demonized American System, particularly with its federal funding of infrastructure, with that of FDR’s New Deal programs. It is easy to see why The Age of Jackson resonated at its time. It reaffirmed accepted white narratives of the past while justifying Keynesian economic actions taken by popular politicians. Likewise, Andrew Jackson provided the precedent of a strong protagonist fighting to spread democracy and freedom to the world for a generation of Americans engaged, or recently engaged, in battling global fascism and imperialism. Jacksonian democracy, Schlesinger typically overstates, “was not simply a national movement. It was a movement of all people, everywhere, against their masters” (320). Inspiring words, no doubt, however suspect of their validity, to the American World War II generation. Schlesinger’s work is propaganda pocked by shoddy reasoning, but it is nevertheless thought provoking and, at times, entertaining. It is a brand of scholarship the passing of which the more progressive-minded cannot mourn, but it nevertheless remains an interesting artifact representative of its own era, and should continue to be valued as such.
