Japanese is a vague language and they produce vague books. "They prefer their prose to be misty," says the prolific Japanese translator Edward Seidensticker in his introduction, "To suggest more than it says." The great Japanese author Jun'ichirō Tanizaki traces it all the way back to the meandering, oblique Tale of Genji. "We Japanese scorn the bald fact," he says, "and we consider it good form to keep a thin sheet of paper between the fact...and the words." So here's this thin Jamesian sheet of paper. Kaname and Misako are getting divorced, if they ever get around to it. Nothing dramatic has happened. It's a banal divorce. They're just not that into each other. Misako has a lover. Kaname's main concern is that when the divorce happens, the lover had better settle down with her to save embarrassment. I too have been banally divorced, and I loved this; it reminded me of some parts of mine. The part where for a while we thought we would be friends, that we'd still be important to each other even if we didn't stay married. The part where the loss of love isn't even that interesting; the logistics of divorce are the scary part. All this and puppet shows! Tanizaki, in his youth a dangerous writer, began to look backwards as he aged, as the timid do. Kaname finds truth in the old-fashioned Japanese puppet shows. "No matter how inspired an actor was, one still said to oneself: 'That's Baiko,' or, 'That's Fukusuke.' But here one had only [the puppet] Koharu herself." Miss Piggy or gtfo Kaname wishes the person would disappear, until only the performance remains. He finds his life too complicated. His father-in-law has a consort, O-hisa, almost a concubine, a much younger, submissive woman with her teeth blackened in the old-fashioned style. She resembles a puppet. Kaname would like a puppet. He's a stand-in for Tanizaki, who set his own wife up with a poet friend of his as their marriage washed away. Tanizaki wrote this book two years before they got divorced; it may be a subtle hint, but one would imagine she got it. this is an actual thing O-hisa isn't quite what she presents as. Flashes of rebellion show under her makeup. Kaname doesn't come off terribly well, as he curls up. The ending is subtle and brilliant. Apparently Tanizaki is known for good endings. The book says little and implies a lot. It's short and dense. Seidensticker says that Chinese novels are precise, and Japanese ones are misty. I read a lot of Chinese novels last year - he's right - and I'm starting to read a lot of Japanese novels now. There's been a dreamlike quality to many of them. Puppet shows are still silly, but this is a deep book. all of these are very serious men
