I thought this was phenomenal from a "true crime" perspective. Though long, I felt the overall organization of the book worked quite well. I also appreciated the sections told in Jeffrey's MacDonald's own words. Having first heard about these murders via the very popular mini-series while growing up, I had a tendency to lean toward his guilt. However, reading this, I found my opinions vacillating continuously between "of course he did it" and "maybe he didn't do it." The case itself is sensational, a Princeton-educated physician and charismatic Green Beret is accused of brutally murdering his two young children and his pregnant wife. He, however, claims it was four hippies/satanic cult members. But that is only the starting point for a bizarre quest for justice, which among other things includes the complete 180 turnabout of MacDonald's biggest supporter initially,his father-in-law Freddie Kassab. For someone who is fascinated by the foundations of behavior and basis for belief, this was a smorgasbord of psychological pondering. For example, how does someone's biggest supporter become their most tireless opponent? How does a seemingly All-American, intelligent, and compassionate doctor become the primary suspect in his family's murder? Then of course, you have to wonder if the revelation of MacDonald's infidelity while married made it easier to believe him a murder, as if somehow committing one makes you legitimately more likely to commit the other. Obviously, it says something about his integrity, it also suggests maybe he was unhappy and unfulfilled in his marriage. But again, why is it easier to believe someone we "dislike" is capable of murder or vice versa? Add to that the legal implications of the case and it makes for interesting reading. McGinniss, who I think writes a fairly balanced recounting, ultimately confesses that he is convinced of MacDonald's guilt, however, I think his personal bias is admirably subdued throughout most of the book. In addition to watching some old interviews and re-watching the mini-series, I have also purchased and plan to read A Wilderness of Error written by Errol Morris, in which he contends that MacDonald is innocent along with his case, as well as Final Vision a short update written by McGinnis...sort of a last word/rebuttal to assertions made in Morris' book. Anxious to see if my opinion of this book changes by the end of my reading. Did I mention it was long? Personally, I was so engaged I didn't mind, and given the choice, I'm not sure what I would've cut. The most important question...do I think he was guilty. Given what he's gone through, I hope so. Do I have reasonable doubt...based on this book, no...but we'll see after reading Morris' book.
