A wonderful book, I will ponder on the rating and review tomorrow. So tomorrow accidentally turned into a few days, for various reasons, luckily it was a book I really enjoyed so my memory is still really clear. I first read this book probably 40 + years and along with the Foundation novels from Asimov they are what make him probably my favourite author (just don't tell JRR Tolkien that). Since that first read, I have probably only read this at most two more times, so this re-read was really enjoyable. Whilst I remembered the story in general terms, the writing and details of the tale were a surprise and an absolute joy. I love Asimov's writing, in my view his methods of driving and explains the story through discussions and conversations are appealing to me. (although as an aside it does make for difficult television, hence why the new Foundation TV series has been heavily adapted). This book set many thousands of years into to the future when Earth is supporting a vastly increased population, cities are so large they join across the continents, and people so rarely go outdoors any more as life in the cities gives them everything they "need", and where animosity exists between the billions that have stayed on Earth and the longer lived healthier humans (Spacers) who explored the galaxy and now live on luxurious planets assisted by a multitude of robots. Add into the mixture, the murder of a prominent "Spacer" who had been discussing with Earth's governments the possibility of providing Earth with assistance from the dreaded and feared (by Earth men) Robots. Assigned from Earth's Police Force to investigate the crime is Elijah Bailey, an intelligent man , whose career has unfortunately not been meteoric, but has done ok, to the extent that him, his wife and son have their own small set of rooms, with should he ever wish to use it, their own cooking facilities (most Part men and women eat in the vast canteens that feed a whole neighbourhood). Aware that this could make or break his career, Lje soon realises that there is more at stake than a simple murder, whole factions of Earth people are vehemently anti robot and will stop at nothing to halt the interference of the Spacers. Supplied with a partner by the Spacers, that is one of their latest humaniform robots, virtually indistinguishable from a human, Life must avoid treading on the Spacer community toes and avoid setting of riots amongst the Earth people who are intent on destroying any robot. The story is excellent, the writing is wonderful and the characters are interesting and a joy to get to know, especially given the sequels to follow.
