Stacey shows off her hometown of NYC to her BSC friends, who all act like idiots, for a variety of reasons. I think this book was supposed to be the first of the series that had Stacey's own adventures in baby sitting, a sort of spin off series that never spun anywhere. Things I remember from reading this as a kid: Nothing. The story seems familiar, but I realized that I was mixing up my memories of the super special New York, New York! and Welcome back, Stacey! I know I must have read this book, but I can't remember specifics. Things I've considered since reading this as an adult: I didn't realize that Judy (who also appears in Welcome Back, Stacey!) inspired such a show of neighborhood awareness in this book. In the first place, was there really only ONE homeless person on their block? I can't imagine there was only Judy. In the second place, Stacey says, "I see Judy twice a day. . . and I have an idea of what her life is like." Stacey, while traipsing between your Upper West Side apartment, and your private school, you have NO IDEA of what her life is like. I really, really wish that sentence wasn't in the book because the rest of Stacey's observations about Judy are pretty well done. Stacey mentions the random things she carries around, things some people might classify as trash, but what Stacey realizes are Judy's most treasured possessions. She says that Judy often stands on the street and screams. She looks much older than she is. And Stacey herself doesn't try to come up with idealistic, misguided ways to help homeless people, she just mentions that her neighbors are trying to do that. I just wish she hadn't said something as stupid as she knows what Judy's life is like. Clearly Judy has a mental illness, one she has probably dealt with for years. Who knows what she went through to end up on the streets of NYC? Who really knows what chronically homeless people have to deal with on a day to day basis except the chronically homeless themselves? Later in the book, when Dawn is so nervous about the homeless people in Central Park Stacey tells her, "Just because they're homeless doesn't mean they're going to hurt you." I love that she said that to Dawn, who was overreacting to everything about New York, but I can't forget that she thinks she knows what Judy's life is like just because she walks by her twice a day. Stacey thinks the place to go for excitement in Stoneybrook is Washington Mall. This is such an 1980s thought, that my mind in 2016 can barely process it. Remember when malls used to be places where people would just hang out, for fun? Stacey is also embarrassed by Claudia's suitcase on wheels, which is hilarious considering every single person in the entire world has a suitcase on wheels now. My 2016 mind thinks that it would be more embarrassing to have your friend huffing and puffing through NYC, hauling around a huge suitcase. Dawn is so annoying about being in New York. She is sure that she is going to get mugged and murdered, and while I was sympathetic at first, it got very wearing, very quickly. Although I think Stacey overreacted to a lot of her friends behavior, I think she was pretty patient with Dawn, and I'm surprised that she later invited Dawn to visit her in New York, New York! In my years of traveling I have met a lot of people like Dawn, and I always dropped them as traveling companions because they are so obnoxious. Throughout the entire series everyone talks about how self-confident and comfortable with herself Dawn is, but she never shows any real sign of it. If I knew Dawn based on this book alone I would think she's a neurotic, needy, clingy idiot. There were a lot of things the baby sitters did that annoyed me just as much as they did Stacey. Since I don't remember reading this as a kid I can't decide if they would have annoyed me then too. Kristy stops in the middle of the street in a major city to take her wallet out in front of a homeless man, which made me want to smack her for her stupidity. However, if I had read that as a nine year old, would I have known how naive that was? Later when Mary Anne asks Stacey why her building doesn't have more celebrities, Stacey has to remind her that it's just an apartment building in New York, and that not everyone in New York is rich and famous. Mary Anne gets huffy about this, but I understand Stacey's frustration. Most people live ordinary lives, but that doesn't necessarily make them (or their children) any less interesting. I don't know if I would have thought this when I was a kid. I think it's interesting that this book (published in 1988) presents some ideas that people back then thought were great ways to help chronically homeless people. Soup kitchens, church assistance, all the things that people who work in homelessness today know doesn't help in the long term. I think the fight the BSC gets into in this book is done very realistically. Stacey's expectations and excitement for her friends' visit is palpable in the first chapter, and everything slowly unravels when the BSC doesn't adjust to New York like she assumes they would. Instead of being understanding and patient, she gets embarrassed by them. Being a teen she only sees their faults, and she spends all her time snapping at the BSC to behave. Stacey's reflections on the fact that traveling sets people on edge, and they act differently when they aren't in familiar settings are spot on, and is a very mature realization for her to come to. (I did not come to that realization until I was in my 20s.) Since Stacey is often referred to in this series as "sophisticated" and "cosmopolitan" it makes sense that she catches onto this pretty quickly, even as she doesn't realize that the BSC sees her as jaded, and snobby. Claudia acts like the most immature bitch in the chapters about the party Stacey throws, and while it's out of character for her, it's totally believable that a thirteen year old girl who is away from her small hometown acts out in this way. What I like about the books in this series that were actually written by Ann M Martin was that she understood how to make teenage girls fight and make up in a realistic way
