Being Committed follows the story of Hannah Lovekin, a 31 year old private investigator who has, thus far, been unlucky in love and unlucky too in the cards she has been dealt in her family life. As a result of the questionable family dynamics in which she was raised, Hannah has adopted some equally questionable and maladaptive coping mechanisms which see her through her day to day life, and relationships. Hannah’s ways of coping lead her to a failed marriage at 21 and a further (almost marriage) at 31. However, after uncovering some family secrets and reconnecting with childhood memories deep in her subconscious, Hannah realises and begins to try and understand the feelings she has been suppressing, and more importantly, act on them. This was a leisurely, entertaining read. With the right balance of humour and emotivity, this book was easy to digest in a few sittings. I really enjoyed Hannah as a character, I found her equal parts frustrating and relatable. Part of me would have liked to see (spoiler alert) a happy ending without bagging her man. Whilst I was rooting for Hannah and did find myself pleased for her in the end, I feel there is definitely a lack of endings in romance books which are a “happily ever after”, but without the cliché love profession and all’s well ends well conclusion of the story. I felt this ending kind of diluted Hannah as a character, and almost sends the message that finding and securing a relationship is the indicator or trophy of having successfully worked through ones’ personal trauma and healing. I felt that for Hannah, she could have done this successfully without having a male counterpart to prove this. For me, it would have sent a nice message of hope and confidence that personal issues and turmoils can be resolved and a happy, content life achieved, without the token of a relationship necessarily being the driving force to heal, or indeed the reward for healing. Perhaps this is a cynical and overly analytic view, however I enjoyed the book nonetheless.
