I read Gothics for the thrill (pun intended) of it and vibes. This really did have it all. -Our meta start *Our protagonist points out the perils of writing in first person, how because you know they're fine because they're telling the tale. True 🙃. *Can we take a moment to appreciate that this is actually breaking the stereotype of the damsel in distress and in fact an homage to an homage (AKA the best Austen novel Northanger Abbey?!?). It's not Francesca who's the victim in all this, but Stefano. And the women (The Countess and Francesca) have a showdown where the black veil and dagger make character entrances themselves. *She also knows she can homage all she wants, but she's no Radcliffe (that's a complicated subject for me) and no very famous Bronte. -The Russian nesting doll of a romance *Her parents story deserves it's own original novel; a lowly artist falls for an aristocratic young woman promised in marriage to an oaf, and thus begins a daring rescue! RIP to her mother, though 😭. -Francesca's father is willing to whore himself out so Francesca can have a life/education of stability. -This novel made me create story theories (all but one was wrong, but still) *I got Midsomer vibes when Francesca's being called the Goddess of Autumn by both her grandfather and the villagers. I was like "...are they gonna go Wicker Man as well?" *Miss Perkins rubbing her nose throughout the novel had me wondering is it was a disguise a la Wilkie Collins' No Name (1862). With her being a British spy, I was in the right neighborhood. *I thought Stefano and Andrea were the same person because for a while, they weren't in the same room/place 🤣. *I also suspected Galiana way before The Countess. Her hypocrisy towards peasants and their plight (she's the poorest in their family and lives off her grandfather's generosity and grew up with a philandering father), her remarks about her father being Francesca's mother's lover and how Galiana herself could've been Francesca and Francesca could be no one... ok, girl 👀👀. -Anyone else read Stefano's name with the zeal of Elle Woods 🩷?? -I loved how the Falcon is kinda more political Robin Hood, rescuing those who are taken prisoner due to speaking out against the Pope. -The bats/wasps infesting this pristine appearing castle... familial symbolism?!? I know this had elements that went nowhere, and it didn't reinvent the wheel, but does it need to? It's right in the middle of Sons of the Wolf and Witch in Michael's works. Suggestions for 60's and 70's Gothic romances are always welcome 🥰. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
