Mystery, 1980 Cam Jansen is a young girl with a photographic memory that has a pension for solving mysteries. One day while waiting in the mall with a friend Eric, they see that there is a commotion at the jewelry store. They see many different people come running out of the store before the police arrive and Cam learns that the store has been robbed. Using her excellent memory, Jan recalls that immediately after hearing the alarm she saw a man with a mustache run out of the store, then a young couple with a baby and two older female friends left. All of these people were gone by the time the police arrived and chased after the first man that left. When the police returned to the store with the man, they were told that he was not the one that stole the jewelry. With the police thoroughly confused, Cam decides that it is up to herself and Eric to solve this mystery. They decide to follow the mustached man to a house not far from the mall. Once there, Erica and Cam see that he is meeting with the young couple from the store. Cam enters the building while Eric looks for the police officers. After a close call, Cam discovers that all three worked together to steal diamonds, and Eric arrives with the police to arrest the thieves. The Cam Jansen series is leveled around the second grade level, but would be a good option for some students from first grade through fifth. It is difficult to find books for upper grade students that read at a lower level. Cam Jansen is a good option because it is a short read, but is still entertaining for a variety of ages. This could also be a good book to introduce mysteries to younger ages and maybe work with predictions. How do you think Cam and Eric feel about needing to watch Eric's little brother? What do you think happened in the jewelry store? Who do are the suspects? Which do you think stole the jewelry? How are Eric and Cam similar different? What traits would you use to describe them? How does Cam feel being alone in the house with the thieves? What about Cam makes her a good detective? What about this story makes it a mystery?
