* I take my writing seriously and consider comments the reward. I would rather not have “like button” clicks, until you are accompanying them with remarks for me. * Agatha Christie pages impress upon you sharply; even someone sampling the queen of mystery as late as I am. I was astonished by the plot intricacy in "The Mysterious Affair At Styles" but had a feeling there were better stories. Immediately, second novel " The Secret Adversary " is a step up. I am drawn to every stage, the settings are far more dynamic, and this time I am responsive to the characters. Many revere this title as the introduction to Tommy & Tuppence but I am entering this experience without knowledge of Agatha and have the pleasure of every discovery coming to me. The publication year 1922 succeeds World War I. England speaks of tight finances and jobs. Reunited chums Tommy & Tuppence dare to suggest they should advertise willingness to do anything, anywhere for money. They find themselves dangerously but honourably employed by British intelligence! A covert search for an American girl named Jane Finn divvies into three intense directions once they are aided by her wealthy cousin, Julius. The chapters highlight each fast-paced excursion, including a kidnapping of both lead characters; disappearing one after the other in different directions. What I admire about this novel in particular goes beyond the ampleness of vibrant events that keep the pages turning with intrigue. Originality is noticeable at once, a treat for a frequent reader. We are used to sitcoms and movies in which distressed protagonists avoid police or telling anyone what was afoot, for fear of repercussions, when it was plainly silly not to enlist help. In that cliché, lies are woven but inevitably need to be explained and help needs to be requested anyway. The frankness of all three heroes catches us off-guard and the effect of their boldness is entertaining. Accidentally accurate passwords, quick thinking, and suave language abound!
