This novel is a tale of two men born in 1799, one an orphan raised by a poor working family and the other a child of wealth. The orphan was saved, plucked from a flood’s raging waters, and he has upon a special fate, affirmed at his christening, when the irascible, self-made parson Joshua Brookes imposes on him the name Jabez—a Biblical reference that recapitulates his birth, sets his place amongst peers, and promises a future of success, if he but remains true and good. This novel is an English Horatio Alger story, serving both to entertain and instruct. As such, it is not high art, but it is eminently readable. The boy Jabez Clegg does remain true and good, and the several instances when he shows his rectitude afford him favors from benefactors that allow him to further ascend, accomplishment after accomplishment, rung after rung. He earns himself the chance to attend school—a rare feat for someone of his class at this time, as most children were expected to work, even as early as six—wins further plaudits, is apprenticed and shows aptitude and industry, and is given more opportunities to rise in society. It’s a rag-to-riches life for Jabez Clegg, he is only thwarted in attaining one thing, his true love Augusta Ashton, daughter to the rich merchant who apprentices then eventually makes a partner of Jabez in his business. It is over Augusta that the orphan and the rich boy Laurence Aspinal clash, though Jabez remains honorable and humble in his dealings with the gentleman, out of both his instinctual goodness and social decorum, which dictates one’s proper behavior with respect to social status. Throughout Jabez’s life, at nearly every milestone in his development, there are encounters with Aspinall, many in which Jabez is injured, and one—to Aspinall’s shame—where he owes Jabez his life. When a young man, the rakish Aspinall served in the Manchester Yeomanry, a martial cavalry that served Manchester in lieu of a police force. In 1819, when the antagonisms between workers and masters came to a head in the bloodshed of Peterloo, this same yeomanry was at the back of much of that carnage and mayhem, with many of the officers riding drunken and roughshod over workers and innocent citizens alike. Jabez is severely gashed by Aspinall’s wild sword when saving the life of Mr. Chadwick, a rich merchant and brother-in-law to Jabez’s mentor Mr. Ashton. Despite this and other negative signs, Augusta is nevertheless smitten with the dashing form of Aspinall, and over the course of several years—including an episode of arrested elopement—she is able to win from her parents permission to marry Aspinall. And during this period, Jabez remains silent about his love for Augusta, having not yet attained a sufficient station to merit serious consideration as a suitor. During the decade when Augusta and Aspinall are married, Jabez continues to ascend, entering into a business relation with Chadwick and Ashton, marrying Chadwick’s daughter who adores him, and becoming a father twice over. As Augusta and Aspinall’s marriage spirals badly downward to its nadir, Jabez loses his wife and children in a freak accident. Shortly after, Aspinall kills himself to avoid disgrace and further degradation when his creditors swarm him. The way is paved for Jabez to fulfill his destiny, and within six months—with abiding patience, decorum, and faith in providence—Jabez and Augusta are united. This novel is Dickensian in the breadth of characters involved, and there are several subplots, but they serve only to illuminate the principals’ virtues and vices, providing occasions for Jabez to shine and Aspinall to show himself tainted, an idle, reckless, ne’er do well. The breadth also serves to enrich the background of the story and make burgeoning Manchester a real presence and not merely a backdrop. Characterization is just sufficient to delineate, but not enough to distract readers from the novel’s purpose, which is didactic and morally elevating—to show not only Jabez’ dynamic ascent, but also how that ascent was a combination of moral virtues: unflagging faith, industry, and pluck.
