'The past puts a fine edge on our own days. It tells us more of the present than the present can tell us.' Holroyd's epigraph, by William Gerhardie, 'An Historical Credo' from The Romanovs. An Evocation of the Past as a Mirror for the Present. Michael Holroyd, the British biographer, married to Margaret Edith Drabble, the British author, was born in 1935. Some of his best writings include Lytton Strachey: A Critical Biography (1967-68), Lytton Strachey: The New Biography (1994), and in between those a four volume biography of George Bernard Shaw (1988-92) from the New York Times This is a book I read several years ago, right around the time that I joined Goodreads. By that time I had lost both my own parents, and reading this memoir was a moving experience. This is because it is not so much a memoir of the author's life, as of the way that life was shaped, formed, guided (or not) by his parents and grandparents (siblings too). It is based partially on writings of his parents, at Michael's request, when they were getting up in years. Not surprisingly, he found out much about both of them, and about his grandparents, which was quite new to him – or at least seemed so. (For example, he found out that he had been born on two different dates – as so recalled by his parents.) I enjoyed the second half of the book most. Here there's a wonderful chapter about Holroyd's aunt Yolande, who was about thirty years older than him. "Whatever was to be done with 'the boy', it was usually left with my aunt to do it." Some of incidents Holroyd relates from the war years reminded ne of Evelyn Waugh's The Sword of Honour . I also enjoyed his chapter on his years at Etn, and found Legal and Military , his memories of his first attempted careers (at his father's urging) highly amusing. The penultimate chapter, Scenes from Provincial and Metropolitan Life very sad, as they deal with his parents' aging and death. In his final few pages ( Things Past ), Holroyd write My purpose has been to pare back a little the cuticle of time and to apply the research methods I have learnt as a biographer to my own life for a while, letting the detective work show through the narrative at some places for those who have a similar curiosity in human nature and its reworkings on a family chronicle. Echoes of what I have forgotten, as well as memories of events I have been unable to forget, linked where possible by discovered facts, have been my signposts. Recommended to those who love memoirs, or have read and enjoyed any of Holroyd's other writings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Previous review: The French Revolution Carlyle Random review: Homage to Catalonia second review Next review: Poetry of Robert Frost Previous library review: The Day of the Jackal Next library review: March Violets Philip Kerr ... Bernie Gunther#1
