I still adore this story, and this love story. -------- My review after the second reading -------- I think I loved it even more the second time. Almost all views of my previous review are valid, save one point: I like Jenny now. I understand her better now. Yes, like she, I am a bit sad, for that tiny part of her heart who longed (against all odds) for something she would never have. Yet, she was a marvelous human being, so consistent. I also like and understand Adam more. I was savoring this story, how the relationship between the main couple evolved. How they worked for their marriage. I know, typically, it would have been Julia and Rockhill as romantic heroes, but Heyer showed that also so an "unromantic love story" can be beautiful. -------- My review after first reading -------- This is one of Heyer's late books, and one can see this novel is thoughtful. Yes, it wasn't a witty Regency romance. I would not say it was a sad story but it was neither Cotillion nor Sprig Muslin (the fans of Heyer will know what I mean). This piece is something between historical romance and historical fiction. You can see how much Heyer knew about the Regency era, especially the everyday life (mostly) of nobility. I don't recall that in any other Heyer's book, there is so much about agriculture in those times. It was quite interesting. On the other hand, there was a "gossip world" about royalty. The Prince Regent was in the background of many Regency novels (it is obvious) but here I felt almost as if I would have gossiped with them. The third main group of historical information is about fights with Napoleon. There were moments when I recalled An Infamous Army . I was a little bored once or twice, but only because I knew it too well. Let me say it one more time: "A Civil Contract" had more historical facts than most Heyer Regency romances. And those facts were added to the plot in a smooth, engaging way. Now, let's get to the story and characters. As you would have expected there were interesting characters: Mr Chawleigh, Lydia, Lynton, Charlotte, Julia Oversley, Jenny, Rockhill, and so on. Everyone gave something special to the novel. One can see how good a writer Heyer was. I couldn't find one tiny piece of evidence of fortuity in this story. Even so, I must admit I was not a fan of Jenny. But, as I have written many times, I don't have to like a character to like a book/a story. And the story was original. I say, even phenomenal. There weren't romantic raptures between the main couple. The hero was in love with the other girl. I was expecting to the end that he would have looked at Jenny and would have passionately fallen in love with her at last. But honestly, how it was it made the story and book more wonderful. I am sure that for some people this atmosphere (as in the below quote) can be boring. But not for those who understand what kind of story it is. 'Jenny, are you sure you like this scheme?’ Adam asked, when they were alone. ‘Yes, that I do!’ she replied. ‘Don’t you?’ ‘Oh, yes! As long as it won’t put you to a great deal of trouble.’ ‘It won’t put me to any trouble at all. But if you had rather –’ ‘No, there must be a party, of course – or, at any rate, you all think so!’ ‘Well, it’s natural we should, but if you don’t wish it –’ ‘My dear, you are perfectly right, and I do wish it!' This is the story which you can understand by reading the quotes below: The next days brought their duties, their small successes, and their annoying failures But it was only in epic tragedies that gloom was unrelieved. In real life tragedy and comedy were so intermingled that when one was most wretched ridiculous things happened to make one laugh in spite of oneself After all, life was not made up of moments of exaltation, but of quite ordinary, everyday things As you see there was more to read between the lines. So, in my opinion, it was one of the best books of Heyer. Although you can't describe it as a typical Regency romance.
