The cotillion (also cotillon or "French country dance") is a social dance, popular in 18th-century Europe and America. Originally for four couples in square formation, it was a courtly version of an English country dance, the forerunner of the quadrille and, in the United States, the square dance. That's what it says on the cover and that's what you will find between the covers of this delightful comedy of manners from the pen of Georgette Heyer, whose accomplishments in the recreations of the customs, fashions and linguistic peculiarities of the period have come to define the whole genre of Regency Romance. I used to think P G Wodehouse is without peer when it comes to creative use of the English language and comedic entanglements, but "Cotillion" is a fine example for me of a succesful challenge to his elevated position. While the historic periods are clearly different, the comparison is underlined by the setting of the story among the higher echelons of the British society (the Ton as the Regency bucks liked to define it) and by the pursuit of love as the prime engine of the plot. The dance starts with an introduction of several gentlemen gathered at the manor of their cranky old uncle who wants to leave his whole wealth to a poor orphan girl in his household. The condition for the inheritance is that the lovely Miss Kitty Charing must marry one of the nephews of Mr Penicuik. Among the four nephews, Lord Dolphington is an Earl with a few screws loose in the belfry, Hugh is a stuffed shirt clergyman, George is already married and a bore, Freddy is an effete man about town, more interested in the latest fashions than in petticoats, and Jack Westruthers is a scoundrel with the good looks and the loose morals that can get him any lady of the high society that he snaps his fingers at. Seems like an easy choice for Kitty, but the only problem is that the saucy Jack has refused to answer the summons. Inflamed by the plan of her tight-fisted guardian to sell her out like livestock, Mrs. Charing hatches a plan to escape for her first season in London, hoping to find there more succes in her pursuit of marital bliss than in the isolated estate of Mr. Penicuik. I do not want neatness and propriety! I want elegant dresses, and I want to have my hair cut in the first style of fashion, and I want to go to assemblies, and rout-parties, and to the theatre, and to the Opera, and not - not! - to be a poor little squab of a dowdy! After browbeating one of the nephews into a fake marriage proposal, Kitty proceeds to do exactly that, armed with an illustrated guide of the points of interes in the metropolis : "The Picture of London (Price Five Shillings, Bound in Red" ). With an introduction to the household of her impromptu fiancee's sister Meg, the girl is ready to take the Ton by storm. Fresh as paint, and full of enthusiasm. Miss Catherine Charing is a delightful guide to the Regency landscape, cca 1816. While trying to solve her own marital status, she is pretty soon involved in the fate of two other couples, each totally unsuited to each other by the standards of the time. All her best efforts though only lead to more complications, to the exasperation of the amiable Freddy Standen, who finds himself plunged deep "in the soup" as his modern alter-ego (Bertie Wooster) would say. Unlike Bertie, the honourable Freddy turns out to hide behind the phlegmatic facade and the studied affectations of speech a healthy dose of common sense and resourcefulness under stress. I think Freddy has what is better than accomplishments - a kind heart! exclaims the impressed young Kitty after the umpteenth time he comes to her rescue. But can he replace the dashing Jack of her romantic dreams? The casual reader might understandably dismiss the novel as inoffensive escapism, a pleasant way to enjoy a weekend pondering over the fashion sense of the well-to-do: Ermine and chinchilla with blue, Meg! Sables never show to advantage! Now, if only you had chosen to wear the Merino cloth pelisse I bought for you - not the earth-coloured one, but the braided one in French green - it would have been unexceptionable! Between the lines though there is a glimpse of the dire position of women in a scandal prone and male dominated society where their only chance at a decent life is to ensnare a wealthy husband, or at least a generous rogue to pay their upkeep in exchange for sexual favours. As Kitty is auctioned to suitors with the promise of a fat dowry, the impoverished Olivia is offered to the blase and elderly 'roue' Henry Gosford as a mistress: I am wholly dependant upon the generosity of my guardian! I do not exaggerate when I say that I have not a penny in the world! I have mentioned earlier that much of the enjoyment of the lecture came not so much from the plot or from the personable young people involved, but from the well researched linguistic peculiarities of the period. While some words made me dive for the dictionary (valetudinarian, cicisbeo) , it is mostly in the bubbling conversation that the talent of the author really shines: You know, Kitty, the old gentleman must be in pretty queer stirrups! Unless he's been on the mop, and that doesn't seem likely. Well, what I mean is, he must be dicked in the nob to want such a set of gudgeons at Arnside! I have considered for a moment a three star rating for this divertimento, but then I had before me a picture of Miss Fishguard,the poetry-obsessed governess of Kitty, and listened to her admonition: So ignoble a thought will not for an instant be permitted to obtrude!
