Initially I was hooked on the premise of this novel - a psychologist decodes an alien message from the Alpha Centauri system and, just like in Carl Sagan's Contact , the other-worldly message contains instructions on how to construct a machine based on the alien's advanced technology. This book was written in 1998 and the story therein takes place in 2017 with an epilogue set in 2019 so it's interesting to read how Sawyer forecasted what our current world would be like. Some hits and some misses, but fun to read about. Like another of Sawyer's books, Hominids , there is a secondary plot involving a rape, and in Factoring Humanity the rape is allegedly committed by said psychologist's husband against their two daughters. One of the daughters killed herself because of the alleged rape while the surviving daughter cut her dad out of her life and is threatening legal action. The husband denies the allegations, moves out, and the marriage falls apart as one would expect. The husband is a computer scientist and created an an evolving AI in his lab named Cheetah, and their relationship becomes a third plot line. Sawyer hit the nail on the head with his vision of modern-day AI. Cheetah was one of the more interesting characters in the book and I was just as, if not more, interested to see how he would end up than the human characters. So, what did our protagonist psychologist do after she assembled her machine from Alpha Centauri, probably the most important scientific discovery in the history of mankind? Well, she kept it a secret, of course, and tried to use it to discover if her husband raped their daughters. Oh, and then she let her surviving daughter have a spin in it. I just couldn't get past this. Is this how a scientist would behave? Maybe, if the future of her family depended on it. But it didn't feel right to me. I didn't buy it. I'll give this book and OK rating because of the excellent science fiction but it often times was over shadowed by the lurid rape bits / family drama storyline and that didn't work for me. The ending as a little to new-agey and nebulous for me, too. I've got a few more Sawyer books on the shelf so I'll give him another try.
