Thirty years ago I read two great English memoirs, Brideshead Revisited and Cider with Rosie, and loved them both. I read Brideshead last week and found it has aged very well: I still love it. I read Cider this week and found it has not, in my own savor, aged well: I now dislike it. Laurie Lee was a poet and the book is in places nearer poetry than prose. This is, on the whole, a good thing. The language is vivid, rich, and complex. The English is pleasing. The last chapter, on the sudden disappearance of ancient European village life, is superb, and worth the price of entry. It might be read independently from the rest of the book to good effect. The book is at no point terrible. It is on each page in some way a fine book, in some certain way a good book. The problem, then, is two-fold: first, the book is vacuous; second, I find it rings untrue. By vacuous I mean that Laurie Lee presents a view of village life that is almost devoid of real human thought or feeling. It is English village life as a dog or a horse might have experienced it. There are smells. There is cold and damp and warmth and sunlight. There are terrors. There is sickness. There are females, to be used, raped, or seduced in keeping with one's appetites. There are characters, cartoon-like and fleeting. There are other boys, to be punched and tricked and played with. A cat, if he could read, would love this book. Because there is nothing of the real essence of human life here. No love, not even familial love. No music, except as a background to dancing or church. No philosophy, no questioning. No God, no mystery of death or life, only corpses and worms and stenches. No morality, no probing questions of right or wrong. Lee confesses, here, that he molested a series of pre-pubescent girls as he explored his own early pubescent sexuality. He confesses that he and some friends plotted and attempted—but, thankfully, failed in—the rape of one of their innocent female classmates. Even in these most heinous of crimes—and many others are described—no moral sense, no guilt or shame or conscience whatever, is ever given voice. For me, I am left with the conviction that in our narrator we have a narcissist if not a sociopath, waxing lyrical about a time and place I'm interested in, but who himself sees the setting only as a romping ground for amoral and empty-headed boys. There's something troubling about his vacancy here. But from a literary perspective, it also means that the book is lacking a philosophical spark that would have greatly enriched it. The second problem is probably connected to the first. The book strikes my own ear as being substantially untrue. I don't mean, necessarily, that the events he describes never happened. He says his family were regularly terrified by a nighttime chain-dragging goat. I can believe that I suppose. Their house flooded regularly and they must sweep away the water frantically. I'm sure that's a real memory of his. But on the whole the characters and scenes and events seem to me implausible; he can't have remembered as much as he claimed to; there are far too many vivid details for a small boy to have retained. But the problem is deeper: even when the event rings true and the details seem plausible, his interpretation of things seems to me underdeveloped. This is connected to the first problem: his moral and philosophical blindness makes me think that the events of the book are half-baked, events without insight, facts without truth. I often found myself thinking something like, "He's describing how he saw his mother reacting in this situation, but I doubt that's how she would explain it." He seems to me not a reliable narrator. I have a third complaint about the book but it's not a fault so much as a personal source of detachment. I enjoy a story more when it has a plot, some sense of question leading to answer or problem leading to solution. This has none. It's a memoir, or a simulation of a memoir, or an embellishment of a memoir, or something. Perhaps appropriately to a memoir, it has little sense of forward movement, no clear beginning or end. Again, this is not a fault per se, but it made me enjoy the book less than I would have. I'm not sure what I would have said, thirty years ago, about why I loved this book so much. Whatever it was, I can't say it now. I found it rather dull, a little hard to believe, and profoundly lacking in human feeling or insight.
