Decades and decades ago, when I was an undergrad at university, we school dormitory girlfriends passed around a well-worn paperback copy of John Cleland's FANNY HILL: Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, published in 1748-1749. Ah, yes, it was a more innocent time. We got our porn from the classics, not from films like Debbie Does Dallas. When Erica Jong put out her feminist version of Fanny in 1980, I was busy raising kids and teaching school in Latin America and missed it entirely, only finding it recently on Amazon at a bargain price. So I had to get it, if only for old times' sake, and to see how Jong's Fanny improved (or not) upon the original Georgian one. I'm sorry to say that, although impressed by Jong's writing style imitative of 1700s publications and also happy with the fact that our Fanny here is not such a pushover for the male sexual organ and takes much more control of her own life, I was bored. There's too much detail, especially when we get to all the sailing on pirate ships. So I skipped bunches of this, probably missing some intelligent and erudite references to Georgian people, ideas and culture. But life's too short, IMO, to spend it having my mind numbed by so much verbiage. I do admit to enjoying meeting up with Alexander Pope, William Hogarth, and Cleland himself, making a visit to the Hellfire Club, seeing the contrast between the early comfortable aristocratic life Fanny led and her life after ending up on the seedier side of society, making the acquaintance of a group of feminist witches and a group of highwaymen, and more. So Fanny meets up with some actual historical personages of the times and also many more fictional ones. There are interesting discussions of witches, slavery, democracy, equality, and even some fun etymology of terms such as Jolly Roger, buccaneers, etc. If I had been in a more patient frame of mind I would have read this more carefully, but, as it was, the payoff for spending more time on this did not seem greater to me than the payoff of getting on with my life. Three stars for this because I did enjoy Jong's Fanny being less of a pushover and less of a patsy than Cleland's. Well, feminism was coming into its own (kinda) in the 1980s. One would expect a more woke Fanny. Besides, Cleland was a guy. What do they really know about women?
