Thomas Merton’s little book on the Bible definitely isn’t for everyone. Though Merton was a Trappist monk, this book struck me as having a “missionary” spirit of presenting the Bible to secular people of the 1960s. It isn’t an apologetic, a summary, or instruction manual for reading the Bible. Rather, Merton describes the Bible’s impact on a person’s worldview and frames of reference. He begins by saying, “The reader who opens the Bible must be prepared for disorientation, confusion, incomprehension, perhaps outrage. The Bible is without question one of the most unsatisfying books ever written – at least until the reader has come to terms with it in a very special way.” “There is, in a word, nothing comfortable about the Bible—until we manage to get so used to it that we make it comfortable for ourselves. But then we are perhaps too used to it and too at home in it. Let us not be too sure we know the Bible just because we have learned not to be astonished at it, just because we have learned not to have problems with it.” The Bible records events. It is the record of God breaking into the world of humanity “invading our private and complex world” as “the ground and source of man’s being, the center of his history and the guide of his destinies.” To read the Bible correctly, we need to ask, “What is it that I’m seeking?” By this Merton doesn’t mean, “What information am I seeking?” but rather, “What am I longing for?” This is the question we bring to the Bible, but this is also what makes it difficult to read. The Bible may pose a threat to our faith, a threat to those things that we had been trusting, those things we believed to be true about ourselves and the world. The Bible destroys our religion. Through the Bible we discover that we ourselves are our own problem. Merton writes, “When you begin to question the Bible you find that the Bible is also questioning you. When you ask: ‘What is this book?’ you find that you are also implicitly being asked: ‘Who is it that reads it?’” Ultimately, the Bible’s focus shifts from the events or stories to a person: Christ. “The great question of the New Testament, the question which includes all others, is who is Christ and what does it mean to encounter him? The rest follows: how is one to share in this event and enter into the Christ-life, how does one participate in the existence of the Son of Man?” The Bible is different from other religious books in that its primary purpose is to reveal who we are, not how to behave. Our identity determines our behavior. “The People of God to whom the message of liberty is directed is, in fact, a small nation or a minority in exile, constantly called upon to resist the massive power of invaders and oppressors, but to do so in a special way: trusting not in alliances with the big political powers but in the hidden, seemingly hazardous, but really firm promises of God.” Though the book made me think, I only recommend it for those familiar with Merton. For most of us, reading “Opening the Bible” is a cross-cultural experience.
