This biography of Bess Truman, written by her daughter Margaret, was drawn from over 1000 personal letters as well, of course, from personal knowing. Several of the letters are from Bess Truman’s personal friends and from her family but by a huge margin the greatest number are from her husband, Harry. He wrote her prolifically – when he was overseas in the army, when he was in the U.S. Senate, when he was in the White House, whenever he was away, when she was celebrating a birthday or their wedding anniversary. Sometimes he unburdened himself about affairs of state, often he sought her advice, always he declared how much he loved her and how he still thought of her as the prettiest girl in the world. Not too many of her letters to him are preserved. After they left the White House and retired to their home in Independence, MO, they began sorting through their memorabilia. Harry came upon Bess throwing her letters into the burning fireplace. He said, “Don’t you think you should save them? Think of history.” “I am,” was her retort as she continued to throw correspondence she had written into the fireplace. That anecdote neatly sums up Bess Truman. She did not want to be a public person. She did not want Harry to enter politics. She did not want him to be President but that was thrust upon him. And that was one reason she did not want him to accept the VP spot. Nonetheless once he made up his mind, she supported him. She wanted to win. She had a fierce competitive streak, which Margaret attributes to her love of athletics. Apparently she was quite a tomboy and a good athlete when she was young and was actively interested in sporting events all of her life. She had to drag Harry to baseball games and fishing. But in the political arena, she was famous for saying, “A woman’s place in public is to sit beside her husband, be silent, and be sure her hat is on straight.” She was always a lady. Those who knew her best were lifelong friends and among them there was great loyalty and devotion. The public and the press and the Washington D.C. crowd didn’t always warm to her or she to them, although Margaret writes that she mellowed with age and lost much, but not all, of her distaste for the press and politics. In fact, at the end of Harry’s presidency, Bess who once hated D.C. would have liked to maintain a home in Washington, even though she was adamantly opposed to Harry’s seeking a second full term. The stress of the presidency was taking an unsustainable toll on Harry’s health, Bess told him when he wavered in his decision. Whatever impression I had of Mrs. Harry Truman before reading this biography tended toward the negative, although I didn’t know much about her. I knew that Harry Truman was devoted to her. I never understood why. She seemed stern, austere and, I thought, unsupportive, given her frequent stays at her family home in Independence when the President desperately wanted her by his side in Washington. I still think stern and austere were not far wrong, but thinking of her as unsupportive was wrong. Bess’ family, on her mother’s side, was small town aristocracy, although the Wallace family harbored a dark secret that marked Bess for life. Harry’s family were farmers. Harry claims he fell in love with Bess when he first saw her in Sunday School when he was five. She never noticed him. He remained in love with her for the rest of his life, although they did not marry until they were in their mid-30s – WW I intervened, he had a series of unsuccessful jobs, and her family wasn’t wild about Harry. Harry was “what you see is what you get”; with Bess you never saw very much, she was always guarded. It seems clear to me that Margaret was much closer to her father than she was to her mother, although the Trumans were a closely knit family. He was effusive in his praise and encouraged Margaret in whatever she wanted to do. Her mother was the disciplinarian, the worrier (a professional worrier, Margaret called her), and never effusive with compliments. I sometimes felt while reading this book that Margaret wanted to defend her mother from the somewhat negative reputation she acquired, but Margaret did not write a hagiography. She wanted us to know that her mother prized loyalty above almost everything else, that she assumed, uncomplainingly, the large burdens of caring for (emotionally supporting) her demanding mother and one of her hapless brothers, that she was philanthropic, that she was her father’s most trusted advisor on all matters, that she was always down-to-earth no matter where or who she was, that she had a robust sense of humor and of the ridiculous, and that she had that rare quality of common sense. She could also be quite acerbic and was a terrible penny pincher. To save money, she tried to make Harry mow the lawn after they retired to Independence. He didn’t want to. She pestered him, so one Sunday morning when she came home from church she found him mowing the lawn. She was aghast. Everyone would know that he didn’t go to church. Harry won that one. It’s Bess’ biography, but the growing up years that focused mostly on Bess, the Wallaces, and their neighborhood friends was rather tedious, as was the detail on the local politics in which Harry was active. The part that focuses on Harry’s presidency was the most interesting. I found it curious that very little space is given to Truman’s decision to drop the bomb and the aftermath. Perhaps that’s because it was the one decision that Harry made without consulting Bess or even telling her he was going to do it. She was furious. Not because he dropped the bomb but because he didn’t talk to her about it first. It caused a disruption in their household peace for some time. Much more space is given to discussing the rise of the Cold War, Stalin, the Marshall Plan, McCarthyism, the beginning of the Korean War, McArthur’s firing, NATO, the Democratic National Conventions, various Presidential candidates, and the Republicans who made Truman’s life hell. Interesting insights. I always enjoy a little bit of gossip and Margaret gives us some. Bess did not like FDR but she liked Eleanor, although the role they played as First Lady was very different. Eleanor expressed her views publicly, Bess did not. Eleanor held press conferences, Bess canceled them when she became First Lady much to the consternation of the press. She asked that the press submit questions in writing. She usually answered them by writing, “no comment.” She did not like Ike but she liked Mamie. She liked Betty Ford, even though their styles were very different. She did not like either of the Carters. At her funeral all of the living First Ladies were invited except Mrs. Carter. Margaret records that she came anyway. Bess’ given name was Elizabeth but she was always called Bess except for those occasional times when Harry teasingly called her Lizzie. Bess was not amused. She was much honored in the post-Presidential years and aspiring politicians came to her to seek her endorsement. She always tried to represent mid-American values. She lived to be 97. That’s got to count for something. If I were to start over again in my decision to read just one biography of Bess Truman, it might be one not written by her daughter. This one was okay, it seemed fair, and Margaret was able to share some things that other might not have known. But an outsider might have provided a wider social context and analysis.
