The thing is that I started The Stanislaskis series beackwards with Waiting for Nick/ Considering Kate, and realized there were two othe books. I absolutly loved Taming Natasha because it's so heartbreaking what both Tash and Spence go through, and it's all about regaining one's sense of self. I think so far it's my favortie of the series. I loved the setting and the atmosphere very small town, and cozy and comfortable kind of like the McCade Brothers series. I loved The Fun House and how passionate she is about her business. I loved that she always takes a class just for herself, and that is so smart for a woman to do. Having read Freddie's story before her parents, I adored Freddie and it helped me understand her romantic, positive attitude. I loved how we got glimpses into what Freddie was thinking as well, because it showed how much she truly wanted a mom and how she wanted her dad to be happy. I also thought it was great that we got little hints about Tash's story, and when she told Spence after she realized she was pregnant, which I loved, it was so heartbreaking, how Anthony dismissed her, and she was so young and naive, and how Lily just died, I mean that's all she had other than her family, and she was gone. I loved Spence's story as well, and how because he was so awful towards Freddie at the beginning, he wants everything for her now. I loved the first day of school, when Freddies got chicken pox and Tash was there and she rocked her and sang to her. I love how cute Freddie is because she thinks Natasha is so beautiful and she wants her with them. I loved Halloween, and of course that night, and I loved how Spence never gave up on Natasha, and he was always there for her. I especially liked when they visited TAsh's family, and how they accepted Freddie so openly. I love Mikhail, and he is always there for his sister. Their whole story of how they came to America, was so courageous and loving, it was beautiful, and how at dinner Natasha told Spence that sometimes you shouldn't be patient. I really love how the series is very family oriented, yet each character is so different and their personality is so different. I really loved the epilogue, and how they got married on Christmas Eve, and how just like parents, they treasured those rare intimate moments together, and how each time they made love it was just them, and they worshiped each other.
