Wow! This book was not AT ALL what I expected it to be, but I'm really glad I read it. It's been on my radar for many years now, after I saw it in the travel section of a local bookstore ages ago. I finally got it from the library so the edition I read was quite old (2003) but I still found it a great read. More than a travel guide, I would describe this book as a summary of international relations, politics, and current events (well, it would be if you read it in the right decade lol). Everyone that knows me knows that I love to travel and I love to immerse myself in other cultures. But I have never been one to follow politics or get into history much (ok, at all), so this review might be skewed by that. Someone more knowledgeable about current events might know this information already. However, I found this book pretty interesting and I learned a great deal from it. It was a succinct look at the most "dangerous" places in the world and each roughly 25 page chapter looked at the history, leadership, and politics that came together to impact that particular country's situation. It was a great way to put all the terms that I hear floating around together and put a face to them, so to speak. As I read, I kept my internet connection close by and updated myself on where things have gone in the 14 years since this book was published. It's a bit surprising to me how little international news we actually hear here in the States. I learned a lot about the role the US has played in many of the conflicts bubbling around the world, and I learned a lot about the things that drive certain parts of the world to function in a particular way. The book has inspired me to continue learning more about countries that I really don't know much about - and to educate myself more on what is going on in the world outside of my country's borders. DP contained a lot of information and could be a bit heavy at times, but the short-ish chapters kept it moving. Pelton's tongue in cheek one liners kept me giggling throughout, as he states that Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe "threw his toys out of his pram in spectacular fashion" or points out that with Bush's military budget of the early 2000's, we could "purchase the entire Axis of Evil with this amount on credit and sell timeshares." Pelton is entertaining and has a relaxed, readable writing style - although he lost some points when he referred to giardiasis as a type of hemorrhagic fever, which made me want to fact check all the things. All in all, this fat book was full of info that I found interesting and useful to read about and if you have any interest in learning about the history of world conflicts or understanding a bit more about some lesser known locales, you might find it interesting too.
