This historical fiction series is worth reading- stick with it. The reader gets the non-fiction, the real characters set in the author's personal creative landscape where she recreates the characters and invents a few fictional ones in a setting that could make this a compelling read. You will meet the young Octavian who changes dramatically into this new person after his adoptive father's (Julius Caesar) death. Octavian grows and rises into the Emperor Augustus Caesar. The story of Julius Caesar shines through; the plot to kill him and then the actual murder- the death- the reader would have heard several times before but this is the author's adaptation and we are drawn in. Aware of the rivalry between Octavius and Mark Anthony, the reader wonders how will she present this in the shadow of Caesar's death, of suspicion and animosity, and fear that he might be next. If you know the story of Julius Caesar, you know that his first wife was Cornelia and their daughter was Julia who became the fourth wife of Pompey. Colleen McCullough's 'fictional' name for Cornelia is Cinnilla. The reader is drawn into the setting with Caesar and Cleopatra lying in bed. Cleopatra is six months pregnant. Caesar says' "I love you as my wife, my daughter, my mother, my aunt." Then he takes her to see the results of a burned Alexandria. He assures her that all the books destroyed would be replaced. Cleopatra was more distraught over the loss of the books that the heart-wrenching spectacle of all the starving women and children. Vegetation burned, waterfalls dried up but sculptures and paintings were saved. Caesar wanted Cleopatra to know what was important in the rebuilding Alexandria. ".... Only when Alexandria's people are served can you spend money on public buildings and temples." He continued, ".... And when I have destroyed what I have left behind will benefit future generations in far greater measure than the damage I did, the lives I ended or ruined." Such beautiful writing excused the mistakes here and there. "Do you think, Cleopatra, that I don't see in my mind's eye the sum total of devastation and upheavel I've caused? Do you think I don't grieve?.... I say again, Pharoah rule your subjects with love, and never forget that it is only an accident of birth that makes you different from one of those women picking through the debris of this shattered city. You deem it Amun-Ra who put you in your skin..... I know it was an accident of fate." What ever Caesar did was out of conscious decision. Here, the author describes the scene with passion. The beauty of her dialoguing. The reader understands who Caesar is. Cleopatra understands too. The dialogue is sweeping and rich with information that brings the scenes to life, describing the manner in which Caesar delegated as "commander-in-chief", and he made his imprint wherever he went and the people listened and obeyed with respect. McCullough knows the stories and all the characters seem to be in her head. Some sentences are confusing and clumsy making the paragraph difficult to follow. Example: "Brutus was a particularly difficult problem for Caesar, who had taken him under his wing after Parsalus, out of affection for his mother, Servilia, and out of guilt of breaking Brutus's engagement to Julia in order to ensnare Pompey- it had broken Brutus's heart, as Caesar well knew. But, thought Calvinius, Caesar hadn't the slightest idea what kind of man Brutus is when he took pity on him after Pharsalus. He left a youth. He picked up the relationship twelve years later. McCullough is trying to tell us that Brutus is a now a wimp. (?) This sentence: "Unaware that a pimply youth now a pimply man of thirty-six, was a coward on a battlefield and a lion when it came to defending his staggering fortune." It disrupted the flow of the narrative for me as I attempted to fix it. That night sleepless on Cleopatra's enormous goose-down bed, her warmth tucked against him in the mild chill of Alexandria's so-called winter, Caesar thought about the day, the month, the year..... etc etc. Then she adds... .....And a business proposition from a queen determined to save her people in the only way she believed they could be saved, by conceiving the son of a god. Believing that he, Caesar was that god. Bizarre. Alien. However McCullough's dialogue is rich and masterful and there lies her strength in storytelling. Prepare for a very long read and for me personally, I tried to decipher what was real and what wasn't in the midst of the clumsy sentence structure- Was this work a rushed piece? It is a longer wider journey covering so many characters (actually too many) and not as simple to figure out as in Cleopatra's Daughter by Michelle Moran. This historical novel spurred me to study the history behind her writing. I think it all depends on when you read a book and for me, McCullough's book Caesar's Women was a challenge as I've already convinced myself of the history of Caesar. I enjoyed her book, The First Man in Rome but I read it about ten years ago and I was a lot more patient and again this spurred me on to looking for the history, the facts having created an impressive scene in my mind. McCullough covered Roman politics weaving this within the drama of the day, which makes a good introduction to that era, to Rome for young readers- probably high school. (This was published in 2002). I commend Colleen McCullough (1937 - 2015) and this production. A good non-fiction is A J Langguth's A Noise of War: Caesar, Pompey, Octavian & the Struggle for Rome .
