While I had been aware of Mary Wilson's memoir, "DREAMGIRL: My Life as a Supreme" from the moment it became a best-seller in the mid-1980s, it was only a few days ago that I set myself to reading it. The music of The Supremes is something deeply personal to me because I had grown up in Motown and their music figures prominently in my childhood memories from the late 1960s, listening to their records on the family Show & Tell mini-stereo. Mary Wilson speaks with both clarity, candor, and grace about her life - from her birth in Mississippi, to her 'adoption' by an uncle and aunt with whom she lived in Detroit for many years before her mother was financially able to move to Detroit with her younger siblings and resume directly caring for her. Wilson also shares with the reader how she first met and became close friends with Florence Ballard ('Flo') and Diane Ross in the late 1950s when the three were in high school. Their love of singing led to them forming a girls' singing group, The Primettes, Wilson at some length relates the experiences they had as budding performers in Detroit. By January 1961, the 3 young ladies had signed with Motown (actually their mothers signed their first contracts because Mary, Flo, and Diane were still minors). At the urging of Berry Gordy, the boss and founder of Motown Records, they changed their name from The Primettes (which Gordy considered as out of step with the new decade and not in keeping with the vision he was beginning to develop for the group) to The Supremes. The name 'The Supremes' was Flo's idea. Diane Ross didn't like that. But Mary was fine with it - and thus, The Supremes were born. Wilson speaks a lot about what their struggles in the early days were like. For example, playing what was then called "the chitlin circuit", which were concert tours many African American singers, bands, and singing groups made in the segregated South. Reading those passages about some of the harrowing experiences The Supremes and many of the Motown acts who performed in those venues in the South had was chilling. I couldn't help but admire their guts. For 3 years, The Supremes struggled, failing to produce a hit. As a result, they became known at Motown as the "no hit Supremes." But then, near the end of a concert tour The Supremes were on during the summer of 1964, they received word that their song "Where Did Our Love Go?" had hit Number 1! They soon returned to Detroit - and at that point, the memoir takes off like a rocket, showing the dizzying run of successes the 3 women would have as The Supremes went on by 1967 to have five consecutive Number 1 hits and become the world's most successful girl singing group ever. Unfortunately, there would come a high cost to this success as Diane (now 'Diana Ross') was being promoted by Gordy and Motown as the 'leader' of The Supremes. Tensions would develop among Flo, Mary, Diana Ross, and Berry Gordy, which ultimately led to Florence Ballard being let go by Motown in the summer of 1967, never to return. Flo's subsequent tale proved to be a tragic one, not all of her own making. There was much of what Mary Wilson said in her memoir about the behavior of Berry Gordy and Diana Ross in relation to Flo, herself, and The Supremes which shows both Gordy and Ross as 2 calculating, scheming, and fiercely ambitious people who weren't at all adverse to hurting and shortchanging people, and destroying relationships and careers. (Suffice it to say, I don't much care for Diana Ross.) Mary Wilson also shares with the reader aspects of her personal life during her time with The Supremes, which some may find intriguing, as well as surprising. For instance, the hotly passionate and romantic relationship she had for several years with Tom Jones. The memoir ends at the funeral service in Detroit for Florence Ballard in February 1976. (I remember the news story behind that service very well. I was a preteen then and watched it on local TV.) Even after Flo had left The Supremes and through her later struggles with her marriage, trying to resume a music career, raising her 3 daughters, and falling into poverty, she and Mary remained very close friends. For anyone who loves "the Motown Sound" and the various musicians and singers who made Motown what it became to the world during the 1960s, "DREAMGIRL: My Life as a Supreme" is the book to read. IT IS WORTH IT.
