"An adventure story", claim the blurbs on the back cover, "a swashbuckling tale". I beg to differ. Though there may be adventure and swashbuckling, this is a tale of soul searching, so any readers expecting a medieval adventure tale will find themselves disappointed. The book itself is presented as the diary of a monk, written while rescuing a knight possessed by demons through exorcism. It opens vividly with the monk visiting the knight and then delves into the past, back when, then teenagers, monk and knight had been colleagues, even friends. Afterwards the book proceeds to clarify how, after knight and monk follow their different paths, the monk precociously grows into positions of greater authority and enters the meanders of exorcism. At this point, I can say that the monk is well portrayed throughout the book, including his unfaltering devotion side by side with the growth of his ambition, his sense of what he can and should have, while at the same time maintaining a naïveté which blinds him to the unwholesome corruption that plagues the real world, outside his monastery. And then the knight starts his narrative, which takes several days. At the beginning, the narrative is interrupted by passages in italics where the monk denotes actions happening before him and his immediate thoughts to the tale. Soon, though, the monk is heard only in between their sessions, leaving the knight's narrative uninterrupted. Occasionally, too occasionally, the knight talks directly to the monk. The character of the knight is presented faultlessly, just as the evolution of his emotional burdens, or demons. However, I found the writing style less than faultless. First of all, the sentence structure is very similar: the author favours short, simple sentences that transmit a sense of restrain and coldness which fit in with the monk's point of view but not the knight's, whose narrative paints dark, bloody, emotionally scarring situations. The atrocities - precisely because the knight-narrator sees them as atrocities - lose some of its emotional impact when the language is so carefully measured and crafted into a steady and rational, rather than emotional, rhythm. One cannot feel all the anger, repulse and frustration that we're told are there. I also believe that the knight's narrative would have benefitted from a greater presence of the monk. Not that the monk should have had a greater presence with italic passages, such as in the beginning, but the knight ought to have spoken directly at the monk more often, resorting to more rhetorical questions (because he does use them, but only occasionally). I am certain the strength of his narrative would have been greater, since the few rhetorical questions tended to underline the knight's grief. Still on the point of style, I found the dialogues a bit stifled: they were rather short, the names (brother X, brother Y) often repeated, and the speech usually followed by 'he said'. I would have preferred a greater variety in reporting verbs to spice up the reading. I felt the ending was a bit lukewarm. The final confrontation between the knight and the man behind his demons was believable, unavoidable and even necessary, but there was also a nod towards Hollywoodesque film endings that kept me from fully enjoying it. Fortunately, the book didn't end there and offered an epilogue which painted a fuller picture of the monk: and this ending satisfied me immensely since it was a realistically happy ending for him, with the culmination of his efforts to unite devotion to God and ambition. As for historical accuracy, it seemed accurate enough, aside one mention of seconds (during a military exercise where the instructor counts the seconds the trainees take) and the constant insistence on having a noble maiden going about her father's estate and travelling beyind it without any type of escort (except later on for her brother) or even a female company (apparently she was the only woman in the castle, not even having a governess, former nanny, or a maid-in-waiting). In conclusion, I awarded the book four stars because I could feel the mentality of a bygone era far better than in other novels, and if not for the unemotional style and the solitary noble lady I would have surely given it five stars.
