What can I say... It's Known Space... And I can't get enough of it. I am rating this 4 stars and not 5 though, and that's basically after considering this against the "Neutron Star" collection of short stories, which I consider very very much superior to this collection. What makes this particularly worth reading, IMO, is how it goes back to Niven's very earliest writings that he eventually turned into canon for his "Known Space" future history. It makes for some pretty uninteresting first few stories of this collection (and when I say that, I mean in context of all the amazing stuff in the Known Space body of work)... the first 4 or so stories are pretty tame, a bit boring, and not written particularly well *in comparison* to all the amazing work that will be to come. And I know that isn't selling this book very well as far as a recommendation, but if you're as into Larry Niven's Known Space series as I am, it really is a must-read... it's really an interesting look into Known Space as far as a better understanding of it as a whole. Anyway... beyond those first few kinda duds (which are really short anyway) It really picks up, like always and has a ton of great short stories to keep you going... but I really prefer the Known Space eras of 2600ish-2800ish if I remember my eras and dates correctly... (basically the era of Sigmund Ausfaller/Carlos Wu/Beowulf Shaeffer through to the era of Louis Wu/Nessis/Ringworld) and Neutron Star is way heavy on those eras compared to this collection. This collection is more focused on the very early centuries of Known Space history... mostly stories surrounding The Organ Banks and early Planetary Colonization through ramrobots and slowboats. So if you're thinking about reading one of the two shorts collections, I'd definitely suggest Neutron Star over this one... But if you're a huge huge fan of Known Space like me, and you well know that you're gonna eventually end up reading every single Known Space book written by Larry Niven, well, then obviously this book, like all Known Space books, is a must!
