This is supposedly the last of the Masters of Rome books. In essence, with the battle of Philippi ending in 42 BC, this covers the fall of the old Roman Republic. The start of the book covers the attempts to assassinate Julius Caesar begin to take root. Caesar's clemency and desire to bring Rome back to the old ways is doomed to failure. The ruling class is unwilling and incapable of meeting Caesar's vision. In order to protect their own varied powers and privileges, they decide to form a vast conspiracy to kill Caesar. McCullough does a great job of explaining WHY Caesar was trying to do. It is likely that once Julius was done "fixing" the Republic, he would have retired (much like Sulla) with a restoration of the Republic with "updated" laws factoring in that Rome was now an Empire. She also does a great job of explaining the other side of the argument from Cato and Cicero, to Marc Antony and Brutus. The act and the resulting fallout is also very well explained. I enjoyed this volume since it has much to do with the rise of Octavian. He is able to see that the Republic Julius wished over is effectively over. There must be a new way of doing things. Octavian's reptilian mind is set on not only destroying all of Caesar's enemies but also securing for himself ultimate power. I thought it odd to finish the story with Antony not yet in Egypt since the final bell for the Republic had not yet tolled. I find that there is another volume after this called "Antony and Cleopatra", which I assume will finish out the story. I do not know whether McCullough "jumped the gun" with declaring this the final volume and then later finishing the series with the aforementioned sequel, but the abrupt ending of a story that is not fully finished is mildly irritating. However, this is a superb story. With the death of Caesar and the rise of a new Caesar, the transition from Republic to Empire has begun. As I have purchased the "final" final book, I shall read and finish it soon. I highly recommend this entire series. If you are not terribly knowledgeable about the fall of the Republic, you can mend your ignorance with this entertaining historical fiction series. I loved every minute of it and would recommend this to anyone with an interest for this period.
