Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod banned the 2011+ NIV study bible so I bought this old school version. Fantastic, large, beautiful. It is handwritten from people across America... Great full color pictures... None of the writing is illegible, but lots of variety. I wish I could give one to president Trump! I bought 3 copies since the commies are trying to erase history and I heard the 1984 version of NIV was less woke than the newer ones. This is beautiful, and it reads like a textbook or very large book- not small chunks of verses, but just a full page of writing with the book titles (Genesis, Corinthians etc) up top in the headers. It's actually beautiful like this, like the formatting of a novel or old school textbook or something. Anyway, it also has a section in the back with every person's name who contributed. Very cool! I like to imagine the different people, it's a very visceral, patriotic, loving feeling. It makes me feel more connected to people even when I'm ON LOCKDOWN. lol. I want to buy ten more copies. Please never stop selling it. I bought 3 used copies-2 of them had flaking leather on the spine case- but one of them was in perfect condition. Maybe the person before me was rough or something. I think it's a high quality leather cover, very beautiful, and with normal use I can't imagine it would flake, but if it does I guess it's just that one slim line where the book crease folds as it opens. Anyway, great Bible. I want to hoard them and distribute them. The handwriting makes you think more about the verse you are reading- you really "chew" each verse more without even trying because you are envisioning yourself writing the verse imagining what the person who wrote it must have thought about that verse, maybe it meant something special to them on that particular day. I'm imagining God answering people's prayers by having them end up in this Bible project and they get a verse just at the right time by "coincidence". Well, it's a nice thought. In order words it really stirs up your imagination and this would be a great gift to any person, especially those who love God or people or America or Bibles
