Closer to 3.5 I had never heard of Molly Keane until a friend recently suggested that I check out her work, specifically 'Devoted Ladies' (due, I guess, to its addition of gay characters; something Keane didn't normally do). Knowing I was a huge fan of P.G. Wodehouse, my friend let me know that he thought Keane's work was funnier (!). (Hmm, I thought... could such a thing be possible?) Writing as either Keane or 'M.J. Farrell', the author penned about 20 novels and plays. (Wodehouse, of course, wrote *tons* more.) This first venture of mine reveals that Keane is, indeed, funny - but not in a way that's at all competitive with Wodehouse. With Keane, you have to think more about how she's expressing herself through her characters. The wit is certainly there but it's a lot more deadpan. Overlapping roughly in the same period (the early 1900s), both writers used the English language in individual ways that would now most likely be considered quaint. But, all things considered, Wodehouse is easier to read. He writes what almost amounts to standup-material jokes which fly well on a surface level. When he's not doing that (and often when he is), he has some form of traditional farce in full swing. Keane is subtler. As evidenced in 'DL', and unlike Wodehouse, Keane doesn't particularly write jokes rooted in a similar, playful usage of conversational language. Her humor comes more through descriptions of the emotional (i.e., tempestuous) lives of her characters. We're kept abreast of everything they love or hate, or claim to love but actually hate. As well, 'DL' (at least) is not a farce. Keane places her characters in a series of mundane social settings (i.e., a lunch, a picnic, a hunt for berries, a hunt for foxes) and, again, we follow their emotional paths. 'DL' is, indeed, a lesbian love story - minus the love but not minus the codependent intensity. Witnessing the relationship of Jessica (butch) and Jane (femme) put me in mind of 'The Killing of Sister George', with its vaguely s&m set-up. (Frank Marcus' play - and screenplay - is not one I've ever liked especially, since all of the characters are so unsavory and don't even have wit to save them.) Keane's plot involves the 'suspense' of whether or not Jane will stay with Jessica - or find a more satisfying love in a heterosexual vein. The solution arrives ultimately in a savagely black, tw0-page punch that almost inspired me to grant a four-star review. I wish this novel had been easier to get through. But I'll look a bit further into Keane's work, to see what else she had on her mind.
