"Everything in this room is edible. Even I'm edible. But, that would be called canibalism. It is looked down upon in most societies." Everyone knows this story. Little Charlie Bucket lives with his parents and both sets of grandparents. They all depend on his father for money and he just lost his job. They're running out of food, fuel and money when (just in time) Charlie find a golden ticket. This golden ticket allows him and two guardians into Willy Wonka's Chocolate Factory for a tour. Charlie and Grandpa Joe set off into the wild unknowns. (Aside: anyone else annoyed that bedridden Gpa Joe can walk once there's chocolate involved? I'm calling foul. The muscular atrophy alone...) Charlie is joined by four spoiled brats (who are slowly offed along the journey) and their terrible parents (only some of which are offed during the adventure). Most macabre-ly, the Oompa-Loompas sing a song at the demist of each child. For example, gum chewer extraordinaire (Violet Beauregarde) tries a test gum (despite Willy Wonka's discouragements) and is subsequently turned into a blueberry. Her Oompa-Loompa song include a set of stanzas regarding how one gum-chewing woman starting chewing in her sleep, accidentally chewed her tongue off and lives in an asylum - it gets pretty dark, pretty fast. I really wonder what Dahl had against gum... My favorite part was the actual tour and reading about all the crazy thing that Wonka had hidden in his factory. For example, when Charlie and the gang running after Willy Wonka, he is able to read the labels on some of the doors they pass: "EATABLE MARSHMALLOW PILLOWS LICKABLE WALLPAPER FOR NURSERIES HOT ICE CREAMS FOR COLD DAYS COWS THAT GIVE CHOCOLATE MILK FIZZY LIFTING DRINKS SQUARE SWEETS THAT LOOK ROUND" I don't even care what happened to the other four kids - Sign. Me. Up The 2018 PopSugar Reading Challenge - A book mentioned in another book Audiobook Comments As with Roald Dahl's other audiobooks, this was a full production. The sound effects just made this book go from a 4.5 to a 5. Seriously! YouTube | Blog | Instagram | Twitter | Facebook | Snapchat @miranda_reads
