Richard Preston begins his story with an apocalyptic epigraph and ends with a metaphoric elegy. It's an effective literary device underscoring the necessity of placing this primal, elusive and deadly virus in a broader context, a context that incorporates historical and ecological considerations. Ebola is a deceptively simple life form. It is a filovirus made up of seven proteins. The subtypes that are known to affect humans are Marburg, Ebola Zaire, and Ebola Sudan. No one knows how the virus is transmitted, or what species serve as intermediary hosts. In humans the initial symptoms resemble the flu. Headache, muscle and joint pain, and fever are the first indications. The difficulty in early diagnosis of the disease is another problem. Many of the initial symptoms resemble malaria. Yet, the chance of a favorable outcome as well as containment depends on the earliest possible diagnosis. Preston begins his story at Kitum Cave, beneath Mt. Elgon which straddles the border between Uganda and Kenya. There are stories of native villages in the 1960's located on the north side of Mt. Elgon having been afflicted with a nameless disease with Ebola-like symptoms. In 1980 a French expatriot died from the Marburg strain. In 1987 a teen-aged boy visiting his parents in Africa died of the same strain. The two victims had only one thing in common — both had been inside of Kitum Cave a scant few days before presenting with the first symptoms. Preston provides a carefully researched account of Ebola between 1961 and 1993. The book's introductory pages resemble the ominous series of warnings and protocols for accessing a Level 4 Hot Zone lab. This is the world of Nancy Jaax, a Level 4 U.S. Army veterinary pathologist. Preston's detailed profile of her immerses the reader in her thought processes. He describes the feel of wearing the space suit needed to work in a Level 4 lab. He describes the hyper-vigilance needed to perform a hot lab dissection. One can only admire the incredible self-discipline and emotional grit she brings to the task. During the course of a mysterious outbreak among monkeys imported for medical research in 1989, he delineates the complex interplay of overlapping jurisdictions in a biocontainment operation. In addition to the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRID) that employs Nancy Jaax and her husband, the CDC, state and county health officials share both responsibilities and liabilities while deflecting media attention that might lead to panic. It is no surprise that personal antagonisms surface during such a crisis. Here, again, Preston brings various players to life. Gene Johnson, a civilian USAMRID researcher, had confirmed one of the fatal cases as Marburg, and conducted a detailed exploration of Kitum Cave in 1987. Joe McCormick is with the CDC and spent time in a hut full of Ebola-stricken African villagers without becoming infected. Both men are highly respected and experienced researchers with conflicting views on how the operation should be managed. The final chapter chronicles the journey Preston makes to Kitum Cave. He paints a picture of vast space, muted swatches of color and ancient clay and stone. “The mountain seemed like an empty cathedral. I tried to imagine what it must have been like when herds of elephants could have been seen moving through a forest of podo trees as large as sequoias: only ten years ago, before the trouble, Mount Elgon had been one of the earth's crown jewels.” Preston is a forceful writer. His prose is compelling. His characters are vividly drawn. Much of the story reads like a medical thriller. These are the qualities that made the book exciting. However, it should be noted that knowledgeable critics have claimed that his descriptions of the disease are exaggerated (see websites in NOTES). There are also passages in the description of Ebola Reston which suggest that the disease can be airborne, another assertion that has been disputed. These criticisms are problematic. Does the author stray too far from the facts in his attempt to tell a riveting story? Does this book contribute to the kind of mindless panic that the Reston biocontainment team feared when they diverted media attention from the site? I found the book thought-provoking. I liked Preston's attempt to contextualize not only Ebola, but other evolving viruses. It's the kind of emotion-packed story that will encourage readers to view the topic with fresh interest. It should not, however, be taken as an authoritative text on Ebola. NOTES http://io9.com/how-the-hot-zone-creat... http://www.npr.org/blogs/goatsandsoda... http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/20/boo...
