A practical guide to a baby’s first year, written for new fathers. Each chapter explains how the baby is developing physically, intellectually, verbally, and emotionally/socially. It then explains what you (the father) are feeling and experiencing. The book’s information and advice are based on academic and clinical research, studies, and expert opinions, as well as anecdotes from the author and his acquaintances. The author includes just the right amount of humor to make it entertaining. The author encourages fathers to as involved as mothers in parenting. He advises adjusting your work schedule to allow for more family time. I read this book because I liked The Expectant Father ( my review ). Here are the notes I took for each chapter. Although the chapters are divided into months, the information often applies to more than that month. 1 Week • Bathe baby at most 3 times per week, but wash face daily, and everything under diaper at each changing. • For first few weeks, use warm wet washcloths or cotton balls instead of wipes. 1 Month • Only let baby “cry it out” as a last resort. Studies show that responding promptly and lovingly is best. 2 Months • Stop swaddling to allow baby to practice using arms and hands. • Turn water heater down to 120°F to prevent burning baby. • Schedule many daytime naps. Baby shouldn’t be up for more than 1-2 hours at a time. Naps don’t interfere with ability to sleep at night. • Set a regular bedtime around 7pm. • Don’t play with baby when she wakes up at night. Keep it quiet and dark. 3 Months Storing breast milk • Room temperature 8-10 hours • Refrigerator 1 week • Freeze within 48 hours in breast milk bags, for up to 3 months • Thaw in warm water, not microwave • After thawing, refrigerate up to 24 hours, but don’t refreeze • Swirl milk to mix before feeding baby • Don’t borrow breast pumps; they can’t be properly cleaned (except for special rental pumps). • Introduce baby to a bottle by now. • Introduce rattles, keys, and other toys. • Start playing a wide variety of music. • Don’t over- or under-dress baby. Dress her as you dress yourself. Layers are best. • Don’t use sunscreen on baby until 6 months. Keep her out of sun. • To minimize diaper rash, check diapers every few hours and change if even slightly wet. Let baby air out without diaper. Use diaper cream. 4 Months • Don’t be the last thing baby sees before falling asleep, or she’ll always need to see you to fall asleep. • Don’t let baby nap more than 3 hours at a stretch. 5 Months Introducing solid food • Wait until about 6 months to introduce solid food, unless baby is bottle-fed; then, possibly as early as 4 months. Start with a single-grain cereal like oatmeal with breast milk. • Introduce only 1 new food at a time. Wait 3-5 days before introducing another. • 3 days after cereal, start on veggies. Introduce green and yellow, spaced out. • After about a week, introduce non-citrus fruits. • Introduce yogurt after 7 months, then breads, cereals, shredded meats. • At 9 months, introduce mushy finger foods. • No honey or corn sweetener until 1 year old. 7 Months • Clean baby’s teeth daily with washcloth, gauze, or very soft toothbrush. Don’t use toothpaste. • Don’t use string to attach a pacifier to the baby (strangulation risk). Instead, get a clip-on. Avoid using pacifier at bedtime so baby doesn’t wake up when it falls out. • A few soft toys in the crib are OK, but still no pillows or large toys. • Car seats should face backward until baby is at least 1 year and 20 lbs. 9 Months • Blocks are some of the most educational toys. 10 Months • Baby should speak with words between 10 months and 1 year. • Keep playing music to develop musical potential, even though you start to develop her verbal skills. Play music without words so she focuses on music. Sing along with nonsense words. 12 Months • Baby will start to try walking. • Stay calm when stopping bad or dangerous behavior. If you react wildly, baby will repeat the behavior to get you to react again (babies find it amusing). • Start weaning baby off breast milk. • Don’t give cow’s milk until after 1 year. Then, start with whole milk (babies need the fat). • Babies can’t start potty training until 2 years.
