Perhaps I’ve had the good fortune of reading no Lethem prior to this collection of short stories. Bereft of comparison, I’m also bereft of prejudice. Although I won’t be for long. One of his novels is next on my bookshelf. I know that since the publication of this collection of short stories in the mid ‘90s, Lethem’s career has managed a steady evolution from more pulpy science and speculative fiction to more “literary credibility” (tongue firmly in cheek) with novels like The Fortress of Solitude and Chronic City. I’m excited to delve into more of his work. Lethem has prominently featured on my “to do” list for quite a while. Overall, I enjoyed this collection, although it certainly is a mixed bag. As I type, I’m not sure what rating I’ll give it; I’m vacillating between three and four stars. Stories range from excellent, to not bad, to far too impenetrable to be satisfying, one or two I simply found boring, and one downright terrible: “Forever, Said the Duck,” I’m talking to you. Of course, I can’t say I was irritated or disappointed, knowing this was early work from a writer who would significantly improve. The collection starts very strong, if disturbingly, with “The Happy Man,” a somewhat shocking story about a man trying hard to provide for his family that also works as a fable or parable exploring the emasculating effects of modern society on the average working joe. Needless to say, take the title with a grain of salt. The lame duck, “Forever, Said the Duck,” lies smack dab in the middle of the collection. Perhaps editor/publisher thought no one would notice it there. Strictly dialogue-driven in a terrible way, I can’t recommend anyone bother with the silly premise and absurd imagery. I’m guessing it was meant to be humorous, but either there’s an in-joke behind this story that left this reader out, or the highbrow comedy far too erudite for me to relate. Regardless, that hour of my life would have been better spent elsewhere. While most others were merely passable or too cryptic for my taste, I very much enjoyed the sixth story in the collection, “Hardened Criminals,” which worked for me as a discussion about the tragic effects of urban violence and decay on family in a most unique and literal fashion. Overall, Lethem’s stories are full of interesting ways to explore familiar ideas, but they also feel unpolished, a bit too crass, unadorned, coarse. While many short story writers embrace cryptic or unresolved story arcs, they also must find a way to connect with the reader. I can certainly delve into the meaning behind “Vanilla Dunk” and “Sleepy People,” but if it’s not a great story, what does it matter of it’s sending a thought provoking message? Not a masterful collection, but worth checking out if you enjoy Lethem or speculative fiction. Keep expectations in check.
