This is a superb political/espionage/military thriller and the author is as good as any top thriller writer you care to mention, so I can hardly believe it has taken me so long to discover him. During the 70s and 80s I devoured Le Carre, Deighton and Forsyth, and Gerald Seymour is in the same category — realistic, hard-hitting, revealing and exciting — how did I only start reading him a year ago? Harry’s Game was Mr Seymour’s first published novel and, quite frankly, is hard to beat on any level. Set in the mid-70s, it tells the story of the assassination in London of a Cabinet minister by an IRA gunman and the British government’s response, which is to train and send in an undercover agent to sniff him out and kill or capture him. The agent will have to live among the enemy in the highly-charged and violent atmosphere of IRA-controlled Belfast, among people who are constantly on the lookout for suspicious strangers in their midst. To make the story even more complex and, I would suggest, more realistic, the agent is to be run direct from London because they suspect that an IRA sympathiser is leaking information from Army HQ in Lisburn to the Provisionals. This causes resentment among the army in Ulster against the ‘we know better’ attitude of their mainland colleagues in Intelligence. Only a very people know about the mission in an attempt to protect the agent, Harry Brown but this means, of course, that the squaddies in the streets don't know who he is any more than do the Provos. That is the plot and Seymour weaves the story around a number of characters, all of whom have depth and feel real: the agent and his handler, the permanent under-secretary in charge of the operation, the prime minister, the IRA assassin, his wife, the IRA chief, people Harry interacts with and various others. Seymour (who was an ITN journalist for fifteen years before turning to writing) must have known Northern Ireland well or did extensive research because he shows us the feelings of the people on both sides of the conflict, reveals their motivations for their actions and loyalties and doesn’t judge or take sides. He shows respect to all involved in The Troubles, which I imagine satisfied readers whether they follow the Union flag or the Irish Tricolour. Reading this book you get a real sense of the continual fear, anxiety, hatred and distrust felt by ordinary people in an extraordinary situation — a state they lived in for years, as well as the horrific violence that was never far from the surface. This took many forms, from IRA intimidation, knee-cappings and killings to British Army search raids on people's houses - kicking in doors, pulling up floorboards and generally making them feel violated and intimidated, children included. I will re-read this book because it is a powerful story with no flaws I could detect. I have read three of Gerald Seymour’s novels now and I loved them all. Anyone who loves a good espionage/military/political tale will love it. 5 stars.
