For what it's worth I recommend this book to those Quillette and Areo readers who claim to like reason and science and yet would dismiss both if it doesn't fit their worldview. I recommend it to those who argue that black slaves were better off then poor white and never stop to wonder why black people would risk it all for a glimmer of freedom. I recommend it to those who castigate Afro-American for not loving their country and segregating themselves from the rest of society. I recommend it to those who consider that the holocaust was worse than the enslavement of Afro-American and their subsequent exclusion from all sphere of society because according to them Jews had higher IQ. I recommend it to those who decry identity politics, lament over what is according to them the mistreatment of white folk despite their goodwill and yet never stop to think why identity politics can be so attractive to some and grew to the extent it did. I recommend to those who never wonder if their experience and understanding could be so removed from someone else that there could be many things about that someone's life and viewpoints they don't know that don't know. About a month ago, I read Clarence Thomas' biography. Thomas wasn't exactly pro-desegregation of schools due to his harrowing experience in a white school who accepted black children. At some point in the book, Thomas discuss school desegregation with a white lawyer. During this conversation, Thomas come to the shocking realisation that most white people believe that black people want desegregation because they want to mingle with white even though for most black people desegregation was a mean to get a better schooling system for their children. For me this little episode exemplify most white-black relationship. A saddening lack of understanding. I have no real hope that any of the people I mentioned would be moved by this book, but yet I recommend it nonetheless. What is likely to happen is that they will rate the book 1 star, and then proceed to explain how black people truly hadn't had it that bad and argue about our laziness, ego-centrism and lack of work ethic. By the way, I'm far from being pro-identity politics, pro-liberal or anything like that, but I'm tired of the double standard and hypocrisy I keep seeing. I'm tired of being asked to judge people as individuals and yet see that the same treatment is not given in return. I am tired of seeing people being accused of trying to guilt or of being a spoiled snowflakes whenever they want to discuss racism or discrimination. And I'm exhausted of being told that race doesn't matter or that we're pretty much all equal by people who in their daily life most likely have never been treated differently because of their race in the real world.
