To put it simply: PT: RATW: Comoros, Seychelles (!!!!), diving books, non-fic, books that broke me out of a reading slump WIL: 1) Cousteau writes like a dreamer. You can just FEEL it behind the words. He means everything he says, and he loves what he does so fully and so DEEPLY. I wanna find something like that. Just...wow. 2) UNFAZED??? I know he downplays the chaos because this isn't meant to be a dramatic account of his journey. It's meant to be more awe-inspiring. But my goodness he really just skips over those parts where his son almost DIED T W I C E in like a twenty-minute period. And then he talks about encountering aggressive/territorial animals like it's nothing? Like "oh that fish just took a chunk out of my buddy's finger ha ha so funny!!" COUSTEAU. MY DUDE. W H A T . It made the whole thing kind of feel like an adventure... like you could flip the page and suddenly, oh my, there's a whole new adventure that the crew aboard the Calypso can only escape by the skin of their teeth! Exciting!! 3) Underwater buddy. He gets it. He understands the need to just hang out at the bottom of the ocean for as long as your tank and decompression tables will allow. Not everyone understands but Cousteau really does. Excuse me while I schedule another dive. 4) Explorer Vibes TM. Same with Kon Tiki. It makes my heart experience a crescendo. 5) Inspiring. I wanna see the WORLD and look at the OCEANS and investigate AQUATIC GEOSTRATIGRAPHY and PAINT UNDERWATER like all the nerds aboard the calypso. GOD they're so cool. I mean, just imagine a life where you get to hang out on a ship all day and befriend the local fish and people around various island clusters. And they get to FILM ALL OF IT and DIVE to unprecedented depths can you hear me SCREAMING at how amazing that all is??? WIDL 1) no <3. This is flawless. Cousteau could run me over with his boat and push me into an anemone, a grouper, and a man-o-war (on separate and multiple occasions) and I'd still think he's the coolest person. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
