An exhaustive account of the “Legend” of the Bermuda Triangle, which is sort of the Holy Roman Empire of mystery regions—like the HRE, it's not really a triangle, not particularly mysterious, and often nowhere near Bermuda. Kusche was a reference librarian at Arizona State University who saw increasing numbers of requests for information about the Triangle. He decided to gather all the information he could, going to primary sources whenever possible… only to find fairly good evidence that the “Legend” is manufactured, misinterpreted, or just plain malarkey. The book is basically just an itemized list of the main incidents (as of the early Seventies, but I don't think the Triangle gets much play in the age of GPS), starting with the “Legend” claim and continuing with quotations from primary sources and Kusche’s own conclusions or summaries. Mostly he sticks to a “neutral point of view” but in some cases he can't resist throwing shade: The Legend failed to mention one “small” point about the disappearance of Al Snider—the gale that struck the small skiff as the men were fishing in the dark. [p. 147] Another time he just duplicates, for emphasis, a mystery-dissolving quote from a primary source. So not only is this a triumph of library science over pseudoscience and sensationalism, it has other merits. First, it demonstrates some key patterns in “unexplained” urban legend-making. The writers who promulgate these modern myths tend to be anomaly hunters, willing (perhaps unconsciously) to fudge details (like the location of the disappearance) or add cosmetic embellishments if it makes the tale spookier. They also tend to source each other rather than check back with primary references, which would clear up many of the so-called mysteries. This also means that they omit key details (like stormy weather) and proceed to assume that everything was otherwise fine. Second, it gave me an appreciation for how risky it was to traverse the Atlantic even until the Fifties and Sixties, and conversely, how amazingly safe traveling and shipping is in the modern day. Third, there are some genuinely interesting stories in with the otherwise mundane losses and wrecks. Including a couple happy endings! Overall this is a great book to read for anyone interested in the Bermuda Triangle, skeptical inquiry, urban legends in general, or even just fans of librarians. It might be particularly valuable in the current age of memes and fake news.
