Annals of Coincidence , entry #1: I met Kareem a few days after New Year's in New York, at a restaurant we both like. It was a Tuesday; I think it was around 1pm. It was one of those wonderful, finite number of weekdays when I didn't have to work. As we ate and drank beer, Kareem told me about the book he'd been reading and enjoying, The World According to Garp , by John Irving, which I've never read. Heard the title a few times over the years, heard the name John Irving, didn't know one had written the other. After eating, I suggested we go looking for a bookstore that I remembered being located around that general area. It was so cold out that after five minutes you wanted to go inside- somewhere, anywhere. But we found the bookstore; it's a long, narrow place below street level with wooden shelves and a trailer in the back. This old edition of Going After Cacciato by Tim O'Brien has the kind of cover you just don't see anymore. There's a stake planted in the ground with two arrows pointed in opposite directions: “Saigon”, and “Paris, 8,600 miles.” There’s also a line of soldiers, a large plant suggestive of jungle, a full moon, and a man’s face; it looks as if he’s dreaming or remembering these things. The only thing I've ever read by Tim O'Brien is The Things They Carried , which I remember thinking was just okay, except for the one unforgettable anecdote about a guy who somehow gets his American girlfriend to come over to Vietnam. She (the girlfriend) starts to spend time with members of the special forces, and after a few weeks goes out on patrol with them. Finally, she disappears; the boyfriend finds her in one of the special forces’ cabins, naked except for a necklace of human tongues. Tongues or maybe ears. I assumed this book was also nonfiction about Vietnam. Another thing about the store is that they don’t accept cards. Kareem offered to spot me $4, and I bought him coffee afterwards. What's that you say, a cup of coffee almost never costs $4? True enough; I'll have to buy him another coffee, or a $2 book, or two $1 books, next time I see him, which was supposed to be last week, but wasn't. Once we were seated, I opened the book and read the first few lines aloud: "It was a bad time. Billy Boy Watkins was dead, and so was Frenchie Tucker..." "Sounds like a novel", Kareem said. "Hmm." Is it a novel about a guy (Cacciato, I assume) who tries to walk from Vietnam to Paris? The possibility reminds me of two people: Richard Swanson, who a few years ago tried to walk from Seattle to Sao Paulo, for the World Cup, and was hit by a car and killed in Oregon; and Bowe Bergdahl, the soldier who walked off his base in Afghanistan and was held by the Taliban for five years. My sympathy is instinctively with someone like Bergdahl (not knowing the full story), and so my fear about this book is that it won't challenge that sympathy; and that Cacciato will be some romantic, childlike, Forrest Gump kind of character who is too pure for the war. We'll see. Oh, here's the coincidental part. A few days after purchasing the book (or after Kareem purchased it for me, rather), I noticed this little yellow banner along the top: "Winner of the National Book Award for Fiction." Sounds prestigious. And possibly something else that should have indicated to me that it's a novel. Just for fun, I went online and looked up the list of National Book Award winners, for fiction. Going After Cacciato won the award in 1979, beating out four other nominees, including... The World According to Garp , by John Irving.
