This was a fascinating and thoroughly enjoyable read. It was the most exciting book I have read in quite a while, and yet I have to stop short of saying that it actually meant something to me personally. It was the best book that I have read about the "Beat Generation", and I think it belongs in the reading list of any serious aficionado. Burroughs had a fascinating life, and the biographer had total access to the subject. To his credit, Burroughs had no interest in sanitizing his life to please the sensibilities of others. This is a true portrait of a remarkable but troubled man, a man whose life spanned a few generations of American culture and touched many other important cultural figures. I won't bother recapping any of his story here, because once I begin, where would I stop? Morgan chose an anecdotal format for his work, one full of the everyday ups and downs, moments of laughter, and interpersonal encounters. This does not read like a literary biography normally does. It sometimes seem like a very long Vanity Fair piece. I don't say this derisively, because the result is a book that is fun and enjoyable, and that also provides a full portrait of his subject. Morgan also has a clear-eyed view of Burroughs's work - the stunning significance of Naked Lunch, and the disappointing lack of importance of some of his other pieces. Burroughs was a man who experienced the dregs of society and life in this country - he was a petty criminal, drug addict, alcoholic, and homosexual. He was also the grandson of a famous inventor and the product of a comfortable upper middle class home, and he had a Harvard degree. He was literate, brilliant, humorous, and creative, but also destructive and more than a little crazy. The story of his son's life and death, which is told in great detail here, is heartbreaking. The things he experienced and the anti-repressive culture which he helped create make for some of the most interesting reading I have encountered. One comes to like the man, despite his terrible flaws, and to enjoy his triumphs and appreciate his wit. And yet one is also left with the impression of a somewhat reptilian mental explorer, a man who possessed genius and boldness, if not an overwhelming literary talent.
