“The ship was named the Bounty: I was appointed to command her on the 16th of August 1787.” -- William Bligh Mathematics, cartography and navigation were some of the skills needed to set out in sea in a square rigged vessel. It could take a lifetime of training to acquire. On December 23, 1787, sailing out of Portsmouth Harbor in Hampshire England was a ship called the HMS Bounty. This is the exciting story of what happened on that ship and why. In 1787, Sir Joseph Banks, botanist and president of the Royal Society of Science asked King George to undertake an botanical expedition to Tahiti and Jamaica. He recommended William Bligh as Captain as he wanted to collect breadfruit trees for transportation. The Commander William Bligh was born in Plymouth England. He was a Royal Navy sailing master (chief navigator) by age 22 and served under Captain James Cook whom he worshiped. However during the four year journey that he took with Captain Cook, the other officers did not like his personality. He was controlling, critical, temperamental, ambitious to a fault and could not understand his impact on other people. He always saw himself as a victim of incompetence and malicious plotting against him. He never had friendships of any kind. The Royal Navy considered this a small voyage and not very important. Making the trip even harder was one third of the ship was sealed off to make room for the breadfruit trees and the large crew of sailors and botanists, 46 men, were crammed in a small space. Another blow to the expedition was the Navy ordered Captain Bligh to sail around Cape Horn which was a treacherous shortcut to Tahiti during poor weather. Fletcher Christian was assigned master mate on the ship as age 23 and was recommend by Captain Bligh's wife Elizabeth for the voyage. Captain Bligh accepted him without hesitation because he had sailed with him before. Fletcher Christian was considered a “true gentleman” from a wealthy family and was considered well spoken even dynamic. From the beginning there was a particular strained relationship between the two men observers on the ship had noticed. Christian did have a dark side to his personality which some might call a borderline personality with mood swings. Also he had a brother who had been involved with an unsuccessful mutiny in the past so there was a bit of a rebellion in his family. Right from the beginning of the voyage, there was rough weather. Captain Bligh noticed there was two cheese wheels missing in the galley. He accused the sailors of thievery but the ship's cooper (man who make s wood containers to store food) reminded Captain Bligh that he had ordered the cheese to be delivered to his own home back in England. Bligh flew into a rage and threatened to flog the man. Things under Captain Bligh went from bad to worse and with Fletcher Christian's leadership, some of the men mutinied after spending five months in Tahiti. They forced the Captain and 18 men into the ship's tender and sailed away. Somehow despite the open sea, Captain Bligh managed to get safely to a Dutch settlement in Indonesia. He lost one man. The mutineers burned the ship after sailing first to Tubuai then back to Tahiti. Eventually most of them were caught, court marshaled, had a trial (some were hanged) and sent back to England. I highly recommend this book if you want to know the real history of what happened on that small merchant vessel HMS Bounty. I loved the story about the ship life as well as life in Tahiti. I was very happy to finally understand the real history, not the movie version, of this famous seafaring treachery. I found the book to be well-written and fascinating. Four stars.
