Bloodline is a 1977 novel by an American writer Sidney Sheldon. Sheldon is best known for his breathtaking thrillers, he is a master of crime-fictions, with novels having become international best-sellers and read by more than 30 million. Bloodline is one of the amazing stories Sheldon has ever written. This novel is about a girl named Elizabeth roffee, whose father (Sam Roffee) dies in a mysterious accident, leaving behind his multi-billion dollar business for her to inherit. She befriends her father’s best friend and business partner Rhys William, an attractive but mysterious man. As the plot progresses, the strong and intelligent Elizabeth soon figures out that her father’s death was no accident and starts the investigation of his murder. In the meantime her four cousins Anna from Berlin, Ivo from Paris, Helene from Paris and Alec from London, force her to take the company go public – an idea which Elizabeth turns down. Consequently, Elizabeth finds herself become the target of an unknown assassin and trapped inside a death maze. Sidney’s manner of keeping the suspense intact is commendable. This breath-taking novel portrays grey shades of each character, making it impossible for the reader to figure out which one of them would be the real culprit. What interest me most in this novel, is the way the characters portray a different power hungry personalities. “Because there was a hunger in me to see everything and do everything. I wanted to be everyone I saw. I wasn't enough for me. Can you understand that?” ― Sidney Sheldon, Bloodline Another fascinating factor to me was that Sheldon’s way of narrating the story by the murderer’s point of view, without disclosing the identity which makes bloodline more mysterious. I highly recommend this masterpiece since Sheldon with success fabricates yet one more action packed best-seller and enhance it with violence, rage, romance, betrayal, danger, greed, jealousy and power. This blood chilling novel can dazzle all readers. It is unquestionably a page turner novel, once you’ve begun reading. Bloodline is an impossible one to place down.
