4.5 stars Oh man… this was well on its way to being a 5-star for me… but the (delicious) OW drama situation was not resolved in a way that was completely satisfying. The OW does get what she deserves (I guess 😈) but the situation is taken out of the hero’s hands and he never REALLY has to confront his stupidity wholly and completely. He’s still suffering under a ridiculous delusion about the OW until the very last page despite all proof presented and literally every singe person telling him that he is a blind stupid man when it comes to her. At the end her viciousness is just pinned on “mental illness” and he leaves her to stew in her misery…. But there’s never a real moment of clarity, beyond that he finally sees her yuck mouth. 🤡 I wanted him to ground her under his heel as he tells her exactly what he thinks of her and then I wanted him on his knees groveling at the heroine’s feet in front of the OW. That didn’t really happen, but the h and H are very much in love and riding into the sunset at the end. I don’t agree with some of the reviews claiming he loved the OW for the whole book. He obviously starts to fall for the h as soon as he meets her and it becomes more and more obvious as the book continues that his feelings for the OW are greatly diminished, if not forgotten. Yes, she continues to be able to manipulate him, and he holds on to his delusions of her, for FAR too long, but I did not feel he loved her any longer fairly early in the book, even if he doesn’t recognize it yet. I typically close books where the H has truly been in love with someone else… but I felt like the author left PLENTY clues at the opening to show you that all is not as it appears (ahem *yuck mouth* ahem 👀🤡💀 - the line where he says he’s dying to see her smile… I died. Dead. 💀💀💀💀) . She creates a perfect evil OW you can love to hate. This is my JAM. 😍😍😍 Anyway, this was loads of fun, and up until the last chapter I had my 5 stars ready. But I’m a petty vindictive b*tch, and I want the Evil Cackling Whore OW to bleed out emotionally at the hand of the H and a grovel for putting his Sweet Angel h through a single moment of angst. This ending didn’t quite get me there. So it gets 4.5 stars ⚠️SAFETY SQUAD SPOILERS⚠️ - cheating? Depends on your definition. 🤷🏼‍♀️ - the H kisses the OW twice - once after the wedding (before sex or feelings with the h) and once as a “goodbye” (after sex and feelings with the h) - both times are initiated by the OW - loads of OW drama - the h assumes the H sleeps with the OW after they are married but he does not - the OW sets up a scenario where he’s drunk and she climbs in bed and the h walks in - he’s passed out and doesn’t know this is happening. - OM drama - all the men who meet the h become besotted with her and it drives the H crazy 😈 - no sharing - noncon and dubcon - domestic abuse - the H hits the h at the beginning of the book. He’s just lost his sh*t on her father for hitting her right before this, so it’s obviously out of character, but it does happen 🫤 - there are several instances of female characters being abused physically by men - miscarriage - attempted rape by OP - h is a virgin - H is experienced but we don’t get much info on his activities beyond the OW - one sex scene between the H and OW at the beginning of the book, before he meets the h - it’s not too terribly detailed
