A magnificent retelling of the events that transpired over the course of those thirteen days in October of 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis. The Cuban Missile Crisis had the world on the brink of nuclear devastation, with tensions reaching an all time high upon the United States learning of the Soviet Unions placement of ballistic missiles in Cuba. Being a witness and key participant of EXCOMM (Executive Committee of the National Security Council), Robert F. Kennedy shares with us the discussions and decisions pressing the committee and President John F. Kennedy over the course of those thirteen days. The tension and pressure that this group of individuals faced, along with the exemplary leadership President Kennedy displayed during this unfortunate moment in history, is retold with great clarity for us all to witness and participate in. After reading this memoir, I have personally formed a much greater appreciation for President Kennedy's leadership abilities and the overall responsibility that the President of the United States possesses in these times of crises. If not for President Kennedy's willingness to take into account the multiple opinions from his team, and his strategy of appeasement with Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, the world would most certainly have been faced with a far more grim and catastrophic result. It is important that we elect our leaders not just based on their accomplishments or perception, but based on their sound beliefs, visions and demonstrations of leadership. President Kennedy's determination to negotiate with his aggressor, rather than attack head on or threaten with intimidation, helped ensure a favorable outcome. I can only hope that if the world were to encounter another such event as this, our leaders will have the required temperament to not further escalate and handle in such a way as President Kennedy has. I highly recommend this particular account for anyone interested in a behind the scenes look of the handling of the crisis, or for anyone who would like to witness a true demonstration of leadership.
