3rd time reading this through. One of my favorite stories of all time, but honestly, I started to feel that I absorbed as much as I could for this time in my life. The thought occurred to me that I might read this once more before I die, and that’s it. We’ll see what the years bring. It is a beautiful story. Profound. Sometimes playful and outlandish in a Lewis Carroll sort of way. Honestly, some parts feel like just another Victorian nickel-novel. But MacDonald always manages to take it beyond its 19th century mew, and really succeeds like no author I’ve ever known in launching even beyond mere literature. You realize at some juncture that it’s about you—has always been about you. Some readers are disappointed in learning that MacDonald is only mildly interested in storytelling. He’s interested in reaching the reader, making a real connection in spirit, and writes with that goal in mind. It’s no surprise then that some accuse him of over-moralizing his tales, and losing track of the art, but I find him to be doing what he supposed to be doing with his stories, and using the art of storytelling to connect with people. He writes honestly, and in some deep paradoxical way I’m always convinced that he writes what he sees, and sees what he writes. Reading MacDonald always helps me to believe in greater things, in a fuller life potential, in a more beautiful God—in MacDonald’s world. The story is about a boy who meets North Wind, a lovely ancient female embodied in the bitter, wintry wind, who serves as an emissary from God. This is truly a story for the childlike, as is all MacDonald’s works, but will appeal to today’s child much less than in the 19th century. North Wind is a metaphor for suffering in the world that has some intelligence behind the façade of senselessness, and the wind is described as only one of the various forms that God’s messengers may assume to reach us, depending on how ready we are, to help us ‘become who we are’. As far as the origin of pain, suffering, and so-called ‘misfortune’, not even North Wind can say what it all means, acknowledging a more remote antecedent of sense behind the sense. The closest North Wind can come to understanding it all, and maybe the closest MacDonald can get to it, is as a song: "I will tell you how I am able to bear [the suffering of others], Diamond: I am always hearing, through every noise [and suffering], through all the noise I am making myself even, the sound of a far-off song. I do not exactly know where it is, or what it means; and I don't hear much of it, only the odor of its music, as it were, flitting across the great billows of the ocean outside this air in which I make such a storm; but what I do hear is quite enough to make me able to bear the cry from the drowning ship. So it would you if you could hear it." When little Diamond questions North Wind about why she isn’t as good to others as she is to him, the answer deftly slams the forward dialogue into reverse: Diamond: Why shouldn't you be good to other people as well as to me? North Wind: That's just what I don't know. Why shouldn't I? Diamond: I don't know either. Then why shouldn't you? North Wind: Because I am. Lest he give up there, North Wind ends with, “Besides, I tell you that it is so, only it doesn't look like it. That I confess freely. Have you anything more to object?” The first half of the book is a bit fantastical with Diamond’s meeting the wind and such, but the second half of the book is mostly preoccupied with Diamond’s earthly struggles. Though I liked the first half best, the second half is really the important part I suppose, since it is the practical application of North Wind’s revelations. I had an incident with this book that is worth mentioning regarding its value in my life. My dad had randomly picked this book off my shelf while visiting in Dallas, Texas. It fell open to these words: North Wind: "You are quite mistaken. Windows are to see out of, you say. Well, I'm in my house, and I want windows to see out of it." Diamond: "But you've made a window into my bed." North Wind: "Well, your mother has got three windows into my dancing room, and you have three into my garret." You can imagine my father’s confusion at reading that section, and later we all laughed as he read it out-loud and reminded me why he doesn’t read my sort of books! Dad passed a few years later—a sudden stroke—and my brother shared with me a dream he had a short time after dad’s death. Dad was asking him to close the window because it was cold outside. Jeremy asked, “Why?” “Because they’ll get cold,” dad replied. For me, and I know this is desperately reaching, it was a vivid reminder that dad had gone to the back of the North Wind, not suffering any longer; but we are still here in the cold, in a small corner of God’s greater Life, sheltered from some paralyzing horrors, but sheltered also from the truth at the foundation of the most unspeakable sorrows—endless warmth, and joy, and love. It was almost as if he was saying, “Don’t weep for me, weep for yourself that you have so far to go in such a chill wind.” Bottom line, this was a mesmerizing and profound tale, and the peace communicated (not merely spoken or written) brings such a sense of assurance to me of what God is doing with all…this. I need as much of these kind of intelligent, lovely reminders as I can get.
