What the hell, Dave? You've just gotten out of a six-month stretch in a Texas penitentiary—an experience that you do not care to repeat—after being imprisoned for Federal tax evasion, and thanks to your buddy Fred (the lawyer with the endless stream of lawyer jokes), you've got a sweet (if weird) gig as caretaker for a houseful of cats in Galveston, twenty-three feline beneficiaries of a widow who appears to have had much more money than sense. And your parole officer is a Bible-thumping harridan. So why would you want to mess everything up with your booze and your sex and your collection of subversive rock-n-roll from the Sixties? Well... "Work ain't natural," Marc said. "Amen to that," Dave said. —p.7 Through not much fault of his own—although Dave's passivity does contribute heavily both to his predicament and to his relative unlikeability as a character—his sweet situation does go rapidly (and humorously) awry. For one thing, Dave doesn't even like cats... As his online autobiography relates, Lewis Shiner had already led an eventful life by the time Slam was published in 1990. This novel really has suffered from its passage through time, though—I should have read it earlier (and now I'm not quite sure why I didn't). Remember when riding a skateboard was equivalent to being an anarchist? Me neither, although I'm willing to believe that 25 years ago, skateboarding really was an outsider activity, rather than the ordinary big business it's since become. Dave uses cassettes in a Walkman to listen to his music, and while the widow Johnson turns out to have had a computer, Dave doesn't even know what a modem is. He drives the widow's pristine K-Car , and uses her telephone—a wired device with a rotary dial, that is—because cellphones aren't even a thing to mention in passing. Dave also reads books from the long-departed anarchist publisher Loompanics (I was a customer myself, back in the day), research that helps him acquire, through appallingly simple means that would almost certainly fail miserably these days, a new identity—which is, though I probably shouldn't say so, crucial to the book's unrealistically happy conclusion. All these bygone elements seem jarring now, rather than evocative—I guess because they haven't yet been gone long enough to become period pieces, for the most part. Fonthill is, though—the bizarre all-concrete mansion where Dave's new skater friends hang out is a real place , although Shiner did relocate it from Pennsylvania for the novel. In Slam , Lewis Shiner had not yet found the science-fictional groove that would serve so well in Glimpses , which I thought was truly amazing , but even from this now-dated effort, it's already clear that he can tell a damned fine story.
