There was an anxiety within me for well over a hundred pages, because I didn't know how this book would unfold or if Nathaniel would come to understand reality, emotions, and psychology as they truly are, and if he'd reject the fantasies of a manipulative woman with undiagnosed Narcissistic Personality Disorder. Seeing Ayn Rand--from the throne in which she sat, perfectly chiseled in marble and draped in chiton and jewels--behind the longing 19-year-old eyes of a desperate, excellence-hungry Nathan Blumenthal was intriguing. Winding the path of Nathan's psychology discoveries, and the liberation from his groomer, was vindication. The tragedy of loss that ensued compelled me, and I sobbed. I savored every page, and I relished psychoanalyzing all of them: a mindfuck fiction can only dream of touching. I believe every word written. There could be some misrememberings or omitted information, but because of accidental human error, or because it was unnecessary info, or insulting, and not to paint a biased picture--but a meticulous, accurate one. For example, it's safe to assume part of the reason Nathan started to lose attraction to Ayn from the pedestal he placed her on, was because, without it, her unappealing appearance and postmenopausal atrophic vaginal walls weren't enough without the fantasy of her idealized greatness. If you are neither physically nor mentally attracted to the object of your affection, sex is not desirable. At least one must exist to enjoy the fruit. Nathan would never write about that, but I could infer it when he claimed her age was a deterrent to his attraction after conquering his idol sexually at 49. Nathan is extremely forthcoming, he knew what he was doing--embellishing the juiciest parts to entrance readers. I didn't need or want all the Ayn Rand sex detail, though. Her eerie mug is already off-putting. Nathaniel Branden is far more interesting than Ayn Rand, and smarter, more exploratory, and truth-seeking. He made real breakthrough discoveries. While Ayn was repetitive, and made rigid, unrealistic, unattainable fantastical stories that produced negative consequences that persist in the political system even now. She brainwashed the lower classes to accept their oppression with the delusions they could be rich and powerful as long as they were stoic, but it's not that simple. Success comes with a lot of luck and a lot of help, and Ayn had extreme amounts of both. She enabled the heartless to exploit the lower classes, and designed a vernacular to word-salad the pitchforks in the other direction. Nathan is not without his own flaws. As most neglected children who search--not just for purpose and meaning, but a purpose and meaning of grandeur--so did he. When you are love, acceptance, and meaning-deficient, there is no understanding of balance or stability. There is only an extreme desire for the strongest, most potent drug to desperately fill the void. These children develop a craving for adulation and to be seen as special in the most novel and unique ways that feel superior and above others, unbeknownst to them. Everyone wants to feel special, but not everyone wants to feel special to a radical degree. Ayn created such an attractant in her philosophy: the belief of an attainable specialdom that surpassed all others. Thus an influx of people who didn't know how to find a healthy version of their alignment. Children's minds are delicate. Enter Nathan's idealization: of a flawed woman who knew how to tailor a sentence in her favor during an age where mainstream information was school curriculum, news stations, and hearsay. Obtaining nuanced information meant reading countless, thick books or directly living in an experience. When the majority of people don't have the time or have access to information that can oppose Ayn, it means Ayn wins by default. Had there been social media and computers to search evidence of foreign lifestyles, anecdotes, and specific questions with specific answers back then, it's possible Ayn's legacy wouldn't have been much more than a Candace Owens or a Steven Crowder. Ayn had a lot of logistical advantages for her philosophy to thrive, because of the time period. She wouldn't have gotten away with her rhetoric as easily today. Luck. But Nathan didn't know that. No one did. Ayn's books and her philosophies taught people to suppress their emotions, that it's okay to suppress emotions, and to essentially selfishly live within illusions. There is some validity in her philosophy, but I'll save that for another review. Ayn had a monopoly on knowledge that wasn't easy to obtain or refute. Thus a control of minds who worshipped her. Thus an obedient cult and a molded hero. Nathan understood how age-gaps psychologically affect people, but they suddenly didn't matter to him so much when he met a beautiful woman ten years younger. The psychology differences still applied, but like Ayn's entire personality and philosophy: you can justify anything abhorrent and morally questionable with the right mental gymnastics. Aside from Nathan's idol-worship, age-gap double-standard hypocrisy, and suppression of emotions, which attributed to him disrespecting and hurting people, he also heavily relied on the use of women to feel better. It wasn't even a year before he was remarried after his second wife tragically died. He's a great example how men remarry quickly after divorce or death. Men cannot be alone with themselves. They need a mommy, maid, and counselor they can have sex with. There is never the "one" to a man. There's only the "one right now." He could not respect his dead wife for even a year. What really peeved me most of all, however, is that well after Nathan's brain was fully developed, well after he was aware he was no longer interested in Ayn, and well after he knew what he was doing was wrong and that he needed to stop, he still persisted in lying, deceiving, and gaslighting Ayn for years, and placed his burden of deceit onto Barbara. Then he proceeded to imply that Ayn's meds were the cause of her paranoia because it's a potential symptom. She was taking those meds for 30+ years. She became paranoid after Nathaniel gave her something to be paranoid about. Women can sense when men are not providing transparency. Their words do not match their actions. Our natural instinct, to protect ourselves, is to ruminate until one of us, us or them, gives us clarity. There is no one who will ever remain sane and emotionally composed while being emotionally abused and deceived. It cannot happen. Not unless the victim is born without the ability to feel or completely emotionally detaches. When a woman is "crazy," that's incognito for "a man drove this woman to insanity with his psychological abuse." Nathaniel Branden was a coward who used women so he didn't have to repair his own deficiencies directly. However, Ayn received the exact product she groomed. Her shamings, her scrutiny, her anger, her meticulously-crafted insults, deflections, misdirections, and arguments to achieve obedience she awarded with praise--like training a puppy--created a fearful little boy. Nathan's options were: 1. Obey Ayn Rand. 2. Face the wrath of Ayn Rand and Excommunication. He essentially was choosing between his life as he knew it, and all the comfort and hard work he put into it, or lose it all. I can understand why he couldn't be honest, but the woman in me still feels a sympathy for Ayn. I feel a sympathy for both of them. They were kids of their environment who became abusive adults. But childhood deficiency is only a reason to explain behavior, it's not an excuse. These personality traits and actions made me lose some respect for Nathan, and I ponder his credibility as a person applied to his psychologist profession, but I'm still very interested in reading his other books. His writing and thought patterns have impressed me. I really came to adore every minute mention of Frank. I was once told he was a himbo; Frank was not a himbo. My favorite quote, which I cannot seem to find, is when Nathan made a revelation about his observation of people and Frank corrected him that everyone is more than they appear. BRAVO. I wish there was more about his musings, but I understand he was mute because Ayn conditioned his obedience and silence. Of the few things he said and did, it was clear he was brilliant, and truly cared to nurture people and animals. He's the real rare gem. He had a natural talent for art, thrived in nature, and I feel incredibly sad that he felt he wasn't sufficient enough to sever himself from Ayn's hip. I get emotional thinking about it, but Frank was a grown man who still had responsibility for his own actions. He chose to be unhappy. He chose not to live in his alignment, as did Ayn. She did not choose to learn from her past mistakes and live in her fullest alignment. She scapegoated her wrongdoings onto everyone else--never deeply, inwardly reflecting--as she did her entire life. Ayn advocated self-awareness and responsibility, but in practice, she did neither. She deflected and rationalized outwardly, allocating fault anywhere but herself. She never evolved, and so died bitter and without the meaningful connections that her soul yearned for. You reap what you sow. One experiment I'd like to conduct after I become a psychology researcher: determine how much damage Objectivism has caused people individually and collectively overall, how much Ayn's philosophies realistically helped, and how much people have manipulated and deceived themselves and others just to maintain a belief in something that induced temporary motivational dopamine.
