While I suspect I read this years ago - or at least some of it, as at times it felt like a re-read - mostly it was long enough ago that I did not remember the stories. This book has five stories, sequentially placed in the Pern saga that McCaffrey so magnificently gifted us with in the 1970's -1980's. These were years in which 'fantasy' and 'science-fiction' were generally thought of as interchangeable and in which strong female authors and characters were hardly the norm. I feel the historic context is very important when reading this book which was written in the 90's at the hight of the fandom; it is totally unsuited for someone who is not very familiar with the original Pern books and longing for more. Dragonflight, published in 1968 was the first in the Pern series. It was ground breaking for it's time and was based on two novellas which won McCaffrey the Hugo and nebula awards. She was, I believe the first woman to do so. When I first read it there was very little fantasy or sci-fi by women for women. It was a writing era where men were REAL men, women were REAL women (with huge busts and yearning for the real men...) and small green creatures from Alpha Centauri were REAL small green...... oops.. sorry Douglas Adams got carried away there. So, pardon the small rant, but Pern was amazing for its time, it spawned fan clubs, devoted followers of the author and the genera and ultimately more than twenty novels and associated stories. Anne stopped writing eventually, but her son Todd keeps up the Pern tradition. What I am trying to work my way around to explaining is why I only gave this one two stars. The stories were ok, but not inspiring, not the I-can't-put-you-down experience I had with the early novels. Set hundreds of years before the first novel, these five stories explain how the colonists came to abandon the Southern continent where they first settled, how the holds and wyers were established and named and how come no one from Earth never came to check on the Pern settlement. And that is what it reads like; history laboriously written to 'explain' to clamoring fans who wanted more and wanted to know 'how it happened'. Personally, I never needed to know, not everything needs to be explained to the last molecule, a story can be just a story, without having to know all the history of an event. This first story (The P.E.R.N. survey) was about the ship who first found the planet, it is a pretty nothing sort of story, instantly forgettable and I really don't see why it was written. The only reason a publisher ever looked at it, I am sure, is because it was part of the Pern franchise. The second story ( The Dolphin's Bell) was set after the first threads fell and a volcano erupted, ok if you like sailing stories, it kind of follows on from The Dolphins of Pern , you see more of the Dolphineers. The characters never really take off, the romance is cumbersome and has no conclusion but it is not the worst story I ever read. The Ford of Red Hanrahan, set some years after the last one, is not a bad yarn in it's own right. Nothing special,but a small group of settlers breaking away on their own, kind of a nice story. No dynamic tension, but not bad. The Second Weyr, is probably the best story in the book for me; it tells the story of Torene and the establishment of Benden Weyr, it is the first one where I actually felt like the author was fully engaged in the story and characters. Not as vivid as some of McCaffrey's early characters, not groundbreaking or distinctive, but still quite enjoyable to read. The last one, I am pretty sure I read before, I don't think I much cared for it then either. About forty years after fist thread-fall, a spaceship picks up a rescue beacon and comes to check it out. Finding an isolated pocket on less than a dozen survivors ruled by a madman. The trained, experienced, commanding officer then proceeds to make a long line of ridiculous, idiotic choices and decisions culminating in a conclusion that the planet is abandoned. A five year old has a better command of logic than this story does. I read it through, but my main emotive connection to it was wanting to hit the commander over the head to see if there were actually any brains inside. So, a collection of stories, fine for fans, best suited for the uncritical and probably not much fun for anyone who has not read any other Pern books.
