I thought that strip was very apropos for a goodreads review. And, being that it is a goodreads review I thought it wise to both thank Andrews and McMeel books as well as publish this photo from page 4 of the book: Thank you, Andrews and McMeel for granting that permission. I'll try my best to honor the integrity laid forth by Watterson. I should start by saying I was banned from reading Calvin and Hobbes for a number of months when I was in 8th grade. Looking back on this, I'm not sure if the ban was enforced - or if my dad said something like, "If you keep this up, I'm going to have to ban those books." You see, he was a big fan as well, but I was emulating a few too many of Calvins behaviors. My dad taught at the junior high school I attended, so when the Science teacher walked down to his room and informed him I had marked that it was, "against my religion" to explain Ohm's Law on the unit test my dad wasn't too pleased. Especially since he was also in charge of the technology club . I had entered an event called, "electricity/electronics" that year. ...I think I made a battery tester. My test answers came about because of comics like this: or this one: or this one: You get the point... Needless to say, my dad and I had a little talk. He never told me exactly how the chat with my Science teacher went down, but I bet there was a lot of forehead slapping on my dad's part. "Congratulations guys, I'm one of you life's greatest accomplishments" is a paraphrase of a quote Calvin told his parents. There's no denying that Watterson is a genius. I mean, he has this vast collection of works that is simply incredible from both an artistic and philosophical standpoint. It's both poignant and critical at the same time. He knows his audience, but remained true to himself. (Granted, I never met the guy, so maybe he was pandering to the masses the whole time by claiming - or at least implying that he wouldn't pander to the masses.) The biggest proof of his genius though is that he's fallen off the face of the planet. There was a lot of Thoreau in Watterson's work, but it now appears that Watterson was even more Thoreau than Thoreau. As another example of his genius though, I'd like to offer the multiple punch line: In an era of one liners (more appropriately, in an era of one liners that aren't funny) Watterson gave us depth with his humor. The strip could have ended with Calvin not having time to turn in the paper - that would have been funny on it's own. But Watterson took us beyond that, with the revelation that Calvin was taking an ethics test. Brilliant. And you know, I think Watterson knows he's a genius. He knows we're the happy ignoramuses waiting to be fed by more of his bursts of brilliance. I take this comment to be introspective on his part: Well, we're waiting Thoreau. Come out of your cabin made with stolen nails and give us some more. The town's not far away. We're ready to embrace you again when you're ready. It's just difficult not to be over-eager.
