I'm a teenage girl who hates to read books, but I had to choose a book for class. I chose Treacherous Love because it looks like a pretty short book and I thought it was going to be about a teenager who has problems with love. It was an easy read and it was kind of about a teenage girl finding love. Have you ever had a crush on one of your teachers, and ever wondered if he or she liked you back? In Treacherous Love, a teenage girl has a substitute and ends up getting a crush on him and he likes her back. I liked this book because it has to do with teenagers close to my age that go through divorces that affect the whole family and I liked that it was easy to read. I liked that the book was an easy read because the chapters aren’t very long and the grammar and words were really easy to read. I also liked how it was easy to connect to because she is pretty close to my age and her divorce she went through was easy to relate to because her dad just walked out on her and her mother. For example, her dad walked out on her, and never called them, or came back to say sorry for just walking out on them. Divorce can be hard on teenagers and this book helps because it goes through how the girl and here mother get through it even when there's rough patches through it. If your not a fan of students having crushes on their teachers and then there teachers liking them back then you might not like this book. This can be a difficult topic because most people don't like the idea of that at all and find that very weird and inappropriate for the teacher to be acting that way toward the students. This might be especially true if you are a parent of a student around the age of 14 or if you children go to school in general. Maybe this wouldn't be as uncomfortable if the students were older than 14 years old. Most teenage girls would like this book because it deals with her liking the teacher but also like a boy her age and towards the end of the book she tries to decide if she wants to be with that boy or not. A couple of other things i like about this book was that it when over some ways how her mom got addicted to pills once her dad left then, it also went through so ways on how they dealt with the issue also and it showed how it affected the teenage girl as well when her was on the pills. This is why i believe that most girls and people in general might really like this book.
