"One Fearful Yellow Eye” is the eighth Travis McGee novel. If you are not familiar with this series, McGee lives on a 52-foot houseboat in Fort Lauderdale. He has no regular job, except, when he needs funds, he does “salvage work” and, by salvage work, he does not mean deep- sea diving for buried treasure. Instead, he does favors for friends or friends of friends who have lost or been conned out of something of value. His fee is fifty percent of the recovery, if there is one. His specialty is helping out wounded sparrows who the world has chewed up and spit out. These novels are filled not just with dark mysteries, but also philosophy and pondering. This novel, however, does not feature the ocean or the sands or the rolling waves crashing on the beach. McGee receives a call from a friend in Chicago who has no one else she can turn to for help and, reluctantly, he flies into Chicago and it seems, at first, that the entire city is against his beach bumming instincts. He is cynical about the flight and about the city. But, Gloria is a dear friend he had once rescued on a beach in Florida and he can’t abandon her. Gloria has married into big money with an older gentleman, a rich surgeon, who died after a short period of time. His grown children resented the presence of this young, vivacious woman in their father’s life and, when, it is discovered, after his death, that his vast estate had been liquidated and disappeared into thin air, relations between this family are not good. Gloria, who barely has enough to last a few months, has no idea what happened to all the money and her late husband’s children think of her as a conniving she-devil who siphoned all the funds out and is ready to disappear with some boyfriend from her past. Bit by bit, McGee sets out to discuss the matter with the principals involved and unravels family secrets and bitterness and psychological problems. There are scandals upon scandals hidden there. Much of the book moves slowly with character development as McGee comes no closer to the answer, but, by the end, events move swiftly and things unravel quicker than he can keep them together. This is yet another terrific entry into the series and, in the end, quite satisfying even though the image of the fearful yellow eye will be left etched upon your memories.
