This was a surprising book for me, in that sections that I thought I would really enjoy were not interesting me and the sections that I thought that I would have to slog through were incredibly enjoyable. Since I had such an uneven response, I think I'll take it section by section. Section One: Planetary Environments I was happy to see that my Intro to Astronomy class that I took in my sophomore year of college was still with me, but this was not a very interesting section for me. It did a good job of presenting the basic outline of planet structure and the necessities for life. This section had less room for interesting tidbits than other sections. Section Two: Aliens This was a great section. Starting at the beginning with a look at the Star War universe and giving us a reorientation into the variety of life on our little planet, the author focuses on discussing the possible evolutionary development of several of the alien forms in Star Wars. Section Three: Droids This was actually the section that I was dreading. Robots don't interest me in the least. However, I found the explanations as to the problems of emotional impairment and particularly the section of understanding and evaluating human speech to be fascinating. Her drawing connections to those who have suffered brain damage in the areas that control those parts was apt and well done. I also enjoyed the in-depth analysis of the three main droid characters: Threepio, Artoo, and Vader. Section Four: Spaceships and Weapons I tried with this section. I just could not get into it. The only thing I liked was the short subsection dealing with Han's 'parsec' mistake. Sometimes apologists can be so inventive. Section Five: The Force I was disappointed in this section, probably because I was hoping for a good look at blending mysticism with science. I don't think the author failed to deliver on that as much as she had other goals in mind. I did enjoy the brief subsection on hypnosis and some of the explanations for the abstract notions were very good. All in all, I thought that this was a great book. It relates scientific concepts well and is obviously well versed in the Star Wars universe.
