The fifth-highest community review of this book on Goodreads is by a gentleman who awarded it one star, alluding to its "lack of plot" and comparing it unfavourably to "Dan Brown's Robert Langdon series". I don't generally like to belittle other people's opinions, or to play the intellectual snobbery game, so I'll just note that the reader in question wasn't the target audience for this book, and might more profitably be directed toward a different section of the library altogether. But a wider statement about society on the whole being not quite clever enough, or reflective enough, to appreciate Joy Williams's caustic genius, wouldn't be out of place when reviewing a book sizzling with barely tamped down misanthropic rage. At heart, this is something like an environmentalist novel, although its bleak vision doesn't really allow for messages of any type. It simply mirrors an America full of fast-food chains and tchotchkas, addicted to television and oblivious to death. It sprawls over natural habitats with tarmac and air-conditioning, placing its non-human victims in abattoirs, shelters or museums, while congratulating itself for its sophistication, drunk with venal stupidity. Ms. Williams's cool, precise prose combines Don DeLillo's alien-like coldness with Hunter S. Thompson's righteous anger. The book's major characters are all teenage girls who have suffered tragedy. Alice, orphaned, lives with her slightly batty grandparents. Corvus's parents have drowned. Annabel has recently lost her mother in a car crash, and her father (the focus of the book's wittiest and most merciless scenes) is haunted by his late wife's ghost, who takes pleasure in running him down and ridiculing his budding romance with his gardener, Donald. In another side plot, an eight-year-old girl named Emily Bliss Pickless (sic) accidentally blows off her mother's boyfriend's genitals (and buries them) and befriends a billionaire. Plot exposition seems like a waste of time here, though: what makes this book so great is how funny it is, and its trenchant, subtle intelligence. Classical references abound. Two cryptic passages begin parts one and three, providing plenty of symbolism for those keen to look deeper. Every page flows with a patter of sparkling one-liners which probe through modern day humanity's delusions of success, and skewer the bromides which make us feel we are special, kind gifts to this planet. An aide at a retirement home for the especially decrepit, Nurse Daisy, encapsulates the book's theme in her stilted, oracular way: “It’s better to be dumb,” the nurse said, “than to speak from a heart that’s all darkness and distraction. I’m agreeing with you. I suppose we should go in. Are you ready to enter our little charnel community, not as docent or guide but as a living member? Do you vow to keep your wits among the witless? Do you commit yourself to pondering ceaselessly the uselessness of caring, the uselessness of love, that great reality for which all else must be abandoned?”
