Warning there may be spoilers for in this review. I find it hard to say which is my favourite Heyer Regency. When I read Arabella that is my favourite, but when I read Cotillion that is my favourite.& I have only just reread Cotillion for the umpteenth time, but maybe Cotillion is my true, absolute love. The point both books have in common are the heroine. Both are pretty brunettes with kind hearts & no real money of their own. Society's rules are less important to them than a social conscience (Arabella) and helping friends or family (Kitty) The books main difference is the hero. Robert from Arabella is a true Regency hero - dashing, handsome, witty & autocratic. In Cotillion on first reading I expect Jack to be the hero - he is Robert without money &, as it turns out, without a heart. GH has decided to turn romance conventions on their head & gives us Freddy Stanton, the fool of the family, well dressed but of only average good looks. He may not want to get involved in the impulsive Kitty's schemes, but it never occurs to him not to help her when her well intentioned plans go awry. & Freddy's true nature is shown by the way he keeps a protective eye on his siblings Meg & Charlie. He may not be too bright, but this Pink of the Ton is absolutely at home in his world. Kitty comes to realise this & Freddy's good nature are far more important & Freddy's family come to value him too! & this line, simple as it is, is one of the most romantic I have ever read; “What I mean is, like you to have everything you want. Wished it was me, that's all. A Cinderella story with heart. Edit: Still my favourite GH Regency. I'll just add Kitty gains not just a kindly husband, but a loving family - which she has never had before. Lot of layers to this story. & look what I found online Adorable Edit 2: & my third read since being on GR of this, still my favourite Georgette Heyer Regency - which of course means this is my favourite Regency of all time! As many times as I have read this novel *mumble, probably around sixty times!* the witty sparkling dialogue and very original plot has me smiling right the way through! If I was stranded on a desert island, this would definitely be one of the novels I would want with me ! & on to reread number four - & that is just since I have been on Goodreads! As Kate Fenton (from the Daily Telegraph ) writes on the back cover of my copy; A writer of great wit and style...I've read her books to ragged shreds. I'm on my second or third copy of most of them! Enjoy!
