Pre-review: There are a total of 127 people waiting in line to borrow Dune from the library, so I made do with requesting the Chinese translation of the second book instead. XD My review for Dune vol. 2: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... My review for Children of Dune: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... My review for book 6 Chapterhouse: Dune: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... Premise: some 12 years after Paul Atreides defeating the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, a few parties banded together to bring Paul (now the Emperor) down, Paul's legal wife, Princess Irulan, seemed to be among the conspirators. Well, the context in the volume vaguely reminds me the Stars Wars trilogy and its prequels: a young dude getting awesome power in a desert, the woman he loves winding up dead giving birth to his twin, etc , and I'm not saying it in a bad way. XD I like the internal struggles Paul, the main character, has with himself, Mr. Herbert had done a believable character study on a character who is worshiped by most of his subject as a living god but at the same time he still has much self-doubt, he still struggles to protect himself and his loved ones (and from time to time he failed to do so), he also struggles to do the right things despite having awesome psychic(?) power and military power at his disposal. Still, I am surprised to see Irulan doesn't play as much role as I expected in the story (she is nowhere in sight in the later part), thankfully she does more things in Children of Dune . Alia, Paul's younger sister, on the other hand does have a more center role to play in this story as a teenage girl, I enjoy her interaction with her brother. Dune Messiah doesn't have many action scenes (just a few scenes) so the tension isn't as high as the first book, but I do like the topic of court intrigues and how even a great ruler can be dragged down by politics and his own power (e.g. Paul's ability to see the future). There are plenty of open battles in Dune , but in the second book the danger comes more from the endless schemes from the different factions. Dune book 1 tells a story with traditional heroism as its main theme, then in the second book the author seems to have taken a step back and done a full analysis on the many side effects of heroism and the inbreeding of religion and political power. The author seems to be telling us: even when the ruler has the best intention at heart, the result can still be disastrous for himself and everyone under his rule. PS: I continue to find the description of the desert planet's eco system, the different POVs from various characters, the practices of the tribes (although the gender role stereotypes in this fictional tribal society is hardly endearing) and the schemes dished out by the different factions to be well constructed and intriguing. PSS: the 2021 Sci-Fi epic movie, Dune Part 1, is pretty damn great! Do watch it! Review after the re-reading: (1) I like the Alia's scenes, although I am not that fond of her (kind of) mooning over Duncan Idaho. (2) The court intrigues continue to be the highlight of the story. (3) Pretty funny to see Stilgar giving out marriage advice about Alia to Paul.🤩 (4) Btw, I was rewatching Dune Part 2. (5) I feel the final conflict is... kinda low-key-ish well done? (6) I like how Alia's struggles with herself is highlighted in the story. (7) I am glad that in the movie they changed the term 'Jihad' into simply Holy War, Jihad is a term too wildly misunderstand in our time.
