This book is pretty cool. One of Dylan's most mythical albums is the Basement Tapes. Most fans know the story: After the fabled motorcycle accident disabled the dude and turned him into a recluse he healed and reared a family somewhere in Woodstock. Sometime during this period he and The Band (who were working on their first album) bided their time in the basement of the big pink and jammed the night away. The recordings done on a simple reel to reel tape machine, were then bootlegged heavily, other bands then covered some of the tunes and The Band kept a few for themselves. Because of this interest a two record set was eventually released. But what of the rest of it? Of course the best tracks were picked and mastered, but when it's Dylan and the band, there have to be more gems. The harder core of Dylanites have probably heard the sprawling 4 disc booty equivalent. It's a monster! Some tracks come up like three or four times and others are just extensive ramblings. I love the sucker because it's so goddamn heavy. Greil Marcus felt the same way. Marcus is an established Dylanologist and has written enough Dylan stuff to fill a fat farmboy's belly. It only makes sense that he'd pour his obsessions over these tracks and come up with some kind of answer. This is what Dylan fans do...try and figure the man out. His response is this book. It takes the ramshackle lyrics and stuffs them into the cultural epoch of a coal miner, horse driven and train-stitched America. Racism, oppression and lots of dust cover the idealogical landscape. Now when i read the book i really really tried to "grok it with fullness" but it's just so goddamn heady. I listened to tracks and read passages over and over again, but instead of being constantly enlightened i found it just jarred the flow of the read. Still, there were times when i was totally enraptured and some of Marcus' ideas still permeate when i listened to 'da tapes, but i probably would have just had other eurekas of my own. So although this book didn't give me the keys to, it still successfully brightened up the basement for me. It gave the album a bit more of a narrative, which is, as i opened up with, pretty cool.
