Recommended for all American Millennials... also for those whose menfolk and womenfolk fought, died and were wounded in America's unnecessary wars or wars fought for the wrong reasons (Chapter 6)... and for those who appreciate a good novel and the nuances of the English prose and the poetry of its Impact... "Never underestimate the nightmares of men." (Jonathan Ferrier~Chapter 20) in reference to America's Divine Destiny ~ that of empire building, a euphemism for 'meddling' with other nations and calling it 'delivering them from Oppression' (also Chapter 17). 1901... in the small town of Hambledon, near Philadelphia there lived a beautiful girl in a castle on an island shaped~like a heart aptly named Heart's Ease. It was built by a pretentious man who had more money than sense... who had it constructed, contrary to popular belief, not for his wife but for his daughter as a foolish indulgence as well as an ivory tower to keep her incandescent beauty and innocence selfishly to himself... for he told his daughter that she must not despair if people stayed away from her because she was plain. He was proved 'right' when Jenny grew taller than most of her schoolmates... making her more awkward and more shyly reticent than usual. Jenny was sixteen when Pete Heger died and then her silly mother married Harald Ferrier (her third husband) a man many years her junior. Myrtle herself, since she was older than both her husbands died of a stroke when Jenny was almost twenty... her doctor was Harald's older bother... and from then on, Jenny's attitude towards the brothers changed. If there was a Beauty (albeit an unaware one), there was also a Beast... his name was Jonathan Ferrier, the older bother of Jenny's stepfather and a most dedicated physician, for his only concern were the health and well~being of his patients. Jon's stubborn nature and overt disdain for any human weakness like hypocrisy and his sledgehammer uncompromising attitude and in publicly denouncing those he called "quacks" for their refusal to adapt sterilization measures as safeguards against germs and microbes and thus against infecting their patients... this earned him several enemies from his own colleagues (the older ones) of the medical profession as well as from his own patients... their family and relatives. So when he was falsely accused of a botched abortion that killed his wife, his ugly reputation in the tiny town of Hambledon condemned him as a Monster thus prompting his lawyer to seek a change of venue to the city of Philadelphia. He was acquitted but his enemies did not forget nor most of the town. Jonathan Ferrier was the symbol of the emerging nation of the United States of America ~ full of Promise... Idealistic... Unforgiving of human weakness but also flawed by those same weaknesses... also severely Misunderstood... his good qualities were what the Founding Fathers envisioned for their fledgling nation. Is America... her ideals and directions... still the same Today as in the start of the 2oth century despite advances in all levels that would constitute a nation? Stark truths and reality here as well as some unforgettable Impactful quotes.
