I picked up Snare of Serpents because the author was Victoria Holt. "Jean Plaidy, also known as VICTORIA HOLT" is the author of a wonderful series of historical novels about the British royal family. To be honest, I was a bit disappointed by Snare of Serpents. I felt it really a mishmash: one part gothic romance, one part country-house mystery, with a bit of historical intrigue on the side. We begin in gothic romance mode. We are in Scotland, sometime before 1898. Young Davina Glentyre (sounds made up, doesn't it?) lives an idyllic life surrounded by her beloved family and servants. She has not a care in the world and is a very happy creature. Then her beloved mother dies, and her life changes. Her father becomes strange and remote, and loyal old servants are replaced with sinister new ones. She abruptly gains a step-mother. Davina finds solace in her friendship with young, poor Jamie North. Naturally, their courtship is forbidden. Then Mr. Glentyre is found poisoned. The sinister mood dissipates, as we shift gears and begin a conventional mystery. Who killed Davina's father? Was it his wife who stood to inherit? Was it his daughter, who stood to be disinherited? What did the disappearing maid have to do with it? Davina is accused, brilliantly defended by a young lawyer, and released with the verdict of "Not Proven." She will have to live with doubt and suspicious all her life. Switching back to a gothic world... Much like Jane Eyre, Davina flees to a caring family in the country. They are short on money (though not destitute), but long on love. Davina spends her time quietly and happily, engaged in simple, wholesome country pursuits - until her past catches up with her. Mr. Lestrange, a mysterious gentleman from South Africa, seems to suspect her past. Davina decides to flee again. This time, she takes a position as a teacher in South Africa and we are treated to a brief travelogue featuring immigrant conditions aboard ship, and the conflicts between the Boers and the British. In South Africa, romance and mystery meet as Mr. Lestrange reappears with his sickly, timid wife Myra, his grand mansion, his frightened servants, etc. Davina soon learns that Mr. Lestrange's first wife died tragically. Was it murder? These myriad mysteries are resolved, as well as Davina's love life, in a rather awkward and mundane manner. The mysteries were nothing special, and the characters rather boring: The Villain, the Egoist, the Eccentric, the Loyal Friend, etc. The setting was nothing spectacular, either. Until the Boer war came along, I was not even sure which era I was in. We are in Scotland only because we are told so. On the other hand, there was nothing truly bad in it, and I found Snare of Serpents to be an agreeable time passer.
