Alright. Let's see if I can get myself back into the headspace that befell me as I read the final 30 or so pages of this last night. [Spoilers ahead] Of course these last pages included a quote from Hesse's "Demian" [one of my favorite books]. It tied the whole thing together, and also solidified that, yes, I really really really do like this novel, in spite of my annoyance with Johnson's chronic tendency to describe female characters in that typical white-male gaze manner. Then again, I can *almost* excuse it because those descriptions were from the gaze of his white-male characters. Nonetheless. I do really really really like this book. And there were too many compelling factors to sell it short at four stars. So, those factors. Number one, the prose. He managed to write a novel that involved both post modernism in addition to super stream-of-conscious-y poetic, gorgeously detailed, gothic prose. This was possible, I think, because of the book containing multiple perspectives - even though the perspectives were often written in third person (as in, sections of the book focused on one character and then another), the style of prose changed subtly among these characters. Basically, number two, Johnson breaks rules in this book, but makes it work. He did things that don't make a ton of sense structurally - jumping in time to the future sporadically, beginning the book with an emphasis on a character whose focus/perspective is forsaken early on (you start the book thinking he is the protagonist. You end the book realizing he just drove the plot, puppeteering much of what happens behind the scenes). And ends the book on none of the characters of focus. Number three, it utterly keeps its promise as a "California Gothic." Re: the California part - I've been living in San Francisco for over 7 years now. I am not sure how I ended up here, and I am *still* not sure how to make sense of this place. I am not totally grounded, I have yet to completely land. The novel's setting is in Central-Northern California, places like Point Arena and Gualala and Jenner, north of San Francisco, an area I've taken a couple road-trips to, and have both fond and complicated memories of. Anyway, characters like Navarro and Van Ness seem to have landed in a similar position to this land. Somehow here, destined without fully knowing why or how, and using whatever brain-power they have to make sense of a place so absurd (Van Ness: nihilistic philosophy. a place to end and die./Navarro -cynical comparisons to his former life, his former land. trying to use his work and falling in love to make it all bearable - both of which ultimately fail.) The confusion, the dreamy absurdity of the place is represented through recurring themes of winding roads, the out-of-place huge Buddhist temple (this part is important - will discuss soon!), the backdrop of drugs and marijuana in people's bodies and stories and the wind, the fog shielding reality and sporadic thunderstorms rebirthing characters and driving narratives to a new place, a surfer's impulsive, ~far-out~ decision-making, a guru that concretizes the piece as one both gothic and magical-realist. The next factor: Synchronicity or something like it. My undergraduate creative writing professor, Warren Hecht, introduced me to Denis Johnson when he assigned Jesus's Son in my first year creative writing class, at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Another strange place I somehow ended up in, but as opposed to California, mostly felt at home in. Anywho. Something about that struck me, that I picked this book out at a bookstore in Berkeley, having known the author from another strange place, and that now I'm somehow here. But to be honest, I'm not fully just *somehow* here. I moved to Berkeley from Michigan to partake in a full-time work-study program at a Tibetan Buddhist meditation center. Now. This is the wild thing. That ginormous strange Buddhist temple that runs as a theme throughout the book? I am 99% sure he is referencing a place called Odiyan, built right around the setting of the novel, by the volunteers of the organization that brought me out here in the first place. Now. Just. What in the heck. This isn't a landmark. This isn't an organization or a place many people, aside from some locals near Odiyan, know about. It really is an enigma. And it feels even more enigmatic and synchronous given what led me to pick out this book in the first place. I can't totally wrap my head around it, still. Lastly. It becomes apparent, to me at least, that this whole book is rather rooted in not just nihilism, but, by the end, Jungian and Buddhist thought (speaking of synchronicity and Buddhism). This becomes particularly apparent when Hesse (whose works were directly influenced by Jung and Buddhism) is referenced at the end of our protagonist Nelson Fairchild's journey - an awakening - an understanding of the secret plot working against him throughout the book, and also a deeper confrontation with life, death, Truth itself, as he struggles to write his final philosophical words with his own blood as ink. Like Hesse's stories, the novel capitulates in the hero's coinciding awakening and death. This isn't just some noir with kooky characters and a lot of action. I imagine a lot of people could read this at such a surface-level and perhaps appreciate Johnson's prose but not his story. I also imagine that familiarity with the setting makes for a deeper understanding. Then again, people should know better! The book's powers and depth materialize more and more as the story goes on, and there's a lot to still analyze and appreciate even now. I recommend the book to fans of existentialism, fans of Hermann Hesse, fans of gothic literature, fans of poetic prose, fans of or those curious about Central-Northern California, fans of 1990's hippiedom... I also deeply recommend that the Coen Bros. adapt this into a film. How do I get in touch with them?
