Scholastic bends to peer pressure from the readers, and brings Stacey back to Stoneybrook in this book. This is the first time any of the baby sitters have dealt with the divorce of a parent in real time, so to speak. Instead of hearing about it second hand, as Kristy or Dawn tells you their memories about it, we are along for the ride as Stacey processes and deals with her parent's divorce. Things I remember from reading this as a kid: Stacey calls the marriage counselor a "divorce counselor" making me think that there were both kinds. I know now that there really is no such thing as a divorce counselor expect in the eyes of kids who are resentful that marriage counseling didn't work for their parents. Stacey wishing she could beam herself to school, like the characters on Star Trek. Whenever I wish I could beam myself anywhere I think of the BSC, not Star Trek. Stacey being reluctant to discuss with Claudia and Laine her decision about which parent she wants to live with. It struck me as a very mature conclusion to come to, to realize that you need to make important decisions that will affect the rest of your life on your own, instead of being influenced by friends. Stacey deciding to go back to Stoneybrook in part because there she is considered "one of the coolest kids around". Even as a kid this struck me as incredibly pathetic. Things I've considered since reading this as an adult: Stacey says she doesn't think of the Walkers, her neighbors and baby sitting charges as black, just as people. What a stupidly earnest, and ignorant white girl thought. I either had forgotten, or hadn't realized that Stacey's mother spends thousands of dollars on jewelry because she's bored. Stacey's father is furious when the credit card bills start coming in, and tells Stacey's mother that she's a spoiled brat, and to do something useful with her life which makes me want to stand up and cheer. Why doesn't Stacey's mother work until after her divorce? Now that I think about it, she is the only mother of a BSC member who doesn't work, and doesn't really have anything else to do. Mallory's mother seems to work inconsistently (she does temp work, especially when Mallory's father is out of work) but she does volunteer work, and she has eight kids to supervise. Jessi's mother isn't working at the time of this book (although she goes back to work later in the series) but she has a baby to look after, and a daughter who takes intensive ballet lessons in another city. Stacey's mother has no children other than Stacey to look after, and Stacey is old enough to be pretty independent. As far as I can tell she doesn't do anything extra except shop for expensive stuff. Stacey is frustrated that her parents can't tell her what their problems are. I can sympathize with Stacey, but I do like that her parents stick to their instincts to keep the problems in their marriage vague. Eventually Stacey will mature enough to figure them out for herself, but it's better that she doesn't have memories of her parents bad-mouthing each other. The book is told from Stacey's point of view so there is no way to know exactly what happened with her parents, since the reader only knows what Stacey knows. However, an adult reading between the lines, and knowing something about adult relationships, can tell that Stacey's parents have probably had marital problems for years. The resentment Stacey's mother has of Mr McGill's long work hours did not just happen over a few months, nor did Mr McGill's frustration with Mrs McGill's shopping sprees. Stacey's unexpected diabetes diagnoses was probably a distraction for a few years, but it's impossible to keep those kinds of issues a secret for long. I imagine Stacey's mother being something of a trophy wife -- pretty, fashionable, charming. Stacey's father was a young, ambitious corporate Wall Street type, a stockbroker that made a massive salary, and year end bonuses. Their marriage fell apart when Mrs McGill realized that someone who makes that much money has to work long hours to continue doing so (possibly working with a pretty, young assistant), and Mr McGill realized that a trophy wife is really only good for. . . shopping and sitting around the house. Later in the book Stacey is angry that parents don't stay together anymore like "in olden times". In "olden times" couples who should have gotten divorced often stayed together for years due to religious or legal taboos. They were unhappy, and their kids were unhappy. I think divorce is a necessary evil, something sad, but true, although I think Stacey's right about rewriting marriage vows. No one should have to feel pressure to be with someone til death. Stacey then says she feels embarrassed by the divorce, even though she knows it wasn't her fault. It hadn't occurred to me that a kid whose parents were getting divorced would be embarrassed, especially since divorce is so common now, but I can see how it would happen. Judy, the homeless woman makes an appearance in this book. I thought it was brilliant of Ann M Martin to write the exchange Stacey has with her. When Stacey tells Judy that her parents are getting divorced the only thing Judy says is "Crying shame" and Stacey can't figure out what she means by that. Is she being sincere? Sarcastic? Seeing this news as a sign of the end times? So much of this series focuses on how hard Stacey's life has been, with her diabetes, stays in the hospital, her parent's divorce, and having to move around so much. While none of this is easy to deal with I don't really think Stacey has much to complain about, and I was always sort of mad that the BSC thought Stacey had such huge problems. I guess those are huge things when you live in a town as happy and wealthy as Stoneybrook. I liked that Judy's answer is cryptic enough to make spoiled, self-pitying Stacey realize that her life isn't that bad. I think it's interesting that no one in the BSC series ever has a separation, just as no one ever lives together without being married. They are always married, then divorced, but no one ever has a trial separation and no one ever moves out until the divorce is final. It seems completely stupid and arbitrary to go to so much hassle and unnecessary conflict.
