Finally, I finished reading this. For my book club's India journey, we read this for "Northern India". This novel is set in Punjab and focuses on a Sikh family. I've never encountered such a setting before so that was interesting. But boy was this book just as wordy as our "Southern India" book choice, The Forgotten Daughter . 'What the Body Remembers' is set right before the Partition of British India. We meet Roop, a teenage girl from a Punjab Sikh family, who is quite naive and materialistic and whose mother recently passed away. One of Roop's ear is deaf, so her father is really worried if he can give her away for marriage. It all depends on her kismat, you see. Roop ends up marrying the landlord, so that her father can waive his debt and not be burdened with providing another dowry (Roop's sister recently got married too). A big theme in this novel is polygamy and the rivalry between the old wife and the new, young wife. I guess this should also symbolize colonial British India and the newly emerging countries India and Pakistan. Understandably, things get very uncomfortable. I just didn't like Sardaji. He is a man full of conflict and arrogance: on the one hand, he wants to be a modern and respected civil engineer, but on the other hand he wants to take a second wife who can bear him children. Postcolonial contradictions and being torn between two different cultures. Nevertheless, I didn't like Sardaji and the crazy patriarchy that goes on in India until this day is really frustrating. This really comes to life in this novel and the reader can see that most of the information we get about the events at that time are through the male characters. Because the females were so restricted. I learned a little bit about Sikhism and I got a way better view of the Partition period from this novel rather than Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children . Unfortunately, it took me almost 200 pages to get used to the writing and the names of the characters. Also, I found the book's title several times in the novel, but I still don't get what it is supposed to mean. Divide et impera [...] That was the policy, divide and rule. Separate electorate for Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs, remember? The Hindu and Muslim faiths were tools, the instruments by which you British divided us, then stood back complaining how we Indians fight, never giving you any peace.
