Pat Garrett was 6’ 5” - a very tall law man - and is best known for arresting and later killing Billy the Kid. “Journey of the Dead” is a bit of an immersive character study that shows us Garrett’s place in the old west. The long, at-times engrossing and at-other-times creepy narrative puts us in the shoes of a man who likes to kill people, who wants the kills to be justified, and wants to be an unattached, respected, and wealthy man in the west. Unfortunately for Garret, as more time passes from the Billy the Kid shooting, it becomes harder and harder. The west is tamed between 1870-1905 and civilization doesn’t quite work for a stubborn guy like Garrett who was used to having the veneer of righteousness when carrying out his duties consequence-free. There’s a sequence early in the novel when a badger eats some of Garrett's chickens at night. After a few tries to trap the thing he eventually figures what gap in the henhouse it is using and he just sits and waits for it, shooting the badger dead when it sneaks in the next time. Later in the novel, as he’s determinedly but happily making his way across a harshly barren desert landscape tracking an outlaw, he reminisces on the badger kill and admits to himself he didn’t kill the badger to protect his chickens. He killed the badger to kill it. We're left thinking that this man really just wants a world where there are bad guys guilty of breaking the law so he could hunt them down and kill them justifiably. Hunting and killing are what he is best at, but he doesn't want to be the bad guy. This might be that mystical "gray area" that sits between black and white, I guess. Further highlighting the conflict of morality in a character like Garrett, he is haunted throughout the book by the ghost of Billy the Kid in nightmares over the 30 years that follow Billy's death (hence Billy the Kid accompanies Pat on this "Journey of the Dead.") There are also public vs private personal conflicts as Pat tends to only want the cold, good side of him to show in public and is offended when his private, personal indiscretions are held against him. Verdict: A complex character study with overwhelming imagery, creepy adult content and rolling prose, "Journey of the Dead" is a good look at a complicated character. Estleman might be guilty here of trying to knock down our American heroes like many post-modern western authors love to do, but Garrett was never really a hero anyway; my familiarity with the Lincoln County War situation made it easier to see this one as a fictional attempt to get inside a real man's head (not necessarily Garrett's - he might be a placeholder for all men) and not a nonfiction indictment on that man's life or character. Jeff’s Rating: 3 / 5 (Good) Movie rating if made into a movie: R
