Viking, warrior, farmer, poet. As a boy, Egil plays a ball game where one of the older boys picks on him. Egil goes home, grabs an axe, comes back and drives it into the boy's head. A battle ensues and seven people die. Egil's father is unimpressed, but his mother thinks it a sure sign that he'll become a great viking. As an adult, Egil spends his time settling pillaging Europe, settling Iceland, fighting for the english, duelling and finding reasons to cause trouble for the king of Norway. The viking pillaging is pretty amazing. Maybe the platonic ideal of a viking raid. He also kills a berserker in a duel by dropping his weapons and biting the guy in the throat. And does rune magic. And so many other amazing things. He is a bit of a dickhead though. Wouldn't want to meet him in real life. Even in his old age, he's a baddass: he wants to go the Althing and throw his silver into the crowd and cause a riot. His children forbid him, so instead he hides it in a fjord. He leaves behind a long line of ugly children. Years later a priest finds his skeleton while building a church and is unable to split his skull, proving how tough he was in life. The sagas are full of amazing names, and this one might be the best. First there's Skallagrim's party to go meet the king. It is worth quoting in full, as it puts the Fellowship of the Ring to shame: Skallagrim prepared for this journey and chose the strongest and boldest of his men and neighbors to go with him. There was a man named Ani, a wealthy farmer; another called Grani, and Grimolf and his brother Grim, who lived on Skallagrim's farm, and the brothers Thorbjorn Hunchback and Thord Hobbler. They were known as Thorarna's sons -- she lived near Skallagrim and was a sorceress. Hobbler was a coal-biter. Other men in the band were Thorir the Giant and his brother Thorgeir Earth-long, a hermit called Odd and a freeman called Gris. In all there were twelve men in the party, all outstandingly powerful men, and many of them were shapeshifters. In the rest of the book there appears: Ulf the Fearless; Hallbjorn Half-troll; Kveldulf (aka NIGHTWOLF); the brothers Hallstein, Holmstein and Herstein; King Harald Tangle-hair (King Harald Fair-hair after unifying Norway); Halfdan the Black; Solvi Chopper; poets Audun the Uninspired, Thorbjorn Raven, Olvir Hump and Bard the White (aka Bard the Strong); King Thorir Long-chin; Sigtrygg Travel-quick and Hallvard Travel-hard (dickhead brothers who work for King Harald); Grim and Bera; Skallagrim; Finn the Squinter, Eyvind the Plagiarist, Sighvat the Red; Baug; Orm the Strong, Son of Storolf; Thorlaug; Jorund the Godi; Guttorm; Ragnar and Raghild and Aslaug; Ketil Keel-farer; Grim the Halogalander; Onund Keen-sighted; Grimar; Tungu-Odd; Thordis Stick; Olaf Feilan; Thord Bellower; King Eirik Bloodaxe; Thorir Hroaldsson the Hersir; Thora of the Embroidered Hand; Gunnhild, daughter of Ozur Snout; Thorgeir Thorn-foot; Atli the Short; Bjorn the Landowner; brothers Thorvald the Overbearing and Thorfinn the Strong; Eyvind Braggart; King Olaf the Red of Scotland; Alf Aksmann; Ragnar Shaggy-breeches; Bersi the godless; Ketil the Slayer; Beard-Thorir; Grim Hairy-cheeks, son of Ketil Haeng; Eirik the All-Wise; Ljot the Pale; Harald Grey-cloak; Olaf wood-carver; Skafti the Lawspeaker; King Myrkjartan of Ireland; Bjarni the Stout; Earl Hakon the Powerful. Best lines: 1. When Kveldulf heard about the death of his son Thorolf, he was so saddened by the news that he took to his bed, overcome by grief and old age. Skallagrim went to see him regularaly and tried to talk him round. He told him to take heart, saying that nothing was less becoming to him than to be bedridden. 'A more suitable course would be for us to take vengeance for Thorolf.' 2. In each province King Harald took over all the estates and all the land, habited or uninhabited, and even the sea and lakes. All the farmers were made his tenants, and everyone who worked the forests and dried salt, or hunted on land or at sea, was made to pay tribute to him." 3. After that he intended to go north and take on to Naumdal and take on the brothers Herlaug and Hrollaug, who were kings there, but when they heard that he was on the way, Herlaug and eleven of his men went into the mound the had spend the last three years building, and had it closed upon them. 4. Then the King said, 'Such a shame that Thorolf seems to be disloyal and to want to kill me.' 5. 'Many of the crew threw themselves into the water, but Skallagrim's crew took the boat they had come on and rowed over to them, killing everyone in the water.' 6. It is said that people who could take on the character of animals, or went berserk, became so strong in this state that no one was a match for them, but also that just after it wore off they were left weaker than usual. Kveldulf was the same, so that when the frenzy wore off he felt exhausted by the effort he had made, and was rendered completely powerless and had to lie down and rest. 7. Skallagrim and Bera had many children, but the first ones all died. Then they had a son who was sprinkled with water and given the name Thorolf. 8. 'You're not going,' said Skallagrim, 'because you don't know how to behave where there's heavy drinking. You're enough trouble when you're sober.' 9. 'Let us go back to the farm and acquit ourselves like true warriors: kill everyone we can catch and take all the valuables we can carry.' 10. Not everyone agreed that he was not a shapeshifter. 11. In the woods, Egil stopped and said, 'This is a poor and cowardly raid. We have stolen all the farmer's wealth without his knowing. Such shame will never befall us. Let's go back to the farm and let people know what has happened.' Everyone tried to dissuade him, saying that they wanted to go to the ship. 12. (Egil is at a feast and there's a man assigned to keep his horn full of ale. He is drinking for himself and for his companions who have started to pass out.) Egil started to feel like he would not be able to go on like this. He stood up and walked across the floor to where Armod was sitting, seized him by the shoulders and thrust him up against a wall-post. Then Egil spewed a torrent of vomit that gushed all over Armod's face, filling his eyes and nostrils and mouth and pouring down his beard and chest. Armod was close to choking, and when he managed to let out his breath, a jet of vomit gushed out with it. All Armod's men who were there said Egil had done a base and despicable deed by not going outside when he needed to vomit, but had made a spectacle of himself in the drinking-room instead. Egil said, 'don't blame me for following the master of the house's example. He's spewing his guts up just as much as I am.' Then Egil went over to his place, sat down and asked for a drink. ... Armod leapt to his feet and ran out, but Egil asked for more to drink. (The next day Egil breaks into Armod's room and confronts him in front of his wife and daughter, because Armod had originally served Egil curds and hadn't let on that there was ale until late into the night. He gouges out Armod's eyes using his finger, leaving it hanging. He also cuts off Armod's beard.)
