I would have liked this a lot more if the heroine didn't spend the majority of the book being uppity and unaware. It really picked up when she discovers that the house she was living in was a brothel but before then, it was pretty boring. It didn't help that she was uppity and moralistic, which is just not my cup of tea. I liked that she helped the boarders afterwards though. This was when the book picked up. I liked that she followed through. She continued to teach the boy and girl to read. She let the seamstress stay while she gets her feet on the ground. She advises the mistress to ditch the married man who was full of promises that never come. Before then, she was just wildly unaware that it wasn't a fun story. The story revolves around Cristabel. She left a secure but a dead end job on the promise of inheritance. Her uncle dies and she gets a letter from a solicitor summoning her. She thinks it is an inheritance but in reality, it was the solicitor hoping a relative would tie up some of her uncle's debts. She is understandably distraught by her situation as she had great expectations. She demands things out of the man who won her uncle's debts. She thought she was getting the house but she wasn't. Her ranting did earn her a property. She inherited an unexpected boarding house. Winstoke was just glad to be rid of her. What they both don't know is it was a brothel. Prim and proper Cristabel claims the house. The inhabitants keep the nature of it hidden from her. Cristabel finally wisens up. Once she was told, she kicked everybody out. Some with no place to go to stayed. She cleans the place and she gets proper guests. She finally turns a profit. Meanwhile, Winstoke fell for her. He thought she was a prostitute as well and propositioned her. She thought he was talking about marriage. When the misunderstanding was cleared, she summarily rejected him. However, he can't get her out of his head. He offers her marriage for real and she accepts. There is this whole thing about Winstoke not making the connection between the harridan that demanded her uncle's house and the beautiful lady that he kept on meeting. It didn't really make an impact on me because the hero and heroine doesn't interact that much. I feel like he popped in the beginning briefly, disappeared for a long while, and then reappeared out of nowhere. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
