This review is a surprise even to myself. Reading this book was also a surprise. I enjoy true crime books (and of course fiction like Crime & Punishment). One can learn lessons about guilt, innocence, investigations, criminal procedure, judge and jury behavior, human nature, etc. I read a lot and I read a wide variety of books. Fatal Vision, however, had not really been on my radar. Yet somehow the book came up on Libby, it was available, it rang a bell, and on a whim I checked it out and began. Now a couple of weeks after finishing it, I'm a) marveling I read it, b) surprised that I finished it, and c) shocked as perhaps this reader is that I'm giving it 5 stars. I confess: the book touched me. Growing up in the 1970s and 1980s, I remember hearing about the murders of physician (and Army Green Beret) Jeff MacDonald's pregnant wife and two young daughters. I remember the crimes as having echoes of the 1960s Manson murders because the murderer(s) wrote PIG in blood over the bed of the slaughtered young mom. I remember my surprise that the husband was a handsome Army officer, a medical doctor, an all-around great guy, and someone everyone spoke highly of. He was quickly named as a suspect. But the Army bungled the investigation, and the case was dropped for insufficient evidence. Throughout the Army's case, Dr. MacDonald vigorously professed his innocence. And most people agreed. Who would believe that a man of his talent, education, caliber, looks, and reputation would stab his own wife 21 times with an icepick... let alone what he did with his bare hands to his two young daughters. There was no way this guy was guilty or even psychotic. Or was he? Spoiler alert: Despite there being no eyewitnesses, a couple of faithful investigators always believed the physical evidence led only to the husband, to MacDonald himself. Further, the murdered wife's stepfather was at first a staunch defender of his son-in-law's. But eventually believed the weight of the evidence pointed to MacDonald as the only possible perpetrator; the stepfather also never gave up seeking MacDonald's conviction and avenging his beloved daughter's death. About ten years after the bloody murder spree during the night of Feb 17, 1970, Dr. MacDonald, Mr All-American guy, was convicted of the heinous crimes. MacDonald was sentenced to three consecutive life terms in federal prison. The ten-year quest of the stepfather for justice was achieved. His stepdaughter's killer was behind bars. MacDonald's conviction looked in jeopardy during the appeals process. His case even wound up in front of the Supreme Court. But the conviction was upheld. MacDonald remains in jail to this day (I just looked it up). His parole has been denied at least once; he will likely die in prison. Still, why do I recommend it? There are crimes and murders and miscarriages of justice all the time. Crazy people do crazy things. Well, that's the surprise to me. It's because Joe McGinniss writes an amazing book about an important case with important implications--about celebrity, about facts, about procedure, about fighting through setbacks, and about simple justice. It's a disturbing case. A case that matters because many, many people felt that the perpetrator "could never" do that to his own family. Yet he did. One of the prosecutors said, and I paraphrase, "We don't know how to convince you that the accused 'could' do the murders. It seems unlikely that someone like Dr. MacDonald 'could' slaughter his own family. However, if the evidence shows that MacDonald did commit the murders, we don't need to convince you that he 'could' do the murders. If he did it, that's all that matters." Wise words. Who you gonna believe? The evidence--or your lyin' eyes? in other words. Many times we see what we want and not what reality truly is. The book is too long. There are too many parts McGinniss included in Jeff's "own words." It could use some modern editing for reader attention to reduce the length and sharpen its focus. But no one can say McGinniss wasn't complete or thorough or careful in how he covered one of the most-covered crimes of the 1970s and 1980s. The skill, compassion, evenhandedness and - yes - wisdom with which the author writes about this complicated case make it a worthwhile read. Several chapters begin with excerpts from the Book of Job. McGinniss quotes from psychologists and psychiatrists about pathology, narcissism, and psychosis. He digs into psychopharmacology and what street drugs are likely to induce what kinds of crimes. He writes with pathos and empathy about horrific events, about celebrity lawyers, media publicity, government pressure and inertia, and just plain good-people doggedness in pursuing the truth and never giving up. He lays out much of the book in full quotes and presents what transpires without bias. Even I didn't know what I wanted to believe about MacDonald as I read the book. I also read the two afterwords; the author confesses he struggled with this book. He was also sued by MacDonald for implying that he committed the crimes; that too consumed a few years of the author's life in defending his contract with the accused and the right of an author to write a book as the author sees it and not what the subject wants him to write. The crimes and aftermath obsessed him and even haunted him for years. As a reader I struggled with the nuances of the case (is it even possible this guy did that?) versus public pressure and celebrity with all of it pushing the reader that the accused was given a raw deal, the Army bungled the case, they were ruining his life, why don't we move on, etc., etc., etc. But the fact remained that 3 people were still dead (4 including the unborn baby). And the accused's story that family was wiped out by four hippie intruders chanting "Acid is groovy, kill the pigs" never bore out. And yet, I still didn't want to believe that he did it. He was so normal, so loved, so.... well-adjusted. McGinniss was contacted by MacDonald before he faced the trial that convicted him--9 years after the crime. MacDonald was sure that he would be exonerated in the trial. He thought a well-written book by a well-known non-fiction writer would help him make some money. McGinniss says he had no point of view about MacDonald's guilt or innocence at the start. He says like most others he thought the husband and father, the Green Beret, the medical doctor, the handsome charismatic guy, could never have slaughtered his own family in cold blood and lied about it for 9 years. But the case intrigued him. He took the job and followed MacDonald from his new life in southern California to the trial in Raleigh, NC. The author lived with the accused (out on bond) and his defense team in rented home in town. They shared meals, beers, travel and late nights as the defense team with its colorful lead defender gleefully discussing how they would smash the government's case of 100% circumstantial evidence--and get their revenge with a full-throated acquittal. An acquittal would make the defence counsel famous and rich. MacDonald would be vindicated, cleared, and able to move on with his life. The team holed up with McGinniss could taste full freedom just days and moments away. But slowly, piece by piece, bit of evidence after bit of evidence, McGinniss chronicles how the stubborn facts of the prosecution added up to--even to himself--a convincing conviction. McGinniss himself ended up knowing the right killer is behind bars. A killer so pathological and skilled and manipulative that he fooled nearly everyone. Because of this book, I will be a better reader of jury trials in the newspaper. I will try to remember that I was not in the courtroom every day; that I didn't hear every bit of evidence; that I simply wasn't there. The public, the press, and celebrity lawyers can make a lot of noise. The job of a defense attorney is to highlight reasonable doubt. If I were on trial I'd want that kind of lawyer. But in the end, in a murder case, stubborn, stubborn facts are what matters. Sometimes the facts aren't there, the case is too weak, and the government can't convince a jury to lock someone away for the rest of the their life. Fine. Our legal system should make it hard to convict. But sometimes the evidence is there. Even if we don't like what we see, what we hear, and the ugly implications that yes, this guy did the crime. The wheels of justice grind slowly, as they say. Jeffrey MacDonald almost got away with murder. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
