Reads well, and I found it interesting. Have to give credit to the author for being ahead of her time, as this is an old book and the theories of which are outdated and have been disproven. But it was written back when most people were using forceful training methods for their dogs, and while Jan’s theory is still based on dominance theory and pack concept (both of which have been disproven) she does use positive reinforcement training methods, which was very progressive considering the book is 23 years old. Jan compares dogs to wolves far too much in this book, and looking at a wolf pack and how they behave isn’t applicable to a domestic species. Dogs aren’t pack animals anymore, they’re semi-solitary, as is indicated by looking at any pack of feral dogs which have no structure and a very fragile and dysfunctional hierarchy. It is very interesting as, as she is using positive reinforcement methods of training, her work is more or less right and she’s getting results, but she just doesn’t know why what she’s doing is working. She believes it is because she’s stepping into the role of “leader” and how everything reflects how they would behave in the wild, which is untrue. However, the reason what she’s doing is working is as simple as, by ignoring the dog when it’s behaving in an undesirable way, and not shouting at it, the dog is getting no attention and no reaction and so the behaviour diminishes. It isn’t because you’re being the alpha and the dog is showing you respect or is relinquishing their own dominance over the “pack”. Jan also, a couple of times in the book, described how she did some fairly irresponsible and honestly quite dangerous things. For example, at one point when telling a story about two dogs who absolutely hated each other, Reggie and Basil. They shut Reggie in a shed (still attached to his chain). “As soon as we got Basil on to his old foe’s patch, however, we let Reggie back out. He remained attached to his chain. At the same time I knelt down, quietly and calmly holding Basil at a distance of twenty feet from the end of the chain. Exactly how Reggie’s chain remained in place I don’t know to this day. Reggie roared into life and flew at Basil. Basil was as ready as ever for the confrontation, however: it was all I could do to hold on to my dog.” I’ve worked with cases of redirection and so I know just how dangerous this was. Basil could easily have turned around and gone for Jan in this moment of high arousal and aggression and she’d knelt down, putting herself on face level with him and also putting herself in a position where it would be hard for her to move quickly, being on her knees instead of her feet. Had Basil redirected his aggression it could have been a very different story for Jan. I believe it was irresponsible for the author to include things like this in the book as this is a book that people with minimal training experience may buy in the hopes of using the training methods on their own problem dogs. Had somebody else read this, and attempted the same thing, they could have gotten very hurt. I did enjoy reading the book from a historical perspective, which is why I gave it 2 stars instead of 1, but I cannot rate this book highly as it is outdated, the theories are disproven, and people should definitely not buy this if they’re looking for anything more than a bit of light reading. If you’re looking for a book which contains genuine behavioural advice for your own dogs then I’d recommend looking at Dr Ian Dunbar’s books. He is a qualified, certified behaviourist. Whereas Jan is self-taught and unqualified.
