Maybe I should let this marinate more, but I just finished this book and I feel like it is a masterpiece! I almost didn’t even pick this one up when I did, but I saw that it was being removed from the audible plus catalog in a few weeks, so since I’m such a GGK fan I decided to read it (listen to the audiobook) while it was still available. Why did no one tell me about this book? Why aren’t people talking about it all the time? This was the 6th GGK book I’ve read, and he kind of has a bit of a formula. I hate to call it that because I don’t mean it in a negative way at all, but thematically this was another book about the power of a ripple. How a conversation, a slight, a grudge, or a choice can shape major future events. If you love a book with lots of threads that come together masterfully, you’re gonna like this. This book had me sucked in from the beginning, but it did something that surprisingly few books actually do - it got better and better as it went. No lull, no boring middle, not clunky arcs. Started out strong and ended on a mountain top. I was completely hooked with all the storylines and characters, and the plot was surprisingly easy to follow despite actually being pretty complex with lots of threads to keep track of. A Song for Arbonne has all of the elements that GGK does SO well, in my opinion. Court intrigue, masterful politicking, a festival/tourney/contest setting, duels, etc. Several intimate conversation scenes that were so beautiful written and subtly significant to the story, I imagined his keyboard smoking as he was writing. FIRE. GGK does this thing where he can do more with 500 pages than most modern fantasy authors can do in 2500. He is quickly becoming a favorite author of mine. Every time I’m reading (listening) to a GGK book, the same question crosses my mind each time - why do I ever read anything else?? It’s so damn good!! This is in the running for book of the year, for me, and it maaaaaay have disrupted my rankings for favorite GGK book!
