At the risk of sounding insensitive or condescending, this book made me feel so sorry for any and all people with the capacity for pregnancy and childbirth. It also made me feel angry, sad, sickened, shocked, and enraged. As a liberal, progressively-minded male, I already considered myself a feminist and was on the side of women and birthing people when it came to abortion being and staying legal and accessible to all; but I wanted to understand the fight better. I wanted to learn more about the war that was waged to get to Roe v. Wade , and I wanted to be well informed for discussions and arguments I assumed I would encounter in a post- Roe United States. This was the perfect tool for that. Reagan has done tremendous research here and I learned a lot; the material was easy to understand (I listened on audiobook) and still very informative. Some of the descriptions of botched illegal abortions and dying pregnant women produced a very real visceral reaction in my gut; it was heart-wrenching, and sickening for me to imagine. The histories of sexism, misogyny, and the sexual double standard in our American culture and in the medical field was staggering and almost inconceivable. Most of my feelings on this book culminate in a general disbelief and awe that we are practically back at square-one on abortion rights, with the recent repeal of Roe v. Wade . However, in her epilogue, Reagan states in no uncertain terms (at the time of publication, about 20 years ago), that abortion rights will come under fire again, and the legal precedents that we think are final will be threatened; the patterns of discourse and opinion will repeat themselves , and the harm done to pregnant individuals will return. And interestingly, as Reagan states, the arguments against abortion will be similar as in decades past, despite the passing of over 150 years; nothing new will be contrived to fight legalized abortion, and the right to bodily autonomy for child-bearing people will be endangered again. The same groups, organizations, and individuals who rejected legal abortion then, on whatever moral or religious grounds, will continue to attack this fundamental right into the future without changing their tactics in the least. It is one of many similar battles in a long, exhausting war against women and their reproductive rights. Even with Reagan's prophetic prediction, and the current status of legal abortion in 2023 America, I still can't believe we are here again. But being better informed about abortion history and the struggle of those with uteruses only emboldens my allyship and strengthens my belief that legalized, safe, accessible abortion and reproductive care are a basic human right and an absolute necessity in our society.
