I'm sad to say this is the first Dalziel and Pascoe mystery that I didn't love. The main mystery was okay (the twists were good though it was a little annoying that only Dalziel was sufficiently suspicious of Swain) but the subplot was where I felt totally let down. It was just too unbelievable. I mean, I get that depression and suicidal intent can come as a surprise to friends and family, but Chung's behaviour was inconsistent . She decides to embark on this huge endeavour, while intending suicide--not suddenly but sometime months down the road? Then she works at getting the right cast, the right venue, worries about the board's decisions, etc., but all the time she's not planning to see it through? Why all the effort? Especially since she must be aware that the suicide will actually ruin the whole thing and prevent it from actually happening. (It would be a different story if her plan had been to commit suicide as a finale, but to do it before the opening procession actually finished?) She is portrayed throughout as an empathetic person: she helps Girl Appleyard and the deacon's wife (is he a deacon? vicar? I don't recall); she *likes* Peter and knows how guilty he's going to feel (she even acknowledges it out loud just before she jumps) and tricks him? That's pretty fucking cold and evil. In fact the whole game she plays is evil, because, as Peter points out, she cheats (for example, she pretends in her last letter that only now did she feel comfortable enough to call Andy Andy, but in fact, she's been calling him that to his face all along). She actually didn't want to be stopped. She wanted an audience. She wanted other people to hurt. She wasn't a depressed person taking her own life to stop the pain, she was a psychopath trying to do the most damage she could. How does that square with her actions toward Appleyard and Deacon Lady? Not very well. By the way, I did guess the suicide's identity wrong. I thought it was Appleyard because in one of the early letters she mused about throwing herself in front of a train and this was just after she was mentioned reading Anna Karenina at Pascoe's suggestion, and the psychologist said she'd leave clues for them to figure out who she was. Plus, how the fuck did Chung know anything about Swain or his lawyer ditching him or where the bodies were buried? Perhaps these questions will be answered in the next book after the next book (which I understand, is set on the Moon in 2010).
