I may have done this book a disservice in my initial review (see below). I really didn't enjoy the experience of reading the book and I rattled off a very short and condemnatory review without thinking about it. However, I read it as part of The Mookse & The Gripes group read of the 1997 Booker shortlist. What this means is that I get to discuss it with a group of people many of whom enjoyed the book. In fact, nearly all of them enjoyed it more than I did. This discussion has been a lot of fun and has given me a bit of a fresh perspective on the book. What seems especially pertinent is the short comment I made below where I said that it got a lot better when I started reading it as a spoof. I am really not sure that is what the author intended, but it does make some bits quite funny (just not funny in the way the author probably planned it). It still feels very strange reading a book clearly set in the 1990s (see Lloyds references) but where couples refer to "walking out" together and people say things like "that's the ticket". Every time you think events have locked the book into the 1990s, someone says something that makes you think it is actually the 1950s. Then you decide on the 1950s and someone starts using a word processor. For me, it is simply the fact that the style didn't work that means a low rating. I have to acknowledge that every time I turned the page and saw that it was yet another section of dialogue with no description, my heart sank. Not because there's anything wrong with dialogue and no description as a thing, but just because the dialogue in this book really didn't do it for me. I'm grateful to The Mookse & The Gripes for giving me some pleasure out of this book that I wouldn't have got otherwise. --------------- ORIGINAL REVIEW --------------- ‘So I’ll book a table for tomorrow week.’ ‘Whizzy.’ ‘What’s whizzy?’ ‘Oh, there you are. Nicola’s taking us out to dine in an amusing new restaurant next Saturday night.’ ‘Me too?’ ‘Yes, you too!’ ‘Wow, that’s whizzy. Shall I go and tell Dad?’ ‘You do that.’ Guy ran off, and came back a minute later. ‘Did you tell him?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘What did he say?’ ‘He said, whizzy.’ ‘Truly?’ ‘Yes, truly, he did. Whizzy, he said.’ ‘That’s whizzy.’ Yes, this really and truly is a direct quote from this book. I could write a lot more, but I don’t feel I need to. About halfway through, my repeated cries of incredulity meant my wife suggested I read it as a spoof rather than a serious piece of literature. That did make it more entertaining in a weird kind of way. How this made the shortlist for a Booker prize will forever be beyond me.
