"The dawn of the Information Age began at the sunset of human decency." Probably about 2001 (when this book was written) I remember reading some other books about WWII and realizing how much there is to know about it. There is still a lot that we kind of know but don't really understand. We can picture emaciated inmates at concentration camps, and know there were gas chambers and crematoria, especially because Auschwitz had all of those things. We don't have that same image of a train arriving at a camp and the passengers being dead within an hour, but that was a thing that happened. We joke about trains running on time. We know lists would be published of names to report, because that is what sent Anne Frank's family into the attic, but not how they had the information. Black's book explains and fills in a lot, incorporating a stunning amount of research and detail, and a far larger picture of how the gears of the Holocaust ground than I think has ever happened before. It is hard not to wonder whether the role of IBM has previously been largely passed over is related to IBM also being the company that managed and coordinated the translation of Nazi-related documents. It is disturbing in this age of rising fascism and widespread surveillance to see how much the Hollerith machines and punch cards allowed personal details to be known and used, for efficient and evil ends. It is disturbing to think of how Thomas Watson of IBM is still revered there, and to know more about the kind of person he was. And here is an important thing; Watson did not specifically want Jews murdered, but he sure loved the profits that his company could make by assisting the Reich. Corporate greed is a familiar threat, though it is worth reflecting on how that affects the development of technology. We may learn more from looking at Bulgaria. Bulgaria's Jewish residents were well-integrated, and they did not want to give their people up. They had reluctantly joined the Axis for support in keeping Macedonia and Thrace. They did end up being willing to give up the Jewish people there. There are stories of integrity and heroism too, often ending up in death. Maybe it's not encouraging, but maybe we are not so far along yet that it can't be put right. And if the only hope is that you can try and do what's right and die honorably, rather than participate in mass murder, it's could to know that there are people who will be brave to the end.
