O my! what a topsy-turvy funny little tale is this! but it is so like the world, yet it is in the fairy tales realm :) what a nasty doom fixed on a baby girl! Savage and cruel act from the side of her aunty, though of a high rank, being the old sister of the little king with a big throne. Yet, what a caprice! In between the reading lines I fell out for some time because in my mind all the time revolved, as if by repeat mode, the unforgettable novel of Milan Kundera ‘The Unbearable Lightness of Being’ , recalling not specifically the scenes from the book but more the meaning behind the title, as translated into a sort of philosophical perspective, what is that to do evil that good may come of it. Well, my mind is at present floating in parallel lines, so I feel, but eventually I gave the story my most serious consideration :)) This charming tale revived my laughter and acted like a cordial to my heart! Such imaginary perfection though written in a very modern way of talking. I just couldn’t believe it was written in 1864. God heavens! They knew even then that love was not a fleeting thing :D I guess I liked the best the way the princess even stamped with impatience to be put up directly after the prince saved her from the lake, seemingly she was drowning while trying to speak some words… A very romantic tale about a not so romantic girl. Upon my word, I was put in a very good humor and I approved of the method the author took to unfold it, that felt but too natural and expected. SO, this wonderful story is about a princess that values her freedom and independency too much, and that expresses her high disapprobation of the methods her family takes to keep her within limits. There is no dealing with her, seeming to be a very determined young creature. She was cursed by an awful witch (a family relation, still) to be lacking gravity (unable to keep her feet on the ground, unless she was almost chained…) but she shall be redeemed, and the worthy gentleman that undertakes the task, that is a prince in his all right, will be so good as to redeem her from her weightlessness, in other words by being a little heavy, and hereafter blessings are overpouring on them. Likewise in fairy tales, he will risk all consequences (even the ultimate sacrifice), failing not to show he could be manly, however the twist allows for a different ending, showing that it was richly worth his patience, and the trial. Well, I can heartily say that they have had amazing good luck. The full love of the prince will be ready to acquit the princess of her only fault – but o my! even that was not a fault (he anyway beholds her with loving eyes), so eventually when the trial is to pass, the calamity itself will have humbled enough to make the princess turn her eye inward, so she gets to look into herself, and what has she discovered there? Why, o my, more love than she could have thought had lain in her unexamined heart.
