I was reading Victoria Holt’s description of Dallas Lawson’s first glimpse of Chateau Gaillard when I was struck by this passage: “There are occasions in life when reality is more exciting, more enchanting than the picture the imagination has supplied – but they are rare; and when they come they should be savored to the full.” Admittedly, these are the musings of a fictional character, the product of Holt’s creative writing talents. But even so, I couldn’t help but reflect on how true this statement is, or at least true in part for me. As soon as I read the statement I paused and reflected on those occasions when the “reality” was better than I could have “imagined.” I’ll agree with Holt’s character that this does indeed occur, but I’ll have to disagree with her assertion that these experiences are rare. Within minutes I’d thought of a list of “real life” experiences that were more exciting and more enchanting than I’d previously imagined. Here are a few I came up with: Hiking the inspiringly scenic Johnston’s Canyon trail in Banff National Park. Experiencing the visually breathtaking “Alice in Wonderland” Ride at Disneyland. The youthful awakenings I experienced when I first read “Great Expectations” as a teenager. That summer of ‘77 when I first saw “Star Wars” leaving the theater an awestruck 10 year old. The first time I listened to The Thompson Twins ‘84 album “Into the Gap.” The first time I kissed the woman who would later become my wife. The first (and second) time I saw Gwen Stefani in concert - witnessing performing excellence. The first time I heard a recording of RFK’s “MLK” Indianapolis speech – moved beyond belief. The first time I held each of my sons in my arms – when it dawned on me I was their dad. Witnessing Maria Sharapova’s spellbinding run to win the ladies singles at the ‘08 Aussie Open. Seeing the magnificent Garden Island of Kauai for the very first time. It was the speed by which I mentally amassed this list that I began to appreciate how many of these “beyond expectation” experiences I’ve had. I suspect that this may be true for most of us. But maybe the real value in Miss Lawson’s statement is not in how “often” reality exceeds “imagination” but how well we remember each of these occasions. Perhaps they might not be so “rare” if we got better at the remembering part. It is with this in mind that I ask myself how the reality of reading “The King of the Castle” compared with what I’d imagined it might be. Here’s what I have to say about that: Firstly, the fact that the main setting is a chateau in Wine country France is easy to discover, since we’re told this in the back cover synopsis. Knowing this, I was anticipating a “vitalization” of the ambiance by way of architectural descriptions of the chateau. In my opinion, Victoria Holt outdid herself on this count. Here were a couple of wonderful examples of this that really stood out for me: “The aspect was purely medieval; and the solid buttresses and towers gave an air of having been built for defense. A fortress surely. As my eyes went from the keep overlooking the drawbridge, to the moat – dry, I caught a glimpse of rich green grass growing there. Excitement gripped me as I gazed up at the corbeled parapet supported by numerous machicolations about the outer façade.” And then there was this exquisite description of part of the chateau’s interior: “A clock with carved cupid posed above its face stood on the mantelpiece, and on either side of it were two delicately colored Sevres vases. The chairs were upholstered in tapestry and their framework was decorated with flowers and scrolls.” The imagery of the chateau’s exterior, especially the locations of the machicolations, had me imagining the family defending the chateau under attack, the family fighting back the marauders by firing arrows, then perhaps even pouring hot oil through the machicolations. The description of the room had me imagining one of the Comte’s aristocratic descendants standing among other members of the aristocracy, discussing world affairs or perhaps even an audience with a Marquis or even a Duke. I always appreciate when authors add sufficient detail so I can visualize the surrounding the characters find themselves in. Victoria Holt did a superb job of this! Another highpoint of the early part of this story was the way Miss Dallas Lawson’s “mission” was presented to the reader. The premise was unique and appealing. Basically, Dallas worked with her father in his restoration business, where he specialized in repairing fine art and renovation of medieval architecture. After a brief stay in art school, Dallas’s father convinced her that she would learn so much more by quitting school and apprenticing under his direct guidance. It turned out that Dallas had a natural ability for the work, and as a result, her father turned over much of the painting restoration assignments to Dallas, while he focused on the architectural work for those clients. One day a letter arrived from the Comte de la Talle of the Gaillard Chateau. The Comte informed Dallas’s father that he was in possession of a collection of fine paintings which required restoration. Could Mr. Lawson come to the chateau, estimate what work was necessary, and if satisfactory arrangement could be reached, stay until completed? Her father was delighted with the proposed project and informed Dallas that if he successfully landed the job, he would have her join him to stay at the chateau until the work was finished. Unfortunately, another letter soon followed, in which the Comte informed Dallas’s father that the project would have to be delayed and that he would be in touch when he was ready. Two years after the letter, Dallas’s’ father passed away and shortly after, another letter arrived from the Comte in which he said he was now ready to reengage Mr. Lawson in the project. By this point Dallas was a skilled restorer of paintings with years of experience. Despite her achievements, Dallas feared that she would more than likely be dismissed as a restoration candidate for the chateau job if the Comte were to discover it was her alone, and not her father, offering the services. It was with this in mind that Dallas decides to simply show up at the chateau, rather than writing the Comte in advance. She knew she was qualified and thought her appearance might give her a better chance than would an engagement through written correspondence. I really liked this plot point because it showed that this character was willing to stand up to any discrimination that may have come to her. She is determined to show the Comte that she is capable and she is passionate about her work. I thought that this premise was excellent and I knew it would present unique challenges to our protagonist. This is always good news for a story. Another part I enjoyed was the scene of Dallas’s first “interview” at the chateau. The scene and dialogue were well written, witty and entertaining. This was especially true when Dallas learns that she’s being interviewed not by the great Comte himself, but by his young cousin Phillipe de la Talle. The conversation itself was “tactically elegant”, like a conversational form of fencing. In the following dialogue, Phillipe has learned that Mr. Dawson has passed away and that this young lady (about his age coincidentally) is claiming that she is qualified to do the restoration work of his uncle’s collection of priceless art. While Dallas is asserting herself, the Comte’s nephew is still reeling from the fact that a young woman has appeared instead of Mr. Lawson. “Did you think, Mademoiselle Lawson, that had you explained that your father was dead we should have declined your services?” Dallas replies: “I believe that your object was to have the pictures restored and was under the impression that it was the work which was important, not the sex of the restorer.” Phillipe’s brow furrows as it appears he’s trying to make a decision. “It seems strange that you did not write to tell us.” He says, pressing the issue. Dallas rises to her feet, striding haughtily toward the door. “One moment Mademoiselle” Phillipe calls out, then continues in a softer tone: “You see, you have placed yourself in a very awkward situation” he begins to explain. “I did not think that my credentials would be slighted without scrutiny. I have never worked before in France and was unprepared for such a reception.” To use a fencing term, this was a good “thrust” by Dallas. Philippe rose to it. “Mademoiselle, I assure you, you will be treated as courteously in France as anywhere else.” Phillipe pauses, then went on… “You spoke of credentials.” Dallas begins retrieving the letters from her attaché. “I have recommendations from people who are very pleased with my work…in England. I have worked in some of our great houses and have been entrusted with masterpieces…but if you’re not interested…” He holds the letters. “That is not true, Mademoiselle…I am interested” Phillipe replies. This conversation seemed to reinforce the idea that Dallas hails from the “impoverished gentry.” In this way, she’s a woman completely alone, not fitting in with the servants, nor is she of the class to enjoy the comforts, security and associations of the wealthy families. But she does possess sufficient dignity and comports herself with adequate poise and confidence as to catch the attention of the Comte’s cousin. In my opinion, this is a shining example of how to “show” the reader the context of the situation as opposed to “telling us.” “The King of the Castle” is a novel I read with great enthusiasm. The enigmatic teen daughter of the Comte, the deceptively provincial grape growing families, and the incredible way in which Victoria Holt shows us a love, so gradually building. History reignited through the restoration of paintings, some of which are in plain view and some of which are hidden, daring the artisan to try to find and unveil them. As an expert in the restoration of fine paintings, our character Dallas is able to spend an extended amount of time in the “company” of the great painters in history: Nicolas Poussin, Claude Lorrain and Jean-Antoine Watteau to name a few. She was able to immerse herself in the masterpieces of fine art. In this way, as I read “The King of the Castle” I felt a bond with Holt’s protagonist. Indeed, I was reading a masterpiece of the Gothic Romance genre!
