*Spoilers ahead! Also beware of fangirling and reader who got considerably carried away* This is a Heyer novel, so of course I expected to enjoy it, but I hadn't planned on falling totally head over heels in love with it!! This is by far my favourite of her Regencies. It's been a while since I hadn't had that much fun with a novel! This delightful Regency romp opens up with a hilarious scene of three cousins sitting in a drawing room at Arnside, waiting for their eccentric great-uncle to put in an appearance and formally tell them why they invited them (except that we know, early on, that one of them, Lord Biddenden, was NOT invited!!). All three are already aware of the reason for their uncle's summons: he means to give his inheritance to his ward, Miss Kitty Charing, provided she marries one of his great-nephews. Her choices are: 1. Lord Biddenden is NOT a choice because he was NOT invited, because he is already married, as keeps repeating 2. Lord Dolphinton , only Earl in the family, who appears to be slightly touched in his upper works, but in reality he is just very, very slow and possesses a very *small* amount of intelligence and common-sense. The poor man had me laughing every time he said something! 3. Reverend Hugh Rattray , a very stoic and straitlaced man, although handsome, he means to offer for Kitty simply out of pity, and to give her the protection of his name and his "education" (he promises to educate her! yay! fun!). 4. Jack Westruther , the rake Kitty has been in love with since childhood. An entirely deplorable man, selfish and without morals, but nevertheless his uncle's and Kitty's first choice. He does not, however, answer the summons to go to Arnside. 5. Last but not least, Freddy Standen , who is on his way to Arnside, but has no idea of the trouble looming ahead of him. At present, Kitty's opinion of them all is Kitty Charing is a charming young lady with a kind heart and warm, open and unaffected manners. She is innocent and seems even more so because she has never been outside of the country. I thought she made a lovely heroine, and although she may not have been as feisty and fascinating as Sophy ( The Grand Sophy ), or as intelligent and resourceful as Mary ( Devil's Cub ), the reader is easily won over by her simple kindness and desire to help others. Appalled by her uncle's heartless ultimatum, Kitty heedlessly flees Arnside and finds refuge in a nearby inn, where she happens to meet up with Freddy Standen, who was just on his way to Arnside. Freddy and Kitty have known each other all their lives and have a very friendly, cousinly relationship. The tale is soon poured out to him, and he finds himself very glad to have encountered her before reaching Arnside, as he had no plan at all to offer for Kitty. They "wouldn't suit". ;) But Kitty, in a light bulb flash of genius, asks him bluntly: "Then Freddy, will you be so very obliging as to be betrothed to me?" "No! Dash it, Kit!" Freddy is none of your typical bad rake in need of a sweet maiden to reform his ways, nor is he a perfect tall, dark, handsome and rich Nonesuch, admired and solicited by all the London beauties. Instead, he is a much more simple, yet much more loveable character. He is said to be "less intelligent" than the norm and repeatedly states the he "has no brains", but in truth he is very down-to-earth, and it is just the way he speaks that make him sound less smart than he really he is. I wouldn't change his speech for the world though, that habit of not using pronouns and using many forceful expressions became him so well and added so much charm to his personality! He is described as not being particularly handsome, but as having an exquisite style of fashion; he is not in the petticoat line, yet is the friend of everyone; he prefers dancing to sporting, and his manners are always graceful and elegant. He may not handle his team with the utmost perfection, but at least he knows how to tie his cravat! Moreover, Freddy is the nicest, most kind-hearted person on the planet. He is loyal, devoted, and doesn't hesitate to help his friends. "I think Freddy has what is better than accomplishments - a kind heart!" Yes, I fell in love with Freddy. Of course I fell in love with Freddy!! He was downright adorable !!! And, of course , Freddy accepts the counterfeit betrothal and agrees to whisk Kitty off to London! "I shall have a great to learn, because I have never been to London in my life. But I mean to apply myself!" Together, they: * Make sure Kitty is properly dressed. "Charming Kitty! You are as fine as fivepence! Were you guided by Freddy's exquisite taste, or is this new touch all of your own devising?" *Dance!!! "For this I will say, Freddy! - however stupid you may be, you are by far the best dancer in London! And that, let me tell you, is what Lady Jersey says! *Visit London. Freddy as the reluctant tourist was hilarious!!! So Kitty, being new to London, naturally wants to see all the famous London sights, which Freddy has absolutely no interest in! She even gets a tourist book, which describes all the Curiosities, Amusements, Exhibitions, Public Establishments and Remarkable Objects in London! And poor Freddy is all "No, really, Kit! Not yourself! Can't be! Nice pair of flats we should look, going all over town with a dashed guide book!" But as kind as he is, he nevertheless agrees to take her on a tour of the City. Shall we? The City of London with commentary by Freddy Standen Westminster Abbey "But the dilapidated effigies in the Henry the Seventh Chapel, in particular the ghoulish countenance of Queen Elizabeth, proved to be his breaking-point. He said that he had never seen such a set of rum touches in his life, and represented to Miss Charing in the strongest terms that another five minutes spent in the chapel would make them both feel as blue as megrim." The British Museum "The thing's a dashed take-in! A pretty set of bubble-merchants they must be, the fellows that look after place! I'll tell you what Kit: it's a fortunate thing you brought that book! Why, if we hadn't had it we should have been done brown as a pair of berries!" The Elgin Marbles "'Dash it, they've got no heads!'" 'No, but you see, Freddy, they are so very old! They have been damaged.' explained Miss Charing. 'Damaged! I should rather think so! They haven't got any arms either! Well, if this don't beat the Dutch! And just look at this, Kit!' ' Birth of Athene from the brain of Zeus,' said Kitty, consulting the catalogue. 'Birth of Athene from what ?'" The Bank of England " 'One of the wonders of commerce; and one of the abortions of art' read out Miss Charing. 'Is it though? Well, that settles it! We needn't go to Cornhill at all. You know, Kit, that's a dashed good book! We can go home now!'" * They rack their brains to try and help new acquaintances (befriended by Kitty) get out of miserable tangles, even Freddy would much prefer to stay well out of it! But, he has no choice but to help, says he, since Kitty's in it (and if she's in it, so must he!). *Literally out-nice each other. Not only are they the two nicest human beings, but they actually argued over it! "'Tell you what, Kit! Got too kind a heart!' A smile swept across her face. 'Oh Freddy, how absurd you are! When you have a much kinder one than I have!' 'No, really Kit!' protested Freddy, revolted. 'Haven't got anything of the sort! Been on the town for years!' 'Yes, you have,' averred Kitty, lifting his hand to her cheek for a brief moment." Could they get any cuter?!?! I found myself going "Awwwwwwwwww" every single time they were together! *And in the middle of it all, they obviously had tons of fun!!! (and so had I) "I daresay Freddy might not be a great hand at slaying dragons- but one has not the smallest need of a man who can kill dragons!" " ' I may be without sensibility, but I'm dashed if I'd sit tearing my hair out when a man came to tell me Kit was in trouble!' retorted Freddy. 'Much good that would do her!'" Not only does Cotillion feature one of the most irresistible hero and heroine of all literature, but the secondary characters are priceless as well. We have Jack, the selfish, rakish cousin who likes to take advantage of everyone and loves to look down mockingly at Freddy and Kitty. Curiously he did not bother me that much. I expected to hate him, having heard much against him, but he was a rather spicy character and made a good contrast with all the other good characters. Moreover I've always loved rakes and he was very hero-material; just the kind who would have made for a perfect "redeemed rake" plot. Then there is Lord Dolphinton, the dim-witted cousin who wants to marry a Cit's daughter and who literally hides under a table when he thinks his mother is coming after him!! I don't think I've ever laughed at a character so much before! He added so much comical relief (as though the book wasn't comical already!). Freddy's father, Lord Legerwood, was extremely fascinating and very hero-material as well. I wished he had been involved in the story more. Another one I loved was Meg, Freddy's older pregnant sister, who made a very good companion and friend for Kitty, and who had random mood swings. I love the scenes when she and Kitty go shopping and try on clothes in her room; they were creating such a lasting bond! The plot of this wonderful book is also so clever and engaging! Nobody really believes Freddy and Kitty's engagement to be real, but they are so busy trying to untangle everyone else's problems that they do not let it bother them. And before they know it, it is no longer just a fake engagement... "' What I mean is, like you to have everything you want. Wished it was me and not Jack, that's all. (...) You don't feel you could marry me instead? Got no brains, of course, and I ain't a handsome fellow, like Jack, but I love you. Don't think I could ever love anyone else. Daresay it ain't any use telling you, but - well, there it is!' 'Oh Freddy, Freddy !' sobbed Miss Charing. 'No, no, Kit, don't cry!' begged Freddy, putting his arm round her. 'Can't bear you not to be happy! I won't say another word. Never thought there was any hope for me. Just wanted to tell you.' 'Freddy, I love you with all my heart!' Kitty said, turning within his arm, and casting bothe her own round his neck. 'Much, much more than you could possibly love me!'" And my reaction: Honestly, this book is just so good, I can't recommend it enough. MUST READ for Regency and non-Regency fans alike, JUST GO GET A COPY AND ENJOYYY!!! :D :D :D Group read with the Georgette Heyer Fans group.
