Really torn between "it was okay" and "liked it," because for me, it fell apart in the second half. Part detective story, part coming-of-age story. I loved the setting, really *feeling* rural Australia--the heat, the space, the isolation--there's a sort of Cormac McCarthy feel to it. I was gripped from the start, as we follow two children, whom we have been skillfully primed to care for, as they wander the back country, hopelessly lost. The hard-boiled detective is likeable in his own way, and complicated--yes, even though the hard-boiled detective is a cliche. The constraints of village life, where everyone knows each other's business--or thinks they do--is well drawn. The constable, Pop, is an appealing figure of gentle stability and intelligence. So, how did the book ultimately let me down? First, the descriptions of setting, that at the outset drew me in, became overmuch: every tree named, every turn of the weather detailed, full of portent. Then, the drama became just over-the-top Gothic, with so many horrors and maladies that it was hard to keep them straight: one prime suspect is an inevitable Town Crazy Guy; incest and rape; two suicides; a murder; two obsessed evangelicals; a grave robbing; and a kidnapping. In a final scene, there's not just blood, but blood "extended out all around him, over the floor and up the walls." Some scenes seemed like they were padding--the fishing scene with Pop and the kids, for instance. Tom's preoccupation with the circus lions seemed symbolic. Is it necessary to the book, in either plot or depth--especially when we have the angel in the rock (but the angel's linked to the lion...)? Likewise, there are multiple descriptions of dreams (full disclosure: that's a pet peeve of mine: long dreams as part of fiction; it's like the author erects a flashing billboard of symbology of his or her own devising--so we're supposed pore over them as mirrors of meaning for the character, the book? Isn't that too easy? Can't you just say something like, "Dreams of being chased by hooded figures troubled X's sleep.") Nonetheless, I was compelled to read most of Angel Rock straight through in one sitting, To Find Out What Happens. That's 80% of what we want from a story, eh?
