Book readers everywhere, please stay your hand (ALWAYS) and think for a moment before denouncing any book as "horrible," "uninteresting," or rating it a 1 or 2, regardless of your age or experience with reading. It is a shame that this book gets such low ratings from some just because its subject matter is serious or because the book itself is deemed "boring" or "not your thing." I see a terrible lack of patience, perseverance and open-mindedness in so many readers, young and old, and that is very saddening. I first read this book when I was nine. I picked it up, thinking it was going to be a sort of adventure story (sailing and all, maybe some pirates), and was a little surprised when it wasn't adventuresome, when the themes were dark and serious and sometimes violent. The writing style was a little on the practical side (for lack of a better term, perhaps stuffy) as opposed to descriptive or conversational as one might expect from a young-adult narrative. So do you know what I did? I paused to pick up a dictionary, or I spent a few moments thinking about what the story was trying to tell me, even if I didn't know all the words all at once. Though this book did not stand out to me as a favorite, it was very memorable, and I always remembered it. The events were unexpected, the details were harsh but not unstomachable; they were necessary to be seen and heard. This book is one of harsh truths. I have read reviews that say it reads like a cliche or that it was boring. It is neither. It presents a tale that never grows old: one not only of cruelty and mistreatment but a story from the lips and eyes of a child who, like the young reader who picked up this book, never had to confront the ideas of slavery and dismal living conditions before. This book is meaningful and gripping, a story I have remembered for years and years after the first reading. Most importantly, it made me think. It gave me a hunger to understand and learn. It taught me that not all books are enjoyable, but they can still be good and well worth your time. Just because you have grown tired of hearing about the horrors of slavery does not mean it should not be explored. On the contrary, the fact that some would regard a book like this as over-exhausted material shows in my mind that more books like this SHOULD exist, that we are too desensitized to certain unsavory aspects of history, to the misfortune of others. If you read this book and said, "whites shouldn't have treated blacks badly, and we all know that, end of story," then I would challenge your views as a reader of literature AND a surveyor of history. That sort of apathy and simple-minded dismissiveness has no place in the avid reader's mind and heart.
