I wouldn't say I was a precocious reader, but once I learned how I fell in love with it. Reading for pleasure was a hobby I developed early, and as it turned out the genres I gravitated towards were fantasy and adventure. I remember the transitional books I was into between "juvenile" and "adult" reading -- I was a big fan of the Choose Your Own Adventure clone Time Machine which had the audacity to put learning into my adventure stories as they all took place in historical periods, from the time of the dinosaurs to World War II. After I ripped through Lewis's The Chronicles of Narnia without getting hung up on the Christian allegory of it, I was teed-up for a career in genre fiction. I even remember the moment I "graduated" to the adult shelves of the bookstore, as I walked past the Fantasy section and all the colorful cover art, turned out to face the room, caught my eye. One book in particular was emerald green with a cover painting featuring a trio of fantasy characters with a dragon behind them. It featured an elaborate logo that said "Dragonlance" and that's all I needed to dive in. I had my five bucks, I bought the book, pocketed my change, and started reading it on the way home. It was Dragons of Spring Dawning by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman, names I'd never heard before. Eventually I realized that I'd made a hasty mistake in starting with the third book of a trilogy, but that was a problem soon remedied, as I was hooked. Over the years there have been something like 170 books with that elaborate "Dragonlance" logo on them, by dozens of authors, but I did not stay in that particular pocket long enough to read them all. Through all that content there is one through-line, though, that I did stick with, the line towed by Weis & Hickman via their dozen or so Dragonlance books. These tell the core story of the shared Dragonlance universe (a universe, I later learned, that was also shared with the Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying game). This book, Dragons of a Fallen Sun , came out in 2000, some 15 years from the beginning of the Dragonlance Saga and a good decade since I'd stopped reading them regularly (though I did read Dragons of Summer Flame at some point in the mid-90s). Yet it is 18 years since its release that I finally find a nostalgic urge to dip into the world of Krynn again alongside its best storytellers. Right off the bat, this is not the book to start with if one has never read Dragonlance before. Though it features enough exposition to support its own narrative, it does not engage in world building. This ought to be expected given that it takes place in a world supported by over a hundred novels before its publication. One should at least have read and been fans of the other Weis & Hickman Dragonlance novels; it is not necessary to have read the whole shebang. As the first release in a new trilogy ("The War of Souls"), Dragons of a Fallen Sun is mostly set-up material. The cast of characters is introduced, some plot wheels are set in motion, and minor short-lived conflicts spring to life and are resolved within its pages. For characters we have a few familiar faces like Tasslehoff Burrfoot (who died 30 years ago), the priestess Goldmoon, the elf matriarch Laurana, and the legendary fighter Caramon Majere. These guys were all key players in Weis & Hickman's original Dragonlance Chronicles and their reappearance seems like fan service, though Tasslehoff does introduce the plot's McGuffin, a powerful magical artifact. There is also Palin Majere, Caramon's son, who has previously featured in Dragonlance fiction; Gilthas, Laurana's son who is now King of the Elves; and Silvanoshei, Gilthas's cousin who becomes King of some different Elves. New characters include Mina, a mysterious young girl who shows up out of nowhere to proselytize her One True God and lead evil armies; and Gerard, a member of the super-honorable Solamnic Knights but who is not all that into it and undertakes a more pragmatic approach to problem-solving than the typical stodgy Knight (a foil, in some ways, to the long-deceased character Sturm Brightblade). The setting of Dragons of a Fallen Sun is the world of Krynn, a more or less generic high fantasy world of Tolkienesque mythical races, magic, dragons, and a constant futile struggle of good vs evil. The wrench in the gears of the world is that magic is departing, which leaves everyone who relies upon it as their source of power in the lurch. Likewise, the Gods have all departed, taking their divine interventionism with them, leaving priests and clerics to use herbal poultices to heal wounds instead of casting Cure Light Wounds and rolling 1d8. One piece of exposition that is repeated a few times is how the world of Krynn now has only one moon in its sky, which is different to the three that used to be there. This is of special consternation to Tasslehoff Burrfoot, a fan favorite from long ago who is supposed to have been dead for decades. Instead, he pops into the world and the story to introduce the McGuffin, to provide comic relief and fan service, and to be the reader's surrogate in the much-changed world of Krynn. You see, Tasslehoff has (spoiler) traveled forward through time with the aid of a powerful magical artifact, but the future into which he's arrived is not the future he expected. I do not know if the Krynn status quo has been well-established by other Dragonlance books leading up to this one but I do suspect that Weis & Hickman perfectly anticipated readers like me who might drop in after a long absence just because of their names on the cover. To that end, Tasslehoff is in the same position as the reader might be, so if he's confused by some fact of the world ("What do you mean Dragons rule the land?"), so are we, and the exposition is provided to both of us. I found this to be a great narrative device throughout the book, which makes it accessible to casual and hardcore Dragonlance readers. Nothing much happens in this book, which is not to say that it is boring. Rather it is setting up for the next volume in the trilogy, so we spend most of the time meeting the players and setting the contexts; putting threads in motion but not quite allowing them to collide. Mysteries are established and not quite solved. Fights are started but not quite concluded. The writing is fine. Weis & Hickman have been at it now as a team and on their own for dozens of books over the years. There is humor and heart in it. Overall, it's a fast-paced and smooth read that encourages one to move into the rest of the trilogy (and to revisit some of the older works).
