Not unlike Jungle , the movie was phenomenal, so I was excited to find out it was based on a memoir. Also like Jungle , the movie sticks pretty close to the text (despite the major change of including Richard after the storm -- because they didn't, really! I'm glad that was a fake-out, since I did not question his reality for one second and it was such a good sucker punch when he faded out and it highlighted that she really had done this all alone ), so I definitely recommend going book first. Even with a glossary and some terms explained along the way, most of the technical details went over my head since I've never been on a sailboat, but this young woman's accomplishments in keeping herself alive for 41 (!!) days on a wrecked-out yacht in the Pacific are nothing short of astounding. From rigging a replacement mast and sail when the main ones are snapped off, to navigating by sextant because nothing else was operable after the storm damage, I was amazed by how much she knew or figured out how to do to get herself safely to shore. With a head injury, no less! One thing the movie doesn't convey is the way Tami described The Voice that kept her going, alternately giving her practical advice, comfort and reassurance, or "slapping her with logic" at every opportunity when she wanted to give up or seek immediate gratification at the possible expense of long-term survival. It gives the story more spiritual depth, though other than saying it sounded like different people at different times but "mostly sounded like me," and asking it once if it's God or a guardian angel ( "something like that" ), she never pins down a concrete belief for where it's from. The writing itself is earnest and heartfelt, and pays loving tribute to her passionate if tragically shortened relationship. To quote Shailene Woodley, it's "as much a love story as it is a survival story," and that definitely comes through in the flashbacks set against lush tropical settings. The book also answers plenty of questions about what happened in the immediate aftermath and the next 15 years of her life, so a very satisfactory read all around.
