Note: I initially wrote a review here for book I of the series, when this is book II in the series. Oops. The first few comments here are referring to the book I review, which I moved here . Here is the Book II review: Means of Ascent: The Years of Lyndon Johnson II I’d love to see someone turn this book series into a television drama. It would have to be television because there is too much material to do justice in a movie. The drama would be just as wild as House of Cards with the bonus of it being true. So many events in Lyndon Johnson’s life seem like it had to be scripted. This book, the shortest one of the series, covers the “wilderness years” of Lyndon Johnson from 1941 to 1948, when his political career is stalled. He has a safe Congressional seat but that wasn’t enough for him. He desperately wants to be a Senator but doesn’t have the chance until 1948. The Senate Election of 1948 Any great dramatic series needs a colorful supporting cast. The first book introduced us to the irascible Sam Rayburn and the clownish “Pappy” O’Daniel, and this book introduces us to Lyndon Johnson’s opponent in the 1948 Senate race, Coke Stevenson. Think of the term “self-made man” taken to such an extreme it seems cartoonish. His successes and principled honesty made him so respected that they practically threw leadership positions at him: County Attorney, Judge, State Representative, and then Governor. When he threw his hat in the ring for the 1948 Senate race, Lyndon Johnson had the odds stacked against him. To heighten the drama, Johnson could not run for re-election to his Congressional seat while also running for the Senate seat. His political career would be over if he lost. Johnson ran for this election like his life depended upon it, driving himself and his team to the limits of their capacity. Johnson developed a kidney stone that made him seriously ill. He willed himself through speeches and travel while in immense pain until he had to be hospitalized. Some of the stories of him pulling himself together for speeches brings to mind the “Michael Jordan flu game” (if you don’t know anything about basketball, it was also mentioned in the Parks and Recreation episode where Leslie gives a great speech while sick). Against doctor’s orders, he refused the doctor’s recommendation of a surgical procedure (which would have had such a long recovery period he would have to withdraw) and waited, hoping he would pass the stone. He did – in the nick of time. Not before telling his aide to make an announcement that he is withdrawing from the race (an order that his aide didn’t obey even though Johnson was adamant!). How do you defeat someone so popular? Johnson kept trying different lines of attack until he found one that worked: that Stevenson is a fence-straddling coward with no principles, who is a stooge for “racketeering labor leaders” and is also possibly a secret communist. Never mind that these charges are false - laughably so (Stevenson was an Ultra Conservative with a rigid set of principles) - and not even internally consistent. It worked, especially when backed by the financial advantage Johnson had, which enabled him to repeat his message relentlessly in print and radio advertisements. Johnson was the first politician to use a helicopter, which not only enabled him to quickly travel around the state but also generated a huge amount of buzz from the novelty of it. And in true Johnson style, he cheated and stole the election. I’m going on too long so I won’t expand, except to say that the story of the steal, and the ensuing legal battle where a clever strategy from the brilliant Abe Fortas enabled Johnson to secure his victory (by the skin of their teeth with the key ruling coming moments before the cheating would have been exposed. Again, how is this real? It’s so bizarre and unbelievable.) that it seems made to be captured on film. Other Notes The core of the book is the 1948 Senate race, but a couple other things are worth mentioning. Caro details Johnson’s accumulation of incredible wealth. Johnson bought a radio station after strong-arming the owner to sell. As he used his political power to gain favors for the station, it became immensely profitable. The details got a little tedious but it is good information. Caro claims that Johnson was the wealthiest president ever, measured at the time of their inauguration. Though I’m not sure if that’s true of you adjust for inflation. Some of our founding fathers were ridiculously wealthy for their time. But let’s not get too nitpicky – he was incredibly wealthy. Though it was really a consolation prize in Johnson’s eyes. His real goal was political advancement, which wasn’t happening. Also covered is his World War 2 service. Johnson’s opponents say he used his privilege to avoid going to combat areas. Johnson describes himself as being on board multiple bomber missions with lots of harrowing experiences. As is usually this case with this sort of thing, the truth is in the middle. After some stalling, Johnson did go to a war zone. He was on board a bomber flight that was attacked and had engine trouble. He received a Silver Star for his “coolness” and “gallantry”. I’ve spent so much time reading this series that I might sometimes forget that Caro’s construction of the history is just one attempt at this. I think some of the above would be disputed by other experts. I’ll try to read some other works to get a broader perspective.
