How is this only the second Georgette Heyer romance I’ve ever read? I picked up An Infamous Army years ago and loved it; I can’t believe it’s taken me this long to seek out another one of her Regency romances. Cotillion often appears on lists of people’s favorite Heyer novels, so it seemed like a good starting point for diving back into her work. I am happy to report that, in short, Cotillion is a goddamn bonbon of a book – clever, cute, and so light and carefree it practically bounces. As an added bonus, the plot is basically a checklist of all your favorite fanfiction tropes: our heroine is Kitty Charing, who was adopted at a young age by a wealthy but miserly Englishman. He declares that Kitty will inherit his entire fortune, but only if she marries one of his great-nephews (he very generously leaves the choice up to Kitty). Kitty hatches a plan - she approaches the most sympathetic of the nephews, a delightful fop named Freddy, and presents her proposal. She and Freddy will pretend to get engaged so Kitty has an excuse to go to London and go to all the ton parties and buy new clothes, and after a suitable amount of time they’ll have a “fight” and “break up” and no one will be the wiser. (And if Freddy's rakish and scandalously handsome cousin Jack should become jealous of Kitty's apparent engagement and decide to do something about it WELL THEN) So the couple goes off to London, where Kitty immediately gets herself involved in the scandalous marriage plots of two separate couples, all while trying to keep a lid on her own marriage plot. This baby’s got everything, in other words. Rakes, social climbers, fake engagements, fortune hunters, elopements – god, we even get that scene where a character is teaching someone how to dance and they have a Moment (“characters unexpectedly falling in love after being forced to dance together for some reason” is my personal favorite in the FanFic Trope grab bag). The only thing that’s missing is a scene where Freddy and Kitty have to make out or share a bed to prove that their engagement’s genuine, since the 18th century setting doesn't allow for such nonsese. Really, the only thing I didn't like was that there was never any real payoff to Kitty being adopted - I was sure that we were going to learn something scandalous about her mother's identity, but she remains merely French, and therefore scandalous enough. All in all, this book was a fun, fluffy all-around good time, where even the villains are funny and charming. Everything was beautiful and nothing hurt, and we need that from our books every now and then.
