I love Through the Looking-Glass probably even more than Alice's Adventures in Wonderland . Like the first book, events in Through the Looking-Glass just happen and they don't owe you any explanation, logic, or sense; and it's simply brilliant. It contains some of my favorite quotes, poems, puns and dialogues and I don't think I'll ever tire of it. I will re-read it many times myself, and if I ever have to read books to children this will definitely be on top of the list. This is the sort of children's literature that I enjoy and "approve of", it's whimiscal and wonderful, free of strictly "logical" boundaries, and most important, it's free of problematic doctrines, prejudices, and all the other red flags I hate to see in children's literature. Here are some of my favorite parts: ⎯ The poem Jabberwocky (quite possibly one of my favorite poems , ever): “Twas brillig, and the slithy toves Did gyre and gimble in the wabe; All mimsy were the borogoves, And the mome raths outgrabe.” ⎯ Humpty Dumpty's explanation of difficult words in Jabberwocky: “To ‘gyre’ is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To ‘gimble’ is to make holes like a gimblet.” “And ‘the wabe’ is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?” said Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity. “Of course it is. It’s called ‘wabe,’ you know, because it goes a long way before it, and a long way behind it—” “And a long way beyond it on each side,” Alice added.” “Exactly so. Well then, ‘mimsy’ is ‘flimsy and miserable’ (there’s another portmanteau for you). And a ‘borogove’ is a thin shabby-looking bird with its feathers sticking out all round—something like a live mop.” (Those are all pretty useful words, I'm disappointed people don't use them more often). ⎯ This: “What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where you come from?” the Gnat inquired. Thank you. Finally someone gets it. As a Zoology student with an interest in Entomology, I'm saddened by the fact that most other people don't rejoice in insects. I personally rejoice in dragonflies, damselflies, Phylliidae, Coleoptera, and of course, Lepidoptera (honestly, who doesn't like butterflies?). ⎯ All those discussions about subtractions, divisions and additions: “I beg your pardon?” Alice said with a puzzled air. “I’m not offended,” said Humpty Dumpty. “I mean, what is an un-birthday present?” “A present given when it isn’t your birthday of course.” Alice considered a little. “I like birthday presents best,” she said at last. “You don’t know what you’re talking about!” cried Humpty Dumpty. “How many days are there in a year?” “Three hundred and sixty-five,” said Alice. “And how many birthdays have you?” “One.” “And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?” “Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.” Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. “I’d rather see that done on paper,” he said.” ⎯ All those marvelous illustrations, both in the original version illustrated by John Tenniel and the ones by Mervyn Peake. ⎯ Christopher Plummer's magnificent narration of the book (arguable the best audiobook I've ever had the pleasure of listening to). ⎯ And finally, the subtle sentimentality that shines through nonsensical parts. After all: “In a Wonderland they lie, Dreaming as the days go by, Dreaming as the summers die. Ever drifting down the stream— Lingering in the golden gleam— Life, what is it but a dream?”
