3.5 ⭐ Come for the Retro Sci-Fi. Pull up a seat and stay a while for a fun murder mystery and some predictive philosophising on the future of humanity. ”Ladies and germs, this is so random and bizarre! I’m joined today by none other than the lead singer of The Strokes, Julian Casablancas. Jules, baby, you just finished the book recently yourself, right?” Last Niiiiiiiiite! Yeah, that’s what I thought. What’d you think? Is this it? Yeah, that’s the one, Caves of Steel. Is this iiiiit? Umm, yeah, I just sai... Is this. IT? Mate, why are you fuc… [I could] take it, or leave it, or take it, or leave it! Wow, really? That’s a little harsh, no? I thought it was a fairly entertaining Murder Mystery with a scarily believable distant future Sci-Fi setting and some interesting Philosophical musings that beg relevant questions of our present-day selves. I mean, in just 250 pages, Asimov gives us what is, in its own right, a decent investigative thriller set in New York, 3000 years in the future, imbued with well-trodden but always compelling topics such as the unsustainability of an ever-increasing population and its correlation with life expectancy, interplanetary colonisation, genetic selection/designer children, the self-sufficiency (or lack thereof) of cities, AI’s role in the future of humanity and problems pertaining to inevitably differing levels of acceptance, culturally ingrained prejudices and the age old dilemmas on the morality of sacrificing one for the good of many/the end justifying the means etc. Yeah, I read the book. Of course. Sorry about that! Any other thoughts? New York City Cops! Yeah? New York City Cops! What of ‘em? New York City Cops! Jehoshaphat, man! Spit it ou… They ain’t too smaaaart! Oh, Julian, have mercy my friend, you’re such a loose cannon! Clearly, you’re referring to Elijah Bailey , a New York City Police Officer and the protagonist of the story! Well, I agree! I don’t remember a whole lot about him from the short story ‘Mirror Image’ in ‘The Complete Robot’ but I certainly don’t remember him being so dull and/or dim-witted. Aside from being completely vanilla, cardboard, beige, or whatever other word best describes an entirely basic and mundane individual, he also seemed like an absolute simpleton for 90% of the book, rarely living up to his reputation as a sharp-minded detective with incredible attention to detail. For the most part he just asked stupid questions and made completely bizarre and unjustified allegations based on ill-informed conclusions. He proves himself not entirely clueless in the end but really, the majority of his investigative predictions are wildly off the mark. Anyway, thanks for joining me and offering some incredible insights, Jules! I don't care no more, I know this for sure, I'm walking out that door! Hmm, suit yourself, pal! *(mutters)what a prick!*
