Attempt #2. I wrote a very eloquent long review and then lost it :P It's happened to all of us! Lots of food for thought in this relatively short story. I tried to read Foundation a while ago and couldn't get into it. I found it dense and difficult to read and put it down after the first chapter, so I was a bit nervous that I'd encounter the same style in The Caves of Steel . I was very pleasantly surprised to find this very easy reading and full of insightful deep ideas to boot! Needless to say I highly recommend this one. The world building was great. The setting is a future version of Earth in which there are too many people and not enough resources. The society that results is rather an interesting mix of ideas, being socialist in the sense of group housing and food, but capitalist in the sense of extra perks for those with better ranking jobs if you've worked hard and done well. I'm not sure what to call the resulting society but it makes for an interesting model. For me one of the most interesting questions in the book was whether or not it was necessary for Dr. Fastolfe and Daneel to drug Baley before convincing him that colonisation was the best course for humanity. Would the logic of their argument not have sufficed? Baley got through to Clousarr (though not to the same degree) without the aid of drugs. It's not a question that can be answered, but it's one I can't help but wonder about. I also thought that Jezebel's reaction to her husbands interpretation of the story of Jezebel in the Bible was very strong. She put so much of the definition of herself into her name and an association of that name with a story that when confronted with a different version she reacted drastically. It's amazing how strongly an idea of something can influence our lives. The questions of A.I. and creating "life" is always fascinating. What makes us human? What about empathy, our "soul", our ability to feel? Can't these emotions be programmed? I'm not convinced either way but it's something I do enjoy thinking about.
