This is a 2 for 1 as the book contains 2 novellas. The first is called A Simple Tale and it is essentially. The trauma of it (WWII camp) is distanced by the matter-of-fact narration and the protagonist's work ethic and lack of instrospection. As a young girl, Maria Poniatowski is OST, "taken" from the Ukraine to a Nazi work camp for the duration of the war. She is then a DP living in a refugee camp until she is repatriated in Canada with the Polish husband (Lev) she met in the camp and the baby they conceived. Now she is an immigrant and she and her husband find work, move forward and leave the past behind. She becomes a cleaning lady and her relationship with her clients, especially Mrs. Ellington forms the majority of the story. How the two old women strive to live in the present and form a friendship that transcends class is part of it, as well as the dashed dreams for Maria's only son Rod who should have thrived in a new place given all the advantages of a stable family and country. Maria is clearly a heroine, though vastly understated and underappreciated and her story in all its different parts, "like the fragments of a broken mirror" form a whole that reminds us of the underlying tales of the "least, the last, and the lost." The second story, the Hunters is well-written but wordy. Understated pyschological drama - mostly interior - for the narrator who is taking a summer sabbatical in London to research her book about death. She has just left a relationship, about which we get no information, but it has taken a toll, as does her subject matter and her abject alone-ness. She gets a flat in a borderline part of town and loves the space itself with its feeling that "someone was happy here" but that soon becomes tainted by the narrator's imagination and her acquaintance with the downstairs neighbor, Ridely Wandor. She is an unattractive woman of indeterminate age who is a carer for the elderly by profession and for her own mother in particular. The title refers rather obliquely to the rabbits the Wandors keep which are their own symbol to decipher. Ridley confides to the narrator that her elderly patients keep dying on her in short order. The narrator, in her own fragile mental state begins to conjure this info into all sorts of scenarios in her mind, none of them seemly. "...I slowed, hibernant, in isolation, and my morbid imagination turned the cememtary soil like any professional gravedigger." p. 144 Ridley is rather needy, so on the few occasions the two meet, the narrator is elevated to "good friend" status, though doesn't share that opinion. The narrator returns to the US when summer ends and moves on with her life in a triumphant fashion comparing this trip to a chrysalis from which she emerges a different person. She doesn't give Ridley another thought until she returns to London with her new lover a year later and comes to know the truth of her story which is way off the mark from her imagination. A cautionary tale about judging by appearance, isolating, and living in your own mind.
