A summary i wrote for my Literary class called "Being Romantic:" In the late 18th and early 19th century, many poets rose to prominence in Europe in what came to be known as “The Romantic Period.” Much debate has been garnered over the way in which the term “romantic” has evolved over the centuries and whether the term has took on a completely different meaning as a result. In A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, the term “romantic” is used to describe a type of passion. As Mary Wollstonecraft says, “I do not mean to allude to the romantic passion, which is the concomitant of genius” (p. 184). Wollstonecraft using “romantic” to categorize an emotional fervor suggests that she, along with other writers during the Romantic Period, used the word “romantic” to label erotic sentiments. This is proven when she says she “does not mean to allude to” this erotic, or “romantic passion,” when discussing passions women should seek that embolden the “pursuit of virtue and knowledge” (p. 184). This distinction lends insight to how “romantic passion” is tied to erotic relationships, and thus, is different from the passions in which Wollstonecraft is encouraging. The term “romantic” is also used in Edgar Allan Poe’s “Ligeia.” The narrator in “Ligeia” is contemplating his relationship with the lady Ligeia and wonders if he engaged in a “wildly romantic offering on the shrine of the most passionate devotion” by not inquiring about her past (p. 644). Once again, “romantic” is associated with passion when discussing amatory love, this time being described as a wild or untamed outpour of eroticism. The works of the artists and poets of the Romantic Period were a direct contradiction to the sentiments that the Industrial Revolution and Enlightenment brought about. While the Industrial Revolution and Enlightenment embodied modernization of society through scientific reasoning, questioning and manufacturing, the literary and artistic works during this time expressed the emotions, spirituality, and “romanticism” of humans that often arose in response to elements of nature, relationships, and political movements. By labeling this era as “The Romantic Period” years after its conclusion, society deemed “romanticism” in that day and age as an exploration of all emotions of the human capacity, some of which were sadness, anger, love, and happiness. Writers during this era of literature and art used the term “romantic” in a similar way to what the term has come to mean in present-day society. The term “romantic” is now used to describe moments in which feelings of erotic love are evoked. This is often shown in popular culture through movies and music. In fact, there is a whole genre of “romance” movies that are centered around passionate love affairs and even a sub-genre of “romantic comedies” that explore humorous flirtations. The idea of “romance” in music is often tied to what we refer to as love songs. These love songs express one’s emotional yearning or sexual attraction to another person and thus, are deemed “romantic” in the 21st century. While writers of the Romantic Period and people of the 21st century use the term “romantic” to describe love or passion, the time periods differ in their execution of it. Poets during the 18th and 19th century used the term “romantic” to refer to an overpowering feeling of one’s deep love for another, while “romantic” in the 21st century is used to brand displays of one’s affection through actions of candlelit dinners or walks on the beach. Romanticism in the present is a physical depiction of sexual connection while writers of the Romantic Period used it synonymously with intangible erotic or passionate emotions.
