"Constructing a pope," said Tennyson, "is a strange task to set oneself. I wonder where the robots got the idea and what they expect the end result will be." "You never can tell about robots," the captain observed. "They are a funny lot. Spend enough time in space and you quit worrying or wondering about why anyone is doing something or what they expect from doing what they do. None of these rummy aliens think the way we do. They're a bunch of zany bastards. Compared to most of them, robots are downright human." "They should be," said Jill. "We are the ones who dreamed them up. No other culture did. There are those who will tell you that robots are extensions of ourselves." "There may be some truth in that," the captain agreed. "Screwy as they may be at times, they are still several cuts above any alien I ever met." Clifford D. Simak's Project Pope is an old fashioned science fiction yarn written in the 80s but steeped in the sentiment of the 50s. There was a lot of interesting ideas here, but Simak maintains a carefree plot that hints at deep implications he never explores. The conclusion does not conclude anything, really, and we leave this intriguing universe wishing at least one of the darker paths had been followed. First, Clifford's view of robots as religious zealots cloistered in collecting data on the universe to unify existence is heady. He notes several times robots are creatures made in the image of humanity--and this religious undercurrent is never explored: robots know their creators, man doesn't. Simak's robots do not really act like robots; they have emotions, feelings, and foibles. Like I said, the novel has a 50s vibe to it. Second, I'm not sure about the revulsion these human characters have towards aliens. The quote at the start of this review occurs in the opening pages of the novel; over two hundred pages later, we have this one: Other roads seemed to be for pedestrians only. Along these crawled and hopped and skipped and walked and jumped and shambled an array of life. Looking at them, Tennyson remembered the Wayfarer captain and his loathing of all alien forms. Seeing some of those that traveled the pedestrian ways, he could understand something of the captain's loathing. In his time he had come into contact with varied alien life, but never in such horrifying forms as he now was seeing. Humans created robots in their image and humans have no difficulty accepting them in their culture despite the rather non-human outlook robots possess. Within this novel, aliens, the truly non-human, trigger deep-seated fear and paranoia. We have an innate fear of the other; the belief that a snake is more horrific than, say, a dog, is because a snake looks less human. Consider: The robots in this novel are striving to discover the truth of the universe, the maxims of a universal creator. We have humans, we have non-humans--and the novel traverses the territory mainly focused on humans. For the aliens encountered, their thoughts or actions are primarily and at times disappointedly human. They aren't allowed within the scope of this story to be truly "alien." Simak's novel is a fascinating story. He provides glimpses of ideas which would take another novel to unravel, leaving them simmering on the wood-stove. He keeps the story interesting but focused and succinct. It's a throw-back novel with some rather fantastic elements and no real hard science, but it's worth the time. Project Pope definitely puts the "speculative" in "speculative fiction."
