o/m/g, where was her editor? In the edition I read, this book has 433 pages. When I was half through, I was only up to her 5th grade! When I had about 100 pages to go to finish, I had reached her 15th year. A year, by the way, when she flew to Paris for her Christmas vacation to be with her boyfriend who had already finished high school. She chastises her parents for not communicating with her more or giving her better gifts! In fairness, there's much discussion in the first couple of chapters about anti-Semitism in America during approximately the first half of the 20th Century and J.D. Salinger's uneasiness with being Jewish. In fact cultural sociology, philosophy, and psychology are woven throughout much of this book and evidently throughout Peggy Salinger's life - at least to-date. More intelligently, though, than the mish-mash of Christian Science and some version of Zen Buddhism and of Hinduism that seemed to be uniquely J.D.'s own or his own and that possessed by his Glass family. Of course I read "Catcher in the Rye" when I was young, although not that young. I think it was required reading in a first year college course. After that I read the short novels about the Glass family: "Raise High the Rough Beams Carpenter," "Franny & Zooey," "Seymour: An Introduction," come to mind. There may have been others but I gave up on Salinger (the father); I couldn't make sense out of his brand of Buddhism. When he died about two years ago, I thought briefly about him again so when a movie was made about his life, I watched it. It got bad reviews, but I rather liked it and got curious about his life and his work. That's why I decided to read his daughter's memoir. It's not all bad. She's clearly intelligent and a good writer. But what kind of self absorption does it take to keep and/or detail the endless small incidents of pre-school, elementary school, high school and on and on? And she footnotes enough to make you wonder if she wants this to resemble a scholarly work. She seems to have been a very sickly child and even sickly as an adult to the point of being at death's door more than once and often an occupant of hospital emergency rooms. From what she writes, it's hard to say if her sickliness was congenital, a result of emotional breakdowns, or attributable, at least in part, to her father's scorn of medical science in favor of mind-over-matter, homeopathic cures, and Christian Science beliefs. Strangely enough, though, she seems to have had an endless supply of friends who took her in (as opposed to her heartless, detached father and, perhaps, mother). I say "strangely" because she doesn't present much of a picture of herself that would attract loyal friendship. In order to shed light on her own upbringing and her father's writing, she deliberately conflates the actions of Holden Caulfield and various members of the Glass family with things her father said to her when he was "raising" her. J.D., in his daughter's telling, comes off as one of the phonies Holden Caulfield so despises. If Holden tried to catch young innocents and save them from danger, Peggy does not see her father as doing the same. Rather he wants to keep everyone (especially young girls - his daughter and his wives or live-in girlfriends) in a state of arrested development; they are not to grow up. They are never to contradict or defy him. Even if you think Peggy has a too jaundiced view of growing up a Salinger, I think she does illuminate much of J.D. Salinger's writing. Whether she found the catharsis she was seeking in writing her memoir or was able to exorcise her demons, it's hard to say. She does end on an upbeat note. Most of the book is a downer. I think she had to give up trying to be a dream catcher. But she does want to catch her own child - coming through the rye or not.
