I've always been fascinated with the space program, ever since visiting the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center as a child in 1977. It was only eight years since Neil Armstrong took his first steps on the moon and less than five years since the final Apollo mission - Apollo 17 in December 1972. This is a truly beautiful book. I picked up my copy 10 or 15 years ago in a sale - the binding was damaged, but the breathtaking photos within were perfectly preserved. The recent 50th anniversary of the first Moon landing caused me to take this book from the shelf and read it again. The images are a fantastic collection of the actual imagery from the Apollo program 1967-1972, with a few from the Gemini program thrown in as well. The photographs are selected from the thousands (over 32,000 actually) in the NASA archives and they are reproduced in exquisite detail and quality. Although the images are from more than a dozen missions, they are put together to recreate the story of a single mission from launch to touchdown. They show the spectacular imagery of the moon, the spacecraft and of the Earth from space, but also the very human side of the astronauts doing their jobs. The photos fill each page of this large format photographic monograph, some moonscape panoramas extended by double gatefolds in an effort to capture the grandeur of the moonscapes. It includes some of the most famous images that we know and love - the views of Earth from the Moon, the footprint in the moondust, and others. But some of my favourites are of the astronauts in candid moments. For example, Eugene Cernan, mission commander of Apollo 17 back in the lunar module after three days exploring the Moon's Taurus-Littrow valley - grimy and exhausted staring towards his co-pilot, Harrison Schmitt, who took the photo. Another would be James Lovell trying to sleep in the freezing temperatures of the crippled Apollo 13. Another is the photograph of his family portrait that Charles Duke (Apollo 16) left behind on the surface of the Moon. The book includes helpful mission data on each of the Apollo missions; a graphical representation of the stages of the missions; a map showing where each mission touched down on the surface of the moon and their relationship to each other; as well as captions and technical details for each photograph. Two essays are included at the back of the book. One, 'The Farthest Place' by Andrew Chaikin on the experience of the astronauts and the program overall includes a quote from Eugene Cernan which I particularly like: "Every guy that's gone out to lunar distance is amazed by the beauty of the Earth," Cernan declared. For him, the sight was the single experience he most cherishes from his two lunar voyages, one that evoked feelings of spiritual awe. He recalled thinking, "I must be at a place that God envisioned before he created this universe. I must be seeing the Earth as he saw it before he created it. It's just too beautiful to have happened by accident." That seems to be a theme of the book: that the greatest discovery of the Apollo missions was Earth - looking back and realising this precious thing that we live on, enjoy and have responsibility for. The other essay is called 'The Skin of the Moon' and is by Michael Light, the photographer who selected the images. This will be particularly interesting for photographers as he describes the process of selecting and preparing the photographs for publication as well as the peculiarities of space photography (there are some). Get a hold of this book if you can - even if you just borrow it from a library. You will be rewarded. Show more
