And I thought I knew all about the Trumans! Like many Americans, I’m a great admirer of Harry and Bess Truman and I thought I knew all about them. Harry was the Man from Independence . Harry and Bess were childhood sweethearts. Bess was an equal partner in her husband’s political career - managing his Senate office, encouraging his rise in politics, and serving as his sounding board and closest adviser when he was President. She was (according to observers) a completely devoted wife and mother. In reality, Bess was from Independence, but Harry grew up on a farm quite a distance from the town. They were NOT childhood sweethearts. Harry may have fallen in love with Bess the first time he saw her, but her family was several social cuts above his and he didn’t fit into her world. She was opposed to him running for the Senate, although she later came to enjoy life as a Senator’s wife. She didn’t run his Senate office, but was put on the payroll there because her small salary was desperately needed to support the family. She was strongly opposed to his accepting FDR’s offer of the Vice-Presidency and fought tooth and nail against it. She feared FDR’s death and hated the idea of being a First Lady. And until her mother’s death, she was far more devoted to that lady than to either her husband or her daughter! I found this book on sale and only hesitated about buying it because I wasn’t sure Margaret Truman could be even-handed about her mother’s life. I needn’t have worried. She loved both her parents, but by the time she wrote this book, she was 62 years old and the mother of four grown sons herself. She could see her parents clearly and honestly, with tolerance and humor. She appreciates their strengths, but never ignores their weaknesses. A valuable source was letters she found in Bess Truman’s house after her death. Those letters had been mislaid and forgotten or the very private Mrs. Truman would have destroyed them. After he left the White House, Harry Truman was horrified to find his wife burning some of their letters. “Think of history!” he protested. “I AM!” she replied grimly. Fortunately, Bess and Harry Truman were prolific letter writers and many exchanges were saved, along with letters from her many friends. I think Margaret Truman was as surprised by what she learned in these letters as I was. The best words to apply to Bess Truman are “oldest child.” Back in the days of large families, birth order was an important factor in determining personality. The oldest child in a large family is normally overly responsible and carries that burden into adulthood. Bess Truman’s life was driven by one event - her father’s suicide when she was a young girl. Her mother had an iron will, carefully camouflaged by assumed helplessness and fake ill-health. Her husband had "escaped" and caused heartache and shame by doing so. In retaliation, she ruthlessly bound her children to her with umbilical cords of steel. As the oldest child and only daughter, Bess believed that her mother's happiness was her primary responsibility. That obsessive sense of responsibility deeply affected her marriage and her relationship with her daughter. This is a fascinating, well-written book. If I’d realized it's over 400 pages long, I probably would have passed it up. Fortunately, I didn’t. I wasn’t even tempted to skim because every word held my attention. It’s a valuable look, not just at Bess Truman, but at American social, economic, and political life in the 1900’s. There are incredible stories of Bess, Harry, their relatives and friends, and all the worthy and unworthy political allies and opponents they dealt with. I wouldn’t have missed this book for anything!
