As with so many collections, this book is exceptionally uneven. There are also a few issues with the author that get in the way: 1) he dwells a lot on the scene of which he was a part, and those punk, etc. drug-filled blah blahs get tiresome; 2) while most of the time his snarky and clear attitude worked to inject life into the story, sometimes his personal feelings got in the way of the journalism; 3) he's definitely a dick; 4) there are no women in the book. This last one was pointed out to me by someone else before I started reading the book, and coupled with #1 it does make the collection feel a bit shallow at points. That said, there are some big pluses. This book dives head-first into trying to tell rock'n'roll from the ground, less a criticism and more of a matter-of-fact account, without feeling dry. I appreciated the frankness, and I really loved how in a lot of instances the goal seemed to confront the mythos of rock iconography and just say, "Look, some of this is tragic, but a lot of it is just bullshit they bring on themselves because to make some of this art you've got to be fucked in the head/a bit of a dick/self-indulgent/etc." Best chapters for me: 3/4 of the Brian Wilson chapter; Jerry Lee Lewis; Syd Barrett; Brian Jones; Miles Davis, Neil Young. However, sometimes he clearly needed more editing or just better content. There's a chunk of stories mostly in a row that just drive home the "rock stars do a lot of drugs, and that causes problems" motif, and the writing often in these cases just rambled. Being about contemporaries of Kent feel like he was writing too close to home, and it didn't work. Worst chapters: Stones/Babylon (which has interesting tidbits but rambles), New York Dolls, Shane McGowan> Guns'n'Roses>Mancunian Candidates (worst consecutive chapters bar none), Lou Reed, Iggy Pop (4 Faces) because it was too long and winding (even though the content and concept was a good one), Eminem (although I like the initial conceit). I would have to say that I would only recommend to most people specific stories as opposed to the book as a whole. While I definitely learned a lot out of many of the chapters (even the bad ones) that helped yield a more complete vision, of which I personally am glad I've read it in its entirety, it's ultimately too flawed to be for anyone but the most hardcore music aficionado (or people who really dig Kent's scene from the 70s/80s, towards which this is definitely skewed).
