The Hiding Place is a story about how the depths of faith and spirituality can get a person through even the darkest nightmare. Corrie ten Boom and her family led the Dutch Underground during the Nazi occupation of Holland, aiding and hiding Jewish people in a secret room in their home above their watchmaker shop. Their efforts eventually cost them their freedom and in some cases, their lives. Corrie and members of her family are arrested and sent to a concentration camp. This is not exactly a new story; we have heard numerous inspirational stories of people who have suffered monstrosities beyond our imagination. What sets Corrie’s story apart from many, though most surely not all, is that her family had the capacity for allowing their faith to grow even more throughout these times of torment. They shared their love, their hidden Bible, and their love of God with all those who would listen. They looked at the smallest things as a gift. Most of all, they understood the true meaning of forgiveness and how it can set one’s soul free. Upon meeting one of her former S.S. jailers at a church service years after these events, Corrie struggled to eventually accept the hand held out to her by this man. “As I took his hand the most incredible thing happened. From my shoulder along my arm and through my hand, a current seemed to pass from me to him, while into my heart sprang a love for this stranger that almost overwhelmed me.” What I struggled with the most in this account is the idea that Corrie and her sister Betsey attributed all of their strength to God alone. They did not personally take credit for any of their courage or capabilities. Corrie later states “If I had ever needed proof that I had no boldness or cleverness of my own, I had it now. Whatever bravery or skill I had ever shown were gifts of God – sheer loans from Him of the talent needed to do a job.” I don’t believe these gifts are taken away from us. I do believe she had these gifts all along and should congratulate herself on having the knowledge and strength to use these gifts in such a powerful way. Her feelings that these gifts were later absent were possibly a result of a bit of natural fear and vulnerability due to all she endured, not because something was given and then taken away from her. Despite the fact that I found this memoir informative and the ten Booms admirable, there was a bit something lacking in the storytelling. It fell a bit flat for me and was maybe due to the span of time between when these events occurred and when this story was written. It perhaps lacked a bit of the urgency and poignancy I have come to expect. On the other hand, it still remains a very interesting book. I gave this 3.5 stars rounded to 4 stars for the heroism shown by the ten Booms and for my admiration of their undying faith and the inspiration they offered to hundreds of individuals during their time of need.
