64%; This is a pretty boring invasion story. Really boring. The aliens are largely absent— they’re behind walls doing “inscrutable things” all the time. Or rearranging Stonehenge like LEGO blocks, also inscrutably. And there is zero human resistance for 226 pages & 13 years of alien occupation because the “Entities” (as they’re implausibly called by humans) can read minds & psychically manipulate humans. So, you know, essentially god-like. Not a great choice for generating a compelling action-driven story. Which it isn’t. So there’s almost no aliens & no human fight-back for the majority of the book. Another interesting/disastrous choice is to spread out all this non-action over 48 years. So, the aliens… They’re comic book aliens from the 50s, purple people-eaters: 15-foot tall purple squids with orange spots & yellow eyes. And we don’t see them much at all (see above, their inscrutability). Occasionally they go out for a ride in their hover cars… and that’s when one gets whacked by a sociopath tween who “loves” the aliens so they don’t detect any menace from his mind as they hover by. Yeah. So then he doesn’t share this with anyone for about ten years (see: sociopath) so the rest of humanity has no idea of this blow against their oppressors & potential weakness to exploit. Yeah. It’s utterly ridiculous. So what then actually happens in this story? Lots of family drama, driving & hooking up. And some mumbling about how they can’t possibly hope to ever defeat the invaders. The author betrays two pretty odd preoccupations: one for detailed descriptions of driving routes in/around Orange County & a second for graphic descriptions of breasts & pubic hair. I didn’t finish but came across at least four of each. Which honestly is about six too many for any reputable sci-fi. Seriously, man… Anyway that’s what’s left—procreations in this boring military family over 30 years on an isolated ranch above Santa Barbara, with occasional digressions into generically rendered hacking of alien computer systems. Interspersed with hook-ups & babies— lots & lots of babies. With so many generations and every other male of the clan named Anson (of all names) it’s so not worth trying to remember who’s who. Because nobody does anything anyway (with exception of…). It’s not a good story & it’s tragically conceived. Mortally flawed from the start & laughable at several points. I only kept reading after 100 pages to see how stupid it could get. Certainly not the “Epic Masterpiece” it’s labeled on the cover.
