Walking That Lonesome Valley An old American gospel song teaches that "You got to walk that lonesome valley/Well, you gotta go by yourself/Well there ain't nobody else going to go there for you/You gotta go there by yourself." I was reminded of this much-loved song in reading Nadine Gordimer's much more complex and possibly heartbreaking exploration of this theme in her aptly title novel, "None to Accompany Me". Gordimer (1923 -- 2014) was a South African author who wrote about the evils of apartheid, among other themes, and who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1991, three years before the publication of this novel. This book was my first exposure to her work. "None to accompany me" is a challenging difficult work written during South Africa's time of transition. Gordimer's novel explores the brutality of the old South African regime and the difficulties in ending apartheid and racism without a bloodbath. I learned a great deal from her portrayal of these difficult times. Gordimer combines her story of political transition with a much more personal tale, a bildungsroman, of her main character, a white woman named Vera Stark. Vera is a lawyer who works for the equivalent of a public interest law firm that helps black people secure the land in South Africa that rightfully belongs to them. The firm is loosely connected to the broader Movement to end apartheid. Vera had been married when young and carried on an affair when her husband served in the military during WW II. She divorced her husband to marry her lover Ben, a sculptor and an academic. Ben gave up his artistic and intellectual goals to devote himself to Vera. For her part, Vera devoted herself to her career and to her adulterous love affairs rather than to Ben and the two children. The political and the personal aspects of the novel are awkwardly woven together. Both South Africa and Vera are in times of transition which, the book suggests, they must resolve for themselves. I had a mixed response to this novel, but it ultimately left me dissatisfied. The strenghts of this book include the political story together with its character development, particularly of Vera. The author shows insight into the interrelationships of the many people in the novel. She explores a welter of themes with a focus on contemporary women, including career and family and their relationship, and sexuality. There is a tendency in Vera to look skeptically at monogamous man-woman marriage and to look instead at alternative forms of personal life, including lesbianism and independence, which might involve many sexual partners or, ultimately, might involve none. As Vera observes late in the novel, "[e]veryone ends up moving alone towards the self." The book makes for slow reading, with lengthy many-claused and often involuted sentences and paragraphs. Some of the writing effectively mirrors the complexity of the story and of the themes of the book. In other places the writing bogs down. I found it hard to stay with the book. In the end, a novel even with difficult themes should be a pleasure to read, and in that sense this book failed. It moved slowly and did not fully reward the attention it demanded. In addition, I found Vera an unsympathetic character on the whole and thought that my response to her was not the response the author intended to convey. Vera's life and the development of her reflections on her life seemed to me atomistic. Her walk of the lonesome valley led to loneliness and unhappiness for herself and others. Her response to gender related issues of modern life left me unconvinced and with sadness. "None to accompany me" is a provocative, thoughtful book in many ways. I felt the need to explore my own lonesome valley, and it is not the valley of this book. Robin Friedman
