Let me tell you, this book was… WOW. As the title suggests, Jane is the name for the underground abortion service in Chicago that served thousands of women before abortion became legal in 1973. Jane members risked going to jail (and some did get in some legal trouble at one point) in order to provide abortions to desperate women who might otherwise resort to terrifyingly dangerous means to end their pregnancies. Jane counselors took the time to explain the entire procedure with women during a time when these things were usually done unto women. They also made efforts to lower prices and negotiate with the men performing the abortions. As Jane progressed, the women realized that in order to fully have control, they had to be part of the entire process. Eventually, members learned how to perform abortions themselves. Despite performing abortions in apartments with minimal medical equipment, the complication rate for Jane abortions were level with those that were performed in medical settings. What really struck me about this is that members of Jane actually learned to perform the procedure themselves so that they could be more “self-reliant” and not depend on male doctors who jacked up prices and didn’t always seem to care about the welfare of the women they were supposedly helping. I also really liked their perspective towards medical care, in that they encouraged questions and didn’t want women to passively submit to medical procedures. I think that’s still a very important issue today. We tend to think that doctors (or medical personnel in general) are infinitely smarter than us, or at least more capable. It reminds me of when I had to learn phlebotomy and intramuscular (IM) injections for work. Being naive and needle-phobic, I had always assumed that you needed years of training and certifications in order to be able to wield a needle. Not so! I learned each skill in a one day training. Folks, it isn’t that hard to stick a needle in a person! Now I don’t see doctors as that much above me. I think most people could learn to do what doctors do. It’s just that not everyone wants to (or can) go to school for that long! Don’t get me wrong, I still respect doctors and I’m not saying I could go out tomorrow and perform heart surgery. What I’m saying is that if I was passionate about it and it was critical that I learn a medical skill, I could do it. In any case, if you want to learn about the extremes women went through before abortion became legal, read this book. But even more than that, read it to be inspired by a group of women who saw something that was wrong with our society and took matters into their own hands.
