2.5/5 Stars 🌟 I was anticipating much, much more. This is the 2nd book in the Left Behind series. We continue from where we left off in the previous book. Which was a high point of tension and promise. Now that our characters Buck, Chloe, and Ray Rayford have taken a stance in their faith, they each have tasks to fulfil in preparing for the rest of the trials in their Tribulation Force. With Nicolae Carpathia officially heading a new world government and our characters are in the middle of this. How will they get anything done working for the antichrist? I was at least expecting the same pacing and suspense that made the writing less obvious, but it was pretty difficult to ignore how the dialogue is lacking and that "romance" between Buck and Chloe. The romantic aspect was not the best, and it took too much centre stage when all I cared about was the biblical prophecy unfolding and really anything else but Buck and Chloe. Their romance felt forced 😬 The conversations between them were so cringe. Only for it to be resolved in such a quick patched-up way. I was relieved but also deeply hurt at the missed opportunity. Look, considering the message and circumstances of approaching hardship, I would have eaten up a great love sub-story founded on strong bonds. I was hoping that character bonds would truly strengthen in this book and some amazing illustration of how relationships keep us stronger in Christ. Especially in the choice of a life partner. Instead, I felt like it was something the authors wanted to quickly get out of the way so we could deal with important things. Perhaps they should've just left it out entirely. I might have appreciated that. Otherwise, all the other reasons I was excited for in the beginning were amped up this time. I was glad to see more Scripture, more little mysteries, and even powerful spiritual moments. I even read my bible to see more of what the bible says. I used to be confused about the book of Revelations, I still am, but I'm not scared to dive in anymore. That's a plus. The writing still was not great. The dialogue and the shortcuts of convenience. I feel like we are rushing towards something... with 11 more books left, I hope not. It would be incredibly disappointing if the entire series had character whose depth remained this lacking. I'm quite a grim reader. I like the idea of realistic struggle and conclusions - hard learned lessons. I hope I see future failed tests and hard decisions that ruin lives ahead. I didn't enjoy this one as much as the first book. Of course, I'm continuing. I'm kind of committed to finishing this series. I really am.
