“ This man could not have done that to those people. Yet every day the evidence mounted. Concrete physical evidence; unambiguous, clear. It could not be, yet it was. He could not have, yet he did. The evidence demonstrated that Jeffrey MacDonald, this gracious, charming, affable man, had fractured the skull of his pregnant wife with a club; had broken both of her arms with a club; had stabbed her sixteen times in the neck and chest with a knife; had shattered the skull of his five year old daughter with a club; had stabbed her in the throat eight to ten times with a knife; had hit her again so hard with the club that he’d shattered an entire side of her face, leaving a piece of cheekbone protruding through the skin; and then, with full awareness of what he was doing, had walked into the bedroom of his two year old daughter and, laying her across his lap, had stabbed her twelve times in the back with a knife and four times in the chest and once in the neck and then, again, fifteen times in the chest with an icepick. ... More disturbing, if he could have done this, how could I have liked him?” ~ Joe McGinniss, author Eventually, McGinniss came to terms with the facts, something MacDonald’s supporters still can’t manage, fifty years later. At almost a thousand pages, Fatal Vision leaves no stone unturned, exploring the contrast between Jeff’s fairy tale claims (about his life, relationships, marriage, career, murders) and reality. Over and over again, Jeff is proven wrong - incorrect, false, a liar. But like the most successful politicians, Jeff will never, under any circumstances, ever, admit his transgressions. Like the best charlatans, grains of truth anchor his falsehoods, lending them the weight of believability. Relying on his accomplishments and eloquence, Jeff can convince almost anyone of almost anything. As long as he’s never fact checked, the charade is perfect. This is a man so sure of his own invincibility he stood in a courtroom and told a grand jury to “shove your evidence up your ass.” Why would this man with such a promising future commit brutal acts of violence against his own family; his own children ? I’m not sure Jeff is self-aware enough to answer that question, and we certainly can’t. All we can do is speculate based on his behavior. Jeff claimed he was “rarely” unfaithful to his wife. But if you scratch the surface of his life, dozens of women fall out. His sexual conquests appear never ending. That’s not unheard of, even for a married father of two, but it hardly fits the picture of marital bliss Jeff painted. He minimizes these affairs as “meaningless” and apparently suffers no guilt. However, he does appear susceptible to social shame, keeping his less savory encounters quiet. And truly, some of his trysts are stomach turning. Jeff’s first sexual experience was at age fourteen ... with a friend of his mother’s. He was late to his own bachelor party because he and a bridesmaid “got lost” for hours. The day after Jeff’s daughter was born he gave a negligee to his old high school flame. When he should have been at home with his young children, Jeff offered to teach a neighborhood girl to drive, spending hours alone with her. Colette’s third baby was due in July of 1970. Jeff told his wife he’d be away that summer for an Army boxing team trip to Russia - a trip that didn’t exist. What better way to keep your pregnant wife off your back than to pretend to be in Russia? After the murders, Jeff drove a friend’s sixteen year old daughter across the country, having sex with her at every stop. The list goes on and on. Clearly, Jeff was trying to fill some endless void in himself with sex, his family (and the law) be damned. If you go back further, to high school, you find that Jeff took a trip to Texas to essentially live with a male friend of his father’s for months, even enrolling in a new school. This odd vacation has never been explained. The friend’s wife said she just suspected her husband was “attracted to the boy” which hints at abuse. Telling lies was not unique in the MacDonald bloodline. Jeff’s mother testified under oath to several things that were untrue - for example, that Mildred Kassab refused to put a marked gravestone over her first husband’s resting place because he’d committed suicide. Nor were the MacDonalds strangers to mental illness. Jeff’s brother, Jay, was a serious drug user who suffered a “schizophrenic break with reality” during which he assaulted his mother and ended up in a mental facility. He reportedly “got messages” out of the TV. It’s tempting to think Jeff killed his family in an altered mental state, hallucinating intruders. But given his efforts at concealment, that’s wishful thinking. Family members observed that Jeff was a perfectionist who could lose his temper with Colette, slapping her on at least one occasion. In January of 1970, the babysitter remarked that the MacDonald family no longer appeared happy. Jeff seemed pale, tired, and sullen. Colette didn’t bother chatting with her anymore. Jeff told his lawyer, and only his lawyer, that during the early months of 1970, he was taking Eskatrol, a diet pill that is essentially a methamphetamine. (Note: Darlie Routier was also taking diet pills when she stabbed her children to death.) Post-murder / pre-conviction, Jeff became enraged at the teenage son of one of his girlfriends, pushing the boy off his boat and threatening to make him swim to shore. So severe was his anger, the girlfriend packed up and left at the first chance. The lengthy interpretation of Jeff’s Rorschak test is fascinating. I agree with McGinniss that Jeff suffers from “pathological optimism.” (see Donald Trump) Jeff simply doesn’t admit to imperfections. In his mind, flaws don’t exist. According to Jeff, everything is always wonderful. His job is perfect. His children are perfect. His marriage is perfect. No matter the evidence to the contrary. I might as well toss in my two cents about the murders. Here goes … At heart, Jeff had no desire to be a husband or father. He was impatient and insulted by the demands of a young family. His schedule was inhuman. He hadn't slept in days, taking Eskatrol to stay awake. He finally climbed into bed, utterly exhausted, and found his sheets wet with his daughter’s urine. He snapped, unleashing all his frustration on Colette, the soft-hearted wimp who wouldn't keep the children in their own beds and wouldn't deprive Kristy of her nightly comfort bottle. The argument turned physical, and within seconds it was too late to turn back. He savagely beat his wife to death. Hearing the struggle, Kimberly came to the doorway. Jeff either accidentally hit her or intentionally silenced her as the witness she’d become. Jeff came to his senses, realizing life as he knew it was over. He grabbed a suitcase. But then … he reconsidered. With the Manson murders fresh in the collective conscience, a story of crazed intruders might work. His reputation would carry him. (His fabrication of this group was based on real people he’d met through his brother, Jay.) But Kristy couldn’t live. It needed to be a clean sweep. Maybe Jeff talked himself into a frenzy of Green Beret fanaticism. A Green Beret can do anything to survive. Impossible things. Or maybe it wasn’t hard for him at all. He stabbed his two year old daughter to death, staged the scene (poorly), gave himself an injury, and called the MPs. Ever the pathological optimist, he locked what he’d done up in some deep, dark room of his mind and went about his life, annoyed every time the subject popped up to haunt him. He’s a man with the selfishness of Satan, the will power of a Green Beret, and the PR strategies of Donald Trump. That’s it. That’s Jeffrey MacDonald. Helena Stoeckley is pitiable, a women so drugged out she asked for a polygraph because she thought it would reveal whether or not she had been in the MacDonald house that night. Because she didn’t even know. I envision Detective Gaddis taking her out for a “romantic” dinner, running his fingers through her dirty hair to obtain a strand for testing, and I want to weep. Poor Helena was an easy target for anyone and everyone. Then there’s Mildred Kassab who lost two baby girl Colettes before managing to raise a child to adulthood. Mildred, who advised Colette to break up with her high school boyfriend and date Jeff MacDonald instead, the up and coming doctor who would give her a secure future. Mildred, who told Colette to wait until spring to bring the girls for a visit. The new pool would be ready then. Mildred, who describes her grief like hugging a cancer to herself as the pictures in her albums lose meaning and just become pictures. And Freddy Kassab. I would give anything to have a Freddy in my life. He read the Article 32 transcript over and over again. His handwritten notes in the margin reveal every inconsistency in Jeff’s testimony. He visited 544 Castle Drive himself, performing his own experiments and measuring every bloodstain. He wore out his shoes walking the halls of Congress, hand delivering letters to keep Colette’s case alive. And he vowed to spend the rest of his life seeking justice. After all, he said, he was only fifty-two. Freddy is the hero of this tale, and Jeff is Judas. Because of the hero, Judas is exactly where he belongs. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
