As is typical of Michener's work, one of the main strong points of this book is that it's hugely informative. I learned a great deal about the turbulent, often tragic history of the Caribbean. I found it interesting, as I've been to the region several times -- I'm even getting married there in a few months -- but was never really aware of its history, aside from what I learned from visits to the typical historic tourism sites like Tulum, Chichen Itza, etc. Rather than following the pattern of novels like Chesapeake and Hawaii , which follow a set of families more or less continuously over a certain time period, Caribbean tells the story in several discrete episodes: there's a story about a character in some region, then it moves on to something else, and we may see something about that character's great-great-great-grandchild in a couple of hundred pages. The episodes of this book are made even more separate by the fact that, in this novel, Michener chose not to restrict himself to any one Caribbean island, so the story jumps around in space as well as in time. Some people might object to the somewhat discontinuous nature of the story, but I thought that it mostly worked quite well. As a natural consequence of the way the story was told, some of the chapters were quite strong while others were weaker. The very first chapter dealing with the Arawaks and the Carib was excellent -- I would have liked to have more chapters dealing with the indigenous population, but this story only included two (the other one dealing with the Maya), at which point the indigenous people more or less disappeared from the story. The chapter about the Haitian slave revolt is outstanding: the book is almost worth purchasing just for that chapter alone. Personally, I felt that most of the chapters dealing with the Spanish domination of the Caribbean were a bit dry and overlong, and I thought that the chapter on the Maya could have been much more interesting than it was. The other problem I had with this book was Michener's decision to include a fictional Caribbean island, All Saints. The chapters taking place on All Saints weren't particularly interesting, and I just didn't quite understand what purpose the island gave to the story. All Saints was portrayed as having two defining characteristics to the story, namely racial segregation and love of cricket. My thought was that, if these are characteristics common to the Caribbean, then they could have been dealt with using one of the real islands as a backdrop, and if they AREN'T typical of the Caribbean, then they really don't have a place in a book whose main goal is to give readers an understanding of the Caribbean islands. Ultimately, though, this is a book I quite enjoyed. It had its flaws, but overall I thought it was very good.
