The Age of Jackson, by Arthur M Schlesinger Jr is a must READ for any modern Democrat, and for that matter every American citizen. Arthur M Schlesinger Jr, one of the most important American historians to ever walk our planet, his father Arthur M Schlesinger Sr, one of the foundational fathers of social history is also very good, but his son in my humble opinion takes it to another level! The Age of Jackson lays out the reasons, motivations, spirit, intellectual mindsets of the people of Jackson's day and why the Jacksonian movement is forever ingrained in our brains. After reading this in depth analysis of Jacksonian democracy if one did not know before, it becomes very clear why Jackson is the only man to have a whole era named after himself! He deserves this prestigious honor and then some. This book was right up my alley, I love studying the Democratic and Republican parties DNA and their precursor parties and movements and how they have stayed the same and how they have changed. It is my third favorite historical discipline to peruse next to labor union tactics (which is not history) and then of course American labor history or American worker history after that it is most definitely party DNA. As Ted Kennedy laid out in one of the greatest partisan political speeches ever given at the 1980 Democratic National Convention in New York which is known by The Dream shall never die (or something of that nature) "The Democratic party has always been the party of Hope"! The Age of Jackson explains in great detail why that is so. This great work goes into excruciating detail concerning the Eastern Jacksonians, the labor/ liberals of the Jacksonian era, certain non household names to the average Democrat or American. Men like, Robert Dale Owen, Ely Moore, Orestes Brownson, Mike Walsh, and the great socialist juggernaut Miss Fanny Wright! Literary liberals such as Nathaniel Hawthorne and Walt Whitman, James Fenmore Cooper etc. Great economists, historians and newspaper men, such as George Bancroft, Thomas Gouge, William Leggett, Amos Kendall, William Cullen Bryant, Theodore Sedgwick Jr etc. The great liberal Progressive populist statesman of the Jacksonian Democrats such as the mighty Thomas Benton, the little magician Martin Van Buren, the plump Preston King, Benjamin F Butler (not the civil war General, who was also a Democrat) Silas Wright one of the greatest moderate liberal Jacksonians of the day, who Schlesinger compared to Lincoln when describing Silas Wrights death "indeed Silas Wright was a preliminary sketch for Abraham Lincoln". This work gives us a holistic analysis of the infamous Supreme Court Justice Roger B Tany, (author of the majority opinion in the Dred Scott case) and how important Tany was to the radical labor/liberal Jacksonian Democrats. There is so much American Social history packed into this work than I am not even scratching the surface. The Age of Jackson lays out the self-evident truth that the forever American struggle is between the producing classes (Hourly Workers, Yeoman farmers, small shop holders, mechanics (in Jackson's day that just meant folks who worked with their hands) tradesmen, whatever form we take through the decades) versus the non- producing classes (hobnobbers and stock jobbers, High capitalist, top tier bankers, silk and stocking lawyers, and today's world, our world CEOs and Wall Street Big shots). And the political form that this struggle takes is a constant political revolution and struggle between conservatives (the representative of the non-producing classes) and liberals (the responsible Representatives of the producing classes) and radicals rather left or right (The reckless experimenters, folks who want to change the world because they cannot get along in it, not because they want to see actual progress and folks who just want to see the world burn) either hurting their professed cause or pushing the more moderate folks of their cause to success(meaning radicals pushing or hurting). The reader if politically, legally, economically literate in at least a elementary sense will clearly recognize tactics that the Whigs(men like Daniel Webster and Henry Clay and many more) developed in response to the Jacksonian liberalism that the Whigs labeled workism, socialism, agrarianism. Tactical, strategic decisions such as homespun conservatism(Davy Crockett or William Henry Harrison conservatism, Richard Nixon Ronald Reagan George W and no one is better at it than Trump (for some apparent reason) these men brought this back as a modern conservative tactic) and looking to take the many AKA the working class true legitimate grievances and have them turn their grievances inward to only worry about self internal improvement and not to build social capital, form trade unions, get involved in their political community (the government at a high level) form clubs etc, and how the conservatives used the clergy as the medium to deliver this message. How the conservatives also attempted to, and we're at times successful to beat into the working classes head that every worker is a capitalist and every capitalist is a worker and that the working class should really sympathize empathize and are collective sympathy and empathy and adoration should be for the top-tier entrepreneur (we can see this today in many forms but one man who is excellent at both of these tactics is Dr Jordan Peterson). In closing this is a must read it will clear up many myths such as the Democratic party drastically changed with the New Deal Democrats and that we had no roots with labor/liberalism and social democracy before that. This book was written in the 40s so it connects the DNA line from Jefferson to Roosevelt. For our time we would say (there is definitely a DNA line) from Jefferson to Jeffrey's and also a DNA line from Hamilton to Trump. This work clearly lays out that the Democrats lost their way and were taken over by the Calhounist( the Democratic party have always been a party of factions upon fractions) between the period of 1853 to around 1876 and not truly gaining their form back until the New Freedom Democratic Party under Woodrow Wilson and not fully coming into clear picture until FDR. But that FDR was carrying out Jeffersonianism for modern times. (though this book does not mention William Jennings Bryant and his Coalition of Toilers, this was the era the Democrats started to get back to at least in a rudimentary form, to Jeffersonian/Jacksonian ends) Allowing Trump to identify with Jackson is a great travesty and it is historical schizophrenia, just as Democrats praising Alexander Hamilton who was listed in a 1947 Congressional committee report, our Congress found that Alexander Hamilton was an intellectual influencer of the Nazi regime the report is titled Fascism in Action! Napoleon Bonaparte also held Alexander Hamilton in high regard! Remember Democrats since 1900 are mantra our strategy has been hamiltonian tactics to achieve Jeffersonian ends, with the Jeffersonian Spirit behind those tactics! I personally would love not to give Hamilton any credit and switch to the saying Washington tactics to achieve Jeffersonian ends with Jeffersonian Spirit behind them, but it is what it is. In our time(2025)what is happening to our country what the Trump Administration and the Republican Congress is carrying out is Alexander Hamilton's fantasy, wherever he is, I happen to think he is looking up at us, he is salivating at the mouth and is experiencing pure ecstasy. I highly recommend The Age of Jackson
