Title : The Orchard Book of Nursery Rhymes Author : Zena Sutherland Illustrator : Faith Jacques Genre : Book of Nursery Rhymes Theme(s) : Happiness, children Opening line/sentence : Hush, little baby, don’t say a word, Papa’s going to buy you a mockingbird. Brief Book Summary : This book is a bunch of nursery rhymes thrown into one book. They range from Humpty Dumpty Sat on a Wall to Ba Ba Black Sheep. The pictures for each of them describe what is happening in the rhyme. Professional Recommendation/Review #1 : Horn book- Jacques, Faith and Sutherland, Zena The Orchard Book of Nursery Rhymes 88 pp. ISBN 0-531-05903-0 (2) K-3 series. Sutherland has chosen her seventy-seven verses with a sure understanding of the timeless appeal of her material. Lilting rhymes, stories, tall tales, and nonsense are the heart of the array, with much to see on the open, energetic pages. A fine book to pore over and to read again and again. Index. Nursery Rhymes; Nursery rhymes Professional Recommendation/Review #2 : CLCD- Publishers Weekly (Publishers Weekly) Noted children’s literature specialist Sutherland’s collection is a particularly fresh and satisfying entry in a crowded field. The selections are sequenced with care, and include many familiar favorites—from lullabies (‘’Hush Little Baby’’) to cumulative tales (‘’The House the Jack Built’’) to classic songs (‘’Mary Had a Little Lamb’’). Sprinkles throughout the verses, Jacques’s bustling illustrations brim with pleasingly old-fashioned details. Particularly inviting are the rustic landscapes, interiors, decorations and animals, though her figures are somewhat less successful. Sutherland’s accessible, informative ‘’Selectors Notes’’ proved background for interested adult readers, while Jacques offers a similar afterword regarding her art. Those seeking an attractive, well-designed nursery rhyme anthology would do well to consider this ‘’dainty dish’’. All ages (Aug.) (Publisher: Orchard Books (New York), Published: c1990)). Response to Two Professional Reviews : I agree with both of the reviews, however they did not talk about the illustrations and I fell that they played a big part in the book. Each illustration for each rhyme was clearly carefully planned out and went along with the rhyme very well. The rhymes were all crowd favorites and would be very fun for children to listen to. Evaluation of Literary Elements : Many of the rhymes had their own rhyme schemes in them. For example, in the Hush Little Baby rhyme it says: Hush little baby don’t say a word, then the next line ends with mockingbird which rhymes with word. Then after that the two lines rhyme together and so on. Also the illustrations go along with each of the rhymes perfectly. Consideration of Instructional Application : This would be great to read to younger children because they are all rhymes that are nice, happy, and easy. It would not be good to have an older child read them because they would get bored of them because they would not really be able to relate to them. However it would be good to show your classroom the collection of the rhymes and how books can do this and make it work.
