Embrace and Conquer by Jennifer Blake is an entertaining read. As a reader slowly wading into the pirate genre, this is a good story to try out if you're still finding your sea legs. Blake has a lovely writing style, and it shows from the historical tableaus she sketches to the consistently great banter between Morgan and Felicite. Blake has excellent control over each scene and character, and it's such a pleasure to read right from the beginning when Felicite argues with her adopted stepbrother, Valcour, the wisdom of dumping a full chamberpot on the Spanish troops passing by. I particularly enjoyed Morgan as a hero. He is a very interesting breed of BD hero, as other GoodReads reviewers have noted. He has an obligatory forced experience with the heroine but then reverts to this 90s HR hero afterwards. He's all about consent, as much as he can while still putting up a pretence of being her lover in order to offer her protection against the other pirates that might get ideas. He keenly feels the error of his ways and apologizes for his actions. However, his actions, like hers, are confusing and open to interpretation so it is not surprising Felicite would ask him if he planned to take her to jail. Valcour, Felicite's adopted brother, is an extremely engaging villain. It would have been interesting to have Valcour beautiful instead of consistently described as "pockmarked." Perhaps it would have added a bit more spice to the pot. Regardless, the showdown between him and Morgan is one of the best fights I have seen between hero and villain/misguided and unreturned love interest. Even though we know Morgan will triumph, Valcour had proven himself a villain not to underestimate, so Blake was able to create that sense of excitement for the reader. To be fair, all the sword fights were pretty epic. Felicite and Valcour, and Felicite and Isabella! Amazing. I also learned a lot more about ships than I expected to learn in Part Two. Also, there needs to be justice for Ashanti. That was completely uncalled for.
