4 stars ⭐️ Secular/Classic - Middle-Grade Because I wasn’t really a cat person as a little girl, I never read this book after reading “Ginger Pye” , but after finding copies of both at a used bookstore recently, I thought I would try them both out together. The verdict? Very cute! There isn’t any anxiety like in the first book with Ginger being missing, so I was able to enjoy this one a lot more. The Pye family is having a summer vacation on a small island for the whole book, so it felt timely to read it now and would be great to read during the summer! The narrator (Kate Forbes) did great for both books, but especially this one with all of Ginger’s “oof”s and Pinky’s “woe”s (as that’s how she says “meow”). I listened to this book as a split-screen with the Kindle edition up as well (both books are available through Kindle Unlimited!) while working on projects and I was very excited to get to this book that I basically made plans just so I could listened to it within a couple days. It’s a calmer story overall, but I liked it more than Ginger’s story because the whole family was together. Eleanor Estes’ other series’ characters, The Moffats, were mentioned a few times in this book and I’ve never read those, so I plan to check into them now. I doubt they will surpass the fondness I have for the whole Pye family after this book, but the author’s writing style is very charming with the 1950s kind of style. The children felt like children with their thoughts and actions, but were realistic with it all—they aren’t dumb main characters at all like some newer published books are, but still messed up on some theories and words that made for an entertaining read. Also, so slight to the illustrations that the author did herself in “Ginger Pye” , but I loved the illustration style used in this book (done by Edward Ardizzone). The line-art style of illustrations are my favorite in middle-grade books thanks to growing up on the “Cricket in Time Square” books. Main Content notes for parents- Christian- Uncle Bennie prays for God to help him stop sucking his thumb and answers “I’ll help you” for God and then continues his prayer (thanking God for the help and the answer); A couple others prayers. Mentions of prayers & praying; A few mentions of God; A few mentions of church, church going, & Sunday school; A couple mentions of people abandoning a kitten or baby in a church; A couple mentions of miracles; A mention of a city named Babylon; A mention of a name sounding Puritan. Spiritual- Cats are described as looking “wicked” or “evilly” when into mischief; A mention of Pinky having the Pye family bewitched. A few mentions of fate; A few mentions of luck & being lucky. Language + Attitude- Exclamations like “my blessed aunt” (from Papa Pye), “by jiminy” and “shucks” are exclaimed a few times each; Rachel wonders if she is “crazy” or “nuts” a few times; A few mentions of not wanting to look “stupid” to others. Both cats (Pinky & Gracie) are said to be deceptive about their true intentions a few times (particularly when playing games or around the family; regarding how a cat acts like they don’t care about something to trick you into doing what they want); Pinky is called a “first-rate deceiver” and practices her deception on the family. Jerry & Rachel get along very well, but there is one moment of Rachel being concerned that Jerry will call her a “nut” (which is noted that he has done that sometimes). Negative + Dangerous Situations- Mentions of pipes, cigars, & smoking; A few mentions of jealousy; A couple mentions of drunks & alcohol. Sensitive animal content- Some drunk hooligans go to drop a kitten in the ocean to cause trouble, but are stopped in time (the Pye family is very distraught about this with the possibility of her being drowned & Papa Pye gets mad and wants to punch the rowdies); Quite a bit about cats wanting to catch and eat mice and birds (and tearing them open) & Birds wanting to eat kittens and insects (such comments from Pinky Pye about eating up mice, wanting a tender young bird to eat, and both cats make crunching sounds like they are eating a smaller animal but do not catch anything). A man is very sad about the possibility of his missing pet bird and believes the bird to be dead. Rachel is very upset about the idea of a baby owl (and other animals) being put in a zoo, but adults tell her that the owl will get to like it there. Uncle Bennie has a dead locust as a pet and then hunts for grasshoppers and crickets to be his new pets. The author shares about crickets fighting each other to the death and the winner eating the loser. Mentions of Ginger Pye being stolen/dog-napped in the first book; Mentions of animals being abandoned; A mention of a mother cat dying; A mention of a cat killing a chicken. Pop culture/Other- A couple references to the earth being a “million years old” or a rock being able to tell the age of the earth so people won’t have to “guess about that” anymore; Jerry comments on when the earth “broke away” from the sun. When Pinky is telling about her past, she talks about her mother and then adds “the less said about my father the better” . A few mentions of Boy Scouts; A mention of Santa Claus. Time-period notes- (Some things that worked for the time period this book was written in, but might raise eyebrows now) Forms of “gay” (happy) are used thrice. A comment about people walking in “single file, Indian fashion” . A cat is called ”pussy” or “pussycat” twice; A mention of a cat’s tail being like a thong. Jerry thinks that girls probably don’t have the sense to notice something at first glance like he (a boy) would notice.
