The Amazing Mrs Pollifax by Dorothy Gilman Synopsis / "You are in effect replacing a dead man, Mrs Pollifax ..." When Emily Pollifax answers the phone that morning, all thoughts of her garden club tea in the afternoon have to wait. Her CIA handler is asking if she could leave immediately on a mission that would take her halfway across the world. What can she say but yes? Once again she finds herself off on an incredible escapade of international intrigue ... this time from the exotic towns and countryside of inner Turkey, to a mysterious rendezvous with a gypsy caravan. Armed with only an open mind and a little karate, Mrs Pollifax is the most unlikely and lovable of international spies. My Thoughts / Flashback to an excerpt of my review of book #1: The Unexpected Mrs Pollifax - In your twilight years? No husband to take care of? Kids all grown up and moved away. Feeling like there's nothing to excite you each morning as you take off to your next volunteering opportunity? Well, good news! This may be one job opportunity you've never thought of taking….. Widowed housewife, Mrs. Pollifax fills her days with her volunteer work wheeling the book cart and working the gift shop at the hospital, rolling bandages, attending the garden club and art association meetings, and joining friends for afternoon teas. Society tells her that should be enough for someone her age. Her age!! She's only in her sixties – not dead. When she comes across a newspaper article profiling an actress who began her on-screen career later in life, Mrs. Pollifax decides to fulfill a childhood dream and apply for a job at the CIA….. Now that you're all caught up on the backstory, let's begin. In book #2, The Amazing Mrs Pollifax (yes, she really is!), my absolute favourite grandmother turned CIA agent, Emily Pollifax, finds herself being transported into the farthest reaches of Turkey. When Carstairs (her CIA handler) calls with another 'collection' mission, Mrs Pollifax is 'all in'. Anything to end the sheer boredom of her safe regular life. She's to travel to Turkey under the guise of a holiday maker where she is to meet up with Magda Ferenci-Sabo and arrange for her to be brought back to the US. Magda, a known Russian spy and secret double agent has expressed her desire to defect to the US, so Carstairs is sending his most unassuming agent, a garden-club grandmother from New Jersey, on what should be a routine courier mission to collect the package. However, simple and routine plans can still go awry – and they do. Armed with money and a passport for Magda to escape the country, Mrs Pollifax's plans are thwarted when the meet is gate crashed by the local police and Magda flees the hotel. To reunite herself with Magda, Mrs Pollifax must traverse the Turkish countryside, realising that she herself is now being watched and her own passport has been compromised. There is an element of the fantastical surrounding Mrs Pollifax and the situations she finds herself in, but it's not hard to get swept up in the quiet resourcefulness that is Emily Pollifax. As with the first book, Gilman takes Mrs Pollifax and her companions into (almost) unchartered territories. Areas where most tourists never set foot. Places that have the wildest terrains; the harshest weather conditions. Her descriptions would take pride of place in any travel guide and certainly adds to the already dangerous atmosphere. First published in 1970, there is a distinct lack of anything 'modern' – no cell phones or internet – it makes you wonder (almost) how an adventure of this magnitude could ever thought to have been accomplished. However, once you have been introduced to Mrs Pollifax and see her zest for life, her unconventional logic and radical optimism, you'll know you've met someone special – and it all becomes fairly believable.
