Those of us who know way too much about science fiction literature know Robert Silverberg as one of its most literary authors thanks for poignant portrayals of middle age like in *Dying Inside* or captivating explorations of extraterrestrial life like in *Downward to the Earth*, and if you've only read from the main Silverberg canon (which is from 1968-1973, I believe?), it might be hard to imagine that at one point he was just a pulp writer who wrote things that didn't exactly push any boundaries. In fact, *The Silent Invaders* seems very happy existing within the boundaries of pulp SF, and I really don't have much nice to say about it even if it wasn't *bad* or disenjoyable at the end of the day. A bit of a weird experience, but... we'll cross those bridges when we come to 'em. *The Silent Invader* is about an alien of the Darruui race who's been modified to look like a human and have human hormonal glands in order to infiltrate society and make sure that Earth, a formidable space-faring power in this future, picks the Darruui side in the upcoming conflict between the Darruui and their archenemies the Medlin. He infiltrates Earth as a "Major Harris," and on his first night in town wanders across a beautiful woman who he's not attracted to. They spend a nice night together but before it can move into the bedroom, he gets called by his Earth contact. He meets this contact - Carver - and is told that the Medlin infiltration of Earth is worse than he feared, and that there are already Medlins altered to be like humans, including none other than the woman he had a fancy dinner with. He confronts her and she paralyzes him and brings him to a location to meet with her, another converted Medlin, and a human man who supposedly represents a subset of superhumans who are evolving on Earth. She says that the Medlins want to protect these superhumans (whose genes are starting to percolate through family trees), and that they don't want the Darruui war to stop their growth. Harris agrees to murder his fellow Darruui and turns to tell Carver about what happened. But he's got his doubts, so when he's sent into the Medlin base to kill them all, he hesitates and after knocking everyone out convenes with a superwoman's unborn fetus ("The Voice") who represents humanity's future. It links Harris with his boss Carver and he sees hatred and bloodthirst there, and when it links Harris to the Medlin woman he sees peace and love and tranquility. He then gets back together with Carver, chickens out of killing him, but then goes back and finishes the job and settles down with the Medlin woman to help this future strand of humanity evolve as a traitor to Darrui ? If you say so, Robert... This book isn't bad or offensive, but it's nothing you've never read before, and the story from the 1977 reissue introduction (which I haven't seen since I read this in the debut 1963 Ace Double publication) says that Silverberg had completely forgotten writing this book when he picked up a reprint of it in 1973. That's pretty funny, and I can see why - this totally read like it was written for the pulps, without much elegance in the writing (although it is perfectly readable because, well, it's still Silverberg) or inventiveness. It's just.... there. The world is only thinly sketched, and the character sketches are thinly brushed at best; Major Harris' betrayal of his people does seem a bit sudden, although I suppose a psychedelic experience through the conduit of a fetus will do weird things to a guy) , and no one else had any development. Like, usually you can rely on Silverberg to say really interesting thematic things based on the carefully structured ways that characters interact with each other, and there's just none of that here. There's not much in the way of themes either, believe it or not, unless you count "Good > Evil" as a theme... This book doesn't just lack the usual character development or themes, though; it lacked pretty much anything in Silverberg's arsenal. It only had one scene which made me think of his other books (when the fetus does a mind-linking thing between Harris and the other Darruui; Silverberg does like to link minds). The plot seems like something out of a Philip K Dick novel, with the simultaneous infiltrations of Earth and all that. But it lacks PKD's paranoia. That being said, this was probably similarly inspired by the Cold War, but in the schlockier way that the pulps were in need of. But I don't think this book's inspirations are worth too much decoding, so in conclusion... I give this short novel (if not a flat out novella) a 5.5/10. It's not good. But I can't think of anything out be too pissy about, so.... Silverberg gets to squeak by on this one, I guess. My next read from him should be *The Man In The Maze*, which should be good, but we'll see what happens there. Stay tuned for those updates, and to hear my thoughts the next time I whip out an Ace Double. Thanks for reading so far, and here's wishing you the best of luck out there, especially if we really are caught in an intergalactic power struggle... Show more
