A highly recommended modern classic that rises above genre; a genius of descriptive prose and psychological tension Every once in a while a book comes along which rises above the mass marketing genre pigeonhole of American publishing to become a genuine contemporary classic. This is one of those books. Originally published in 1980, Horn of Africa possessed all of the hallmarks of that era's massive publishing industry's promotional ethos. Epic in length and title; the storyline echoing the then popular male-oriented suspense-thriller-action novel theme of discontented, disconnected Vietnam vets wandering Africa in search of fortune as mercenaries, gun-runners or contract spies; Horn of Africa had the misfortune of being released a year after Apocalypse Now appeared in theaters. The similarities in tone and theme probably led some to view Philip Caputo's novel as a poorly disguised imitation. Indeed, this novel and Caputo's prose are often favorably compared to Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, from which Francis Ford Coppola drew inspiration for Apocalypse Now. But Horn of Africa is so well-written, its characters so stark and the story so relevant to our post-modern age with its clash of cultures between Islam, Marxism and the West that this book deserves a resurgence of interest and a place among modern American classics. It would make a great movie given the times we live in. And I heard the movie rights were just acquired by Stephen Altman and David Levy. Hope they stay true to Caputo's original vision. That being said, Horn of Africa is not without flaws. 90% of the novel is near genius. 10% should have been edited out prior to publication. The book traces an ill-fated CIA expedition to train Islamic rebels leading a revolt in a fictional breakaway region of Ethiopia (reflecting Caputo's experience as a war correspondent covering Eritrean rebels). The main character, Charlie Gage, is Philip Caputo's shadow -- a Vietnam Veteran turned Middle East war correspondent. Gage has lost his will to action after a harrowing RPG attack on his Beirut office kills his secretary (Caputo was wounded covering the Beirut conflict). Gage ends up in Cairo, jobless, listless and eager to do anything to regain his nerves. An overly ambitious, rogue CIA bureaucrat named Colfax recruits him for the Ethiopia mission, dubbed Operation Atropos, along with two others, Patrick Moody, a broken ex-British officer and nominal mission leader, and Jeremy Nordstrand, a sociopathic ex-Special Forces officer and Vietnam veteran. Each man takes on the mission in an effort to redeem himself from some past failure of will. But Nordstrand's plan to take over the mission and establish himself as a demi-god among the jihadi rebels sends the entire mission into a death spiral that only Charlie Gage will survive. Its an intense read, even at nearly 500 pages. The only misstep in the entire novel is a lengthy and altogether unnecessary backstory-psychological analysis of the diaries of Jeremy Nordstrand. Caputo's prose even changes here, as if he was in a hurry to add this portion to somehow explain Nordstrand's insanity. Sometimes less said is better. The book would have benefitted from a 10% reduction including that entire, amateurish analysis. It's a small but obvious flaw. I hope a brave, new audience will rediscover Horn of Africa. Given world events and the resurgence of radical Islam, novels such as this should be required reading in modern literature classes. And I hope the movie, if it ever gets made, stays true to the book. Highly recommended.
