It's a beloved children's book and it's a classic. But a word of advice from someone who went down this dark path? Know thyself , Random Goodreader. I read books from the 1930s all the time but there is just something about the way Tolkien writes that kills me slowly inside. I knew this going into it, but I really wanted to like one of his books. In my defense, my goal was to finish what I started with the Lord of the Rings trilogy. And I really tried to cling to what was happening but I just kept zoning out because there was nothing here for a reader like myself to hang onto. I want to understand the appeal of Tolkien in the modern-day sense because there are people who swear to have recently read and loved his books! The fault lies not with Tolkien, but with me in trying to read Tolkien. So, it's not you, Bilbo. It's me. And it's all the fucking songs in this thing. I've come to the conclusion that I should have read this when I was younger. Because the older I get the less patience I have. For the parents of annoying children in restaurants, for the people who tell me that my opinions are wrong, and for the books that drag ass. If I had read this when I was a kid, I'm pretty sure I would have the nostalgia glasses needed to say that this book shaped my childhood and whatnot. As it is, I got nothing. I'm not saying The Hobbit is terrible, but it's the wrong kind of story for a grumpy fart like myself who doesn't enjoy dry questing and a bunch of shitty songs in their reading material. And this thing is filled to the brim with both. It felt like I was swimming through jello to get to the end. I will say there was more humor in this than there was in the LotR books, so that was cool. But as far as plot goes, I just didn't care about any of it. What are they even after? Some leftover dwarf treasure? Dammit. I wanted to be in your club. I wanted to get invited to all the larping parties. I wanted to learn how to throw down cool elvish gang signs. I wanted to wear pointy ears & play a flute off-key at my daughter's wedding. You Tolkienites are a great bunch of people and I'm just sorry I couldn't like the books the way they deserve to be liked.
