4.5 stars As with The Philosopher’s Pupil, the novel Iris Murdoch wrote before this one, The Good Apprentice begins with a dramatic scene involving the accidental death of the beloved friend of Edward Baltram, our main character, resulting in an immense guilt that consumes him. He falls into depression and after friends and family failed attempts to console him, ends up at the home of his estranged artist father in the English Fens where he spends much of the book alternately confused and bewitched by its inhabitants and their lifestyle. At the same time, his father Harry, stepbrother Stuart, and a variety of other characters live their life in London with the usual Murdoch dramas and life crises about love, betrayal, faith and religion. It’s clear from the opening chapters that Edward’s family is a convoluted one and as the novel progresses this becomes ever clearer. There are several instances of instantaneous love where the stress of events causes one character to cling to another while other characters analyze their behavior for them, sympathetically and otherwise, and there are many pages of overwrought love declarations, passionate denials and emotional rollercoasters that tip our sympathies one way and then another. Edward himself tumbles from depression to elation to confusion and back again and ultimately he is a compelling character to follow. Unlike many Murdoch novels, there are no truly dislikable inhabitants in the novel and many of them suffer heartbreak or a deep struggle of some kind whether they be male or female. There are some wonderful cameos from a psychic Edward sees to Mr. Blinnet, Thomas’s crazy, not crazy client, Sarah’s mother Elspeth with her brusque feminism and Willy a Professor who gets teary eyed every time someone mentions camels, as his father was killed by one, and who believes in ‘salvation by Proust.’ Then there are Edwards family in Seegard who are especially bewitching with the three women described alternately as ‘cloistered princesses in a castle waiting for a knight,’ ‘elf maidens’ or ‘taboo holy women’. Perhaps that is the effect of the house and its surroundings which are drawn so beautifully, especially the secret grotto where the lingam stone stands and the misty fens that surround the property. Edward spends a lot of his time there confused as to what is real and at the end of the novel much of went on there is still unclear. At the same time in London conversations often turn to topics that twenty four years later are still current; computers, nuclear war and the environment, and it seems both ironic and prescient listening to the discussion about computers as Gods and lines such as, ‘children now are brought up on computers, not books, that’s part of the trouble’. There is humor in the book particularly in the drawing room scenes Murdoch excels at, Harry in particular comes out with some sweeping generalizations about women and love, morality and science while trying to bamboozle Midge or Stuart into making decisions about their lives, he is a sometimes overwhelming force of nature but pales into comparison against the enigmatic and Godlike Jesse. Stuart himself is a complex character whose cognitive meanderings can sometimes get tiresome but who you ultimately feel compassion for as his sufferings about morality, faith and purpose, get pushed aside by his brother and father’s dramas and who is constantly either berated by everyone or having things thrown at him in frustration. The women of the novel range from maidens to mystics, feminists and housewives, and are equally compelling from the perfectly attired but bored Midge, to the frumpy but intelligent Brownie and the fragile but beguiling llona. They have a greater voice in this novel than many of the other Murdoch novels I have read and although suffering as much as the men, have as much if not more strength to carry on and get on with their lives even if those lives are difficult. Although the men may appear to have all the force and charisma in the novel it is the women who have the power to judge, condemn and forgive. With such a cast of characters this is a convoluted and compelling book with the usual beautiful and thoughtful writing I’ve come to expect from Iris Murdoch as well as occasional mind taxing philosophizing and a mix of love, tragedy and humor. Edward himself seems to make an attempt at describing it by the end of the novel; ‘At so many points anything being otherwise could have made everything be otherwise. In another way it’s a whole complex thing, internally connected, like a dark globe, a dark world, as if we were all parts of a single drama, living inside a work of art.’ The book may not quite be a ‘dark world’ but it is a very human one. Some favorite lines ‘Only Edward could not cry properly, not as he had seen girls cry in gushing pouring streams. His tears came forth painfully as a small and healthless dew’. “Happiness, that’s what life’s about, it’s your job to be happy, not to spread gloom and despair all round. Don’t be so selfish. Get your courage back, get your narcissism back, get your myth back, straighten your spine and believe in yourself again.” “Sometimes, because of a catastrophe, a bereavement or some total loss of self-esteem, our falsehoods become pernicious, and we are forced to choose between some painful recognition of truth and an ever more frenzied and aggressive manufacturing of lies.” ‘The sun was shining and the day had established itself as a warm summer day, a London summer day with a London light and dustiness and haze of green trees and resonance of sound and emergence of colour which can seem, according to one’s mood, so genial and festive and full of spacious celebration, or so stifling and oppressive and full of ghostly nostalgia.’ ‘With a demonic accuracy, the pain of jealousy had been added now to all the others. Jealousy lasts forever. Bad news for the young.’ ‘The idea of goodness is romantic opium, it’s a killer in the end.’
