JESUS FUCKING CHRIST. I'm not easily disturbed (horror movies tend to make me laugh, and I was mostly bored by The 120 Days of Sodom ), but this stuff is exactly as haunting as Dennis Cooper's reputation suggests. And what made me crawl up in a ball under a blanket while reading this wasn't the physical violence or the extreme fetish sex depicted, no: The effectively rendered psychological horror will from now on live rent-free in my head, I'm afraid. "Closer" is the first installment of Cooper's George Miles Cycle, a pentalogy based on a real person the author encountered when they were both teenagers. Cooper, who lost touch with Miles, always hoped he would read the cycle, and even tried to reach him, but couldn't - he later learnt that Miles had killed himself two years before the publication of "Closer" in 1989. This information is unfortunately rather unsurprising to everyone who encounters the fictional George Miles, as he is a drug-addicted, severely depressed gay teenager who, let's say: specializes in lying face-down pretending to be dead while various people have sex with him. Many practices are violent and degrading, he is often so intoxicated that he can't consent, and in some scenes 40+ adults commit statutory rape against him. But what's really the worst is that he keeps putting himself in these situations, that he wants to flee his dysfunctional family and (as he experiences it) meaningless existence by becoming an object, that he's spiraling down a psychological abyss and all he encounters is disaffection. It's extreme self-harm paired with neglect and cruelty, depicted in grueling detail. It's stomach-turning nihilism. This novel reads like Bret Easton Ellis channeling the Marquis de Sade while writing a movie script with Harmony Korine for Larry Clark in his "Ken Park" era. So if you're one of the people promoting trigger warnings, don't even pick this up. As Ellis and Clark tend to do in their respective works, the book does revolve around a center (George), but there are numerous minor characters who cover the themes - here: mainly alienation and the nexus between sex and violence - in different ways. I particularly liked how Cooper works with ideas of (stifled) self-expression by showing a teenage painter and an imagined pop star. You also have to give it to the book, which is not considered a classic for nothing, that the hallucinatory prose is very strong: This text is a brutal fever dream, absolutely relentless, and being caught in George's mind works perfectly as an overpowering horror show. The composition with chapters focusing on different characters also works well. It's interesting to read "Closer" comparatively in the canon of transgressive literature, from the Maquis to Less Than Zero , Story of the Eye , No Longer Human , Naked Lunch , The Necrophiliac etc. The novel is quite the experience, and not a pleasant one. If you'll excuse me now, my Catholic self needs to take a bath in holy water.
