This is the first of Debbie’s I’ve read in a long time. I used to read them all the time. But started to read more indie authors. And I have to say I wasn’t overjoyed like I used to be after reading it. I didn't connect with either character. At first, I wanted to hate the ex-husband, Matt, for being so nonchalant about not having a job, and when he did quit it without talking to his wife, and most of all not putting his wife first above all else. However, there is talking to your husband about what you need and want, and talking (at) your husband about his needs and wants. Karen packed up and had her moved from Alaska to Oakland, California. But not before she served him with divorce papers. But here is what I don’t understand he had a trust fund so were they really hurting for money? I mean she had a job too. They had family there too, so am I missing something? Then, when she returns for Charles and Lanni’s wedding, at first Karen wants nothing to do with Matt. However, at the reception, they attempt to dance, only one dance, however, old feelings run rampant. Now they had been married for four years and divorced for two at this point. And then before you know one dance turns into two which turns into a few more. Then before you know it he was taking her home and into bed. It was a night to remember but in the light of day, the view of what the future looked like was totally different. It did not have the pleasant happy ever after one would think. Matt honestly thought he had a second chance with his wife. Instead, he suddenly wakes up to someone he didn't know anymore, who didn't even want to understand all the hard work he had been putting into his dream, all by himself. Was he delusional to think that he didn’t make a mistake by not talking to Karen first before quitting his many jobs? Of course. However, it would have been nice if Karen had truly listened to his dreams, and not lumped him into the dumps where she keeps her deadbeat dad. Now a month has gone by since she found out that she is pregnant, and she can’t bring herself to call Matt to tell him. She confides in her ex-sister-in-law Lanni who takes it upon herself to get them together. Find out if that’s a good thing or a bad thing. For me, in the end, I still wasn’t sure how I felt.
