This was such an interesting book. I love chocolate and eaten it without much thought of where it comes from, both from the bean and from the manufacturers. I had no idea that the chocolate industry was so secret-squirrel internationally and how fiercely competitive the two main U.S. companies, Mars and Hershey's, are with each other. This book outlines the history of chocolate and candy production in the United States and how the rivalries between Mars and Hershey's developed (they used to be friendly with each other) including corporate espionage. I loved learning about the lives of Mr. Mars and Mr. Hershey and seeing how wildly different men could both compete in the impossible market of milk chocolate (which shouldn't exist since it's basically a combination of water (milk) and fat (cocoa butter)). Here are some of the nifty facts I learned from the book: WWI is responsible for the production of chocolate in bars and individually wrapped so that chocolate could get to U.S. troops overseas. Chocolate and other candies were sold unwrapped in smaller pieces before the war. Hershey used to sell chocolate to Mars for their candy production. The taste of Hershey chocolate is engineered for American tastes--it's slightly gritty and sour compared with, say, Swiss chocolate. Mars is a privately owned company. Hershey's is publicly traded but its largest stock owner is a trust for a school for orphans and needy children that the childless Mr. Hershey created. Mars passed when asked by Steven Spielberg if he could use M&M's in the movie "ET" so Spielberg asked Hershey if he could use the newly invented Reese's Pieces instead. Nobody knew much about the American chocolate industry before this book was published in 1999 and both companies were furious after it was published. I'd love an update to the book but it seems unlikely given the ire that rained down on this reporter after she published book. Too bad. It's a fascinating subject and actually worked to sell me chocolate while I was reading the book--I couldn't do it without craving M&M's while reading it!
