Monica Hughes has long been a hero of mine. Her books DEVIL ON MY BACK and THE KEEPER OF THE ISIS LIGHT are amazing, and I read them over and over as a child. Long before YA books like THE HUNGER GAMES were common, books that asked hard questions of teen readers and put teen characters in truly desperate situations, she was writing things like this. DEVIL ON MY BACK doesn't have a happy ending, it has a hard ending, where the main character has to decide whether to give up happiness in order to do the right thing. In INVITATION TO THE GAME, Lisse and her friends have been declared unemployable, their only skills are things that can be done by robots. So they know they will live out their days on welfare, reviled by workers, scrounging for anything beyond the basic necessities. There's talk of sterilizing the unemployeds, their life expectancy is around 60, and they cannot leave the single neighborhood they've been assigned to. It's harsh stuff. But Lisse and her friends are trying. They're trying to make something of themselves, to be happy . . . and then they're invited to play the game. But is the game for real? And what is the prize waiting for them at the end? The premise of this book is fascinating, and Hughes' writing just whips along. It's a small book, and spare. There are no endless training montages or deep descriptions. If this book had been written today, it would have been a good two hundred pages longer, and my attention would have wandered a great deal. As it is, I couldn't put it down. But It's not her best book, sadly. There are WAY too many characters, and most of them are completely interchangeable. I actually didn't care enough about most of Lisse's friends enough to bother learning who was who. The only person given a physical description is her friend Scylla, who has long red hair and a deep voice. We don't even know what Lisse looks like. She's also the least dynamic character in the book, the only one who really has no useful skills, until the very end. With more compelling characters this book would have been 5 stars and would probably still be talked about.
