There is sickness in contemporary literature, a very great sickness; but it is hardly self-willed, and it is bound up with the situation of contemporary humanity. from the last chapter, written during the second World War Of all the books I have under the general heading of American Literature, this is the last one I would ever want to lose. That means that I would give up all the novels, all the other books by and about American authors, and keep this as the last one. Why? Because by dipping into Kazin's book, I would be reminded of, be able to read at least bits and pieces about, all those authors and books that I've loved. I'm constantly pulling this book off the shelf it sits on in the same room as my desk, the television, a lot of books - the room that I spend more time in than any other room in the house to check the index (a good one) and read about an author that I've become curious about, or am currently reading a book by. But don't think this book is a pre-Wiki listing of authors, the books they wrote, and brief facts about each. Kazin was a literary and cultural historian of America. (The primary period covered by this book is 1890 to 1940.) What he does here is discuss and describe movements in American literature and culture in this half century. The pages devoted to a single author are like a word-painting, which evokes in the mind of the reader a portrait of the artist . These portraits are built on facts, of course - but the colors Kazin uses to paint the pictures of a movement and its artists are chosen not only by his perception of facts but also, inevitably, by his own views as a critic. The edition I have was published in 1956. I only noticed today, after all these years, that it is abridged . I have no idea what or how much is missing from the 1942 edition. Perhaps I will try to find out. It has a postscript that Kazin wrote in 1955, thirteen years after the book was first published. The postscript is very brief, only five pages, so really doesn’t add more than an overview of those years. Anyway, here are the chapters in my edition. PART I: THE SEARCH FOR REALITY (1890-1917) 1. The Opening Struggle for Realism 2. American Fin de Siecle 3. Two Educations: Edith Wharton and Theodore Dreiser 4. Progressivism: The Superman and the Muckrake 5. Progressivism: Some Insurgent Scholars 6. The Joyous Season PART II: THE GREAT LIBERATION (1918-1929) 7. The Postwar Scene 8. The New Realism: Sherwood Anderson and Sinclair Lewis 9. Elegy and Satire: Willa Cather and Ellen Glasgow 10. Liberals and New Humanists 11. Into the Thirties: All the Lost Generations PART III: THE LITERATURE OF CRISIS (1930-1940) 12. The Revival of Naturalism 13. Criticism at the Poles 14. The Rhetoric and the Agony 15. America! America! The book is hardly the last word on Faulkner, or Hemingway – on Sinclair Lewis, or Jack London - on Henry James, John Steinbeck, Stephen Crane, Willa Cather, H.L. Menken, Frank Norris, Sherwood Anderson, or any other of the writers mentioned. But anyone interested in American literature of this period, and the historical and cultural forces that helped shape that literature, cannot possibly do better than to have a copy of this book at their side as they explore that subject, and read the novels of America - of America as it grew up, found its place in the modern world, and (afterwards) discovered the immensity of the problems it still had yet (and has yet) to confront. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Previous review: King John Next review: Parkinson's Law Older review: Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man Previous library review: Down on the Farm Next library review: Italy in Mind Show more
