I’m normally a fast reader, and the first story in this collection straight away got my attention and caused me to read on quickly. On reaching the end, I had the distinct feeling I had missed something, and I went back and read it again, taking my time a bit more. That’s one of the features of this collection. The stories really have to be read slowly to be properly appreciated. Even at that, I’m not sure I fully understood them, but for what they’re worth my impressions are below. Breece Pancake was born in 1952, committed suicide in 1979, and was a native of West Virginia. The context of time and place is important to these stories, almost all of which feature male characters from rural West Virginia in the 60s and 70s. Panacke’s characters work as farmers, miners, mechanics, truck drivers, etc. They go hunting and fishing, and they fight. In “First Day of Winter”, an old man asks his son to go hunting with the admonition “Won’t be Thanskgiving without wild game.” In “The Scrapper”, a bar and street brawler seems to almost consciously struggle against the affectionate feelings he is starting to develop towards his girlfriend. Meanwhile the story “Time and Again”, packs a punch of the metaphorical kind. I would have to describe this collection as one of the bleakest I have come across. Entrapment seems to be a common theme across a number of stories, especially in “A Room Forever”, “The Salvation of Me”, and “First Day of Winter”. The title story “Trilobites” has a slightly different feel, but to say more would introduce spoilers. That story incorporates a search for fossils, and that touches on another common theme. Throughout the stories the main characters uncover bones and artefacts – mouse skeletons; deer skeletons, human skulls from Indian burial grounds, and Indian arrowheads, underlining the connections that the lead characters feel for the land. A powerful set of stories, but each was written separately and I think they might work better read that way, rather than as a collection.
