There is no doubt this book brought about huge changes in New York City policies toward the poor and indigent in 1890 when it was published. I just finished "Five Points" which motivated me to finally read this volume even though I was already familiar with many of the photographs found herein, like the iconic "Bandits Roost" (which was bulldozed shortly after publication to make way for the park that still stands today). Therefore, the most surprising thing for me is how "politically incorrect" the writing seems in this day and age. I was expecting someone a little more empathetic to other cultures, but it more closely resembles the sensationalist moralizing of Victorian-era Protestants. The saloon, the gambling den and other "heathenish" practices are cited as reasons why conditions are so horrible. Nowhere is this more evident than in the chapters on Chinatown and "Jewtown," although the Italians, Irish and Bohemians (aka the Czechs) do not come off much better. However, to be fair, he cites many examples of model tenements whose more spacious and open design improved the character of the occupants almost overnight. As harsh as the author's judgmental tone may sound today, the reader should overlook the lack of political-correctness, because it is a fascinating tour of New York street life (the large tenements, the flop houses, the stale beer dives, the sweat shops, the youth gangs). Looking back, it is surprising how much survived into the 1970s (and even 1990s). For instance there is a chapter cataloging the "famous" professional beggars who were staples of the tenement neighborhoods. One in particular posed as a blind veteran of the Franco Prussian War (and made so much money, he used his earnings to open a museum in Connecticut). In contrast, the ubiquitous "blind man selling pencils" (which, until fairly recently, was still a feature of street life in and around Times Square) was generally legitimate. It's not all one relentless downer though. There are quite a few laugh out loud moments. Highly recommended especially for people who are intimately familiar with the streets of New York.
