There are some minor spoilers in this review. Nothing that gives away the main plot, but some characters are looked at in depth and some plot points are mentioned. “In the beginning there was no east and west. Where then is there a north and south?” This is the question that is at the heart of Tanizaki’s wonderful “Some Prefer Nettles.” At first, I mistakenly believed that this was going to be another east vs. west style novel, as it was a common theme in Japanese literature during this period. Understandable given that many Japanese traditional values were being replaced with more American/European ideals. Even the clothes were changing drastically, with kimonos leaving and suits becoming the norm. Though these ideas are discussed, they are not what the novel is about... at least not in that direct of a way. In fact, if there is indeed an answer to the above quote, it seems that Tanizaki thinks that there is still no such thing as east and west, north or south. Tanizaki constantly subverts any personifications of any specific core value, showing them to consistently be flawed. For example, O-hisa, who to Kaname seems to personify the eastern traditions, is scolded by the old man for using a compact at one point and she doesn’t like many of the traditional clothes. She even talks about preferring to read women’s magazines to calligraphy and such. In contrast, the most fully western character (as in the only one actually from Europe) is the madam who puts on a front of how European she is, but even after her brother’s death she refuses to leave Japan. This says to me that Tanizaki is saying that people are pretty much the same everywhere. We’re all fascinated by things foreign and new, but at the same time still uphold a lot of traditional aspects even unintentionally (this is further reinforced by Kaname saying that his marriage would maybe work in the west but would be unheard of in Japanese society towards the beginning of the novel, and then later the old man says how many relationships, including his marriage, are very much like theirs). Kaname in particularly is in love with the perfect eastern personification, which is why he is fascinated by O-hisa, he even says that maybe he could end up with someone who is "more O-hisa than O-hisa actually is." (I don't have the book on me, so this is probably not the full quote, just the gist of it). Despite this, he regularly sleeps with a woman who looks as European as possible... practically the opposite of O-hisa. Yet despite opposites appearances, they are quite similar. It turns out despite her presentation as a European who escaped her homeland, she's of Asian descent as well. Thus any presentations as fully eastern or western are shown to be... flawed. Beyond analysis though, my terms of the story as a whole; the book is ambiguous to the point of frustration. I found myself pondering throughout the novel, do they not want a divorce or do they and they are simply too lazy? It was frustrating, but intriguing. I loved the details about classic puppet theater that are presented, and found myself wanting to know more beyond what the book gave me, which is satisfying in its own way as well. All in all this is a very satisfying read. I’m rather shocked that the book was never adapted into a film. While many readers may not think the plot would serve itself as a film, many Japanese directors of the 50s and 60s thrived on this sort of material, Ozu or Kon Ichikawa in particular come to mind (the later of which directed a film version The Makioka Sisters, which is another Tanizaki novel). Highly recommended to all fans of Japanese literature, or those looking for a complex dysfunctional family drama.
