I should feel guiltier about not liking this book, I suppose, but I don't think that would be fair. A large portion of the book's latter subject matter consists of an idea that a partition between the world of the white man and the world of the black man can be adequately represented, in short, by saying that the white man assigned the black man the status of being representative of the Body (capitalization as it appears in the book) while the white man appoints himself as a personification of the Mind. I don't ascribe to simplifications like that when it comes to trying to classify people. It's as erroneous as believing one gender is smarter or dumber or lazier or more hard-working than any other, or that whichever way one's flag flys, so to speak, determines his or her character implicitly. It's the same suit all the assholes wear, tailored here and there for just another asshole to parade himself in. I honestly don't know how much any of what I read in this book had to do with being a black man in the '70's. It seemed to intimate only what it was like to be Eldridge Cleaver, and what it was like to live in Eldridge Cleaver's mind. My personal opinion is that it was fraught with a lot of contradiction, like anyone else's, but that it was also a bit too enamored of itself to do anyone any good, or to argue any point saliently by perceiving the opponent with at least a small degree of genuine understanding, if not sympathy. Eldridge Cleaver seems pretty pissed off most of the time, which isn't wrong in itself. But assigning that anger under an auspice of fighting the good fight for an oppressed people strikes me as rather egotistical. I guess I'm saying this: everything he said was not for the benefit of others, despite the high-minded opinion he otherwise held for himself as a kind of cultural illuminator. So, I guess I'm not a fan. I gritted my teeth over an unprovoked parenthetical passage written in the midst of a deconstruction of the sexual impasses of the white woman (whom the author of the book terms, in a kind of self-styled, fatuous psuedo-psychological lingo, as "the Ultrafeminine"): "At the end of her flight from her body is a sky-high wall of ice. (If a lesbian is anything she is a frigid woman, a frozen cunt, with a warp and a crack in the wall of her ice.)" Christ. What a fuckwad. A misogynist, actually. Also, convicted and sent to prison for serial rape. I believe it was in this period that he began to become a mover and shaker in the black power movement, and in which he also began this book. It is hard to separate the author from the man when there is so much shielding him from criticism for simply being a terrible human being. Anyway. That's that. There's more, but it's not important enough to mention. I think my point is more or less clear on this one.
