Even as a kid, I thought the whole, “my life is over!” opening chapter was a bunch of nonsense. How was anyone at school going to keep the kids from hanging out together? Why would their respective parents honor a request from the school that they not be friends any more? What difference did it make that they couldn’t be an official club at school? So right off the bat, I was grumbling about this book and wishing JC had continued the series herself. I think a lot of Trixie fans forgave a lot with this story because this KK cranked the romance aspects up a few notches; I, OTOH, felt betrayed. Trixie was special because she did NOT get all sappy and gooey and start thinking romantic thoughts around a good-looking guy, and I felt like she was going gooey on me. However, I loved Mrs. Vanderpoel and Brom, appreciated Spider, and the more formulaic mystery plot was familiar and I liked those, so despite the romance, and despite the fact that the characters no longer bantered as brilliantly as they did under JC’s hand, I decided I’d stick with Trixie a while longer. Reading it as an adult, I really notice a drop in the overall quality of the writing. JC’s writing was smooth, her characters witty, the whole effect of an expert effortlessly doing a brilliant job. I griped when I read Arizona about the info dumps, but in Mysterious Code we have smaller bits of info much more awkwardly introduced. Since when is Mart an expert on old swords, and why is Mart an expert on them? Regan shows just long enough to haul Bobby off stage, and never so much as greets the other kids, let alone banter with them as he usually does. Julie Campbell could tell a story with no real mystery at the heart and still hold my interest; this Kathryn Kenny could spiel out a neatly plotted mystery with the best of them, but I missed the deeper characterization and the feel of the environment. This KK does a lot of “description by listing” and other tricks common to the Stratemeyer Syndicate and those who copied that style. Gets the job done, I suppose, but can’t compare to JC’s much more integrated writing style. But, there’s the supper at the Belden’s, and the original characters (Mrs. Vanderpoel, Brom) get some attention and are interesting concepts, and I do have a weakness for plain ol’ mysteries. So even as an adult, I’m going to keep reading the series. I do wish that, after Julie Campbell quit, the publishers would have given the other authors their own individual pseudonyms, so the reader would have a better idea going in what the book was going to be.
