Set in Petal, Mississippi during the 1950's, Mother of Pearl is a story about finding love and the connections between individuals regardless of our differences. These connections are particularly meaningful in a time and place where racial tensions and prejudice are very pronounced. Even Grade is a black man born to unknown parents. He builds a relationship with Joody Two Sun, an eccentric woman with Native American roots and an ability to "read" the past and future lives of the people she encounters. Valuable Korner is a white teenage girl whose mother is a loose woman that drifts in and out of her life; her father remains unknown and unnamed to her. She seeks companionship with a childhood friend, Jackson. Unbeknownst to the two of them, Valuable and Jackson are actually half-siblings; family members that keep this knowledge from them are causing them more harm than good - particularly when the two realize they have fallen in love. This did not exactly sit well with me; I wanted to shout out for someone to please let them know before this goes too far! An abundance of additional characters are introduced, each with his or her own distinct idiosyncrasies. I struggled a bit with this book. It took quite some time for me to become interested in the characters and the plot. Once I understood where this might be going, I decided to continue and follow through to the end. The dialect was tough to get used to and parts of the story seemed just too fragmented; it didn’t really flow well for me. There were many characters and for the most part I did not feel many of them were well-developed. There was a thread of magical realism running through the book that somehow just did not work for me; I couldn’t really buy into it. Despite these criticisms, there were some things I liked about this book - vivid imagery, a touch of humor resulting from the bantering between Even and his neighbor Canaan, the bond eventually created between Even and Valuable, the connections made between several of these characters which defied the overlying prejudices and segregation in the small town, and an important decision which was made at the end of this novel. Overall I would say this book was okay - it had potential but just seemed too unpolished and choppy for me to truly enjoy it. 2.5 stars This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
