I expected this to follow in the same thread as any of Tamora Pierce's books and show that girls/women can kick butt, survive adversity and be independent. But alas, it did not. Instead, her curse is practically forgotten half-way through the book after she is taken advantage of by her superior. I'm still not sure why she asked for payment afterwards. Shouldn't she have given him money (if he was "doing her a favor")? Wouldn't that have made more sense? Why, oh why did the author have to eroticise (sp?) that scene? Rape is not erotic. It is a horrible, brutal, and sadistic thing. Oh sure, Bush tries to say that it has effected Juilene because she feels dirty and bathes constantly afterwards (which is common amongst rape victims), she feels awkward around her superior after that, and she has trouble with physical intimacy later on when she falls in love. Too bad the compulsive bathing stops after... what? Twice? Three times? No mentions of it again after that. The awkwardness around her superior is over after about a week. That's all it was anyways... an awkwardness. There's no uncomfortable skin-crawling, or wanting to find work elsewhere, or anger/hurt directed at him afterwards. NOTHING! WTF? The trouble with physical intimacy with her love is only a problem once, when they start to get in the mood. The author has to say "oh she's uncomfortable here because she was raped... but she still continues anyway." Juilene doesn't say "Let's go slow with our relationship... I was raped, which you're fully aware of. Plus, another guy attempted to rape me a few weeks ago. You're the hero, so you're understanding and will wait for me." or "I can't be with any man right now." Nope. After once sentence of narration saying that she was feeling awkward, she does the horizontal shuffle with him... because in order for someone to fall in love with Julienne (and appreciate her for who she really is), they have to sleep with her. That's the only way to break the curse so that she can get everything she had before (wealth, power, people to wait on her). She has to put her discomfort from being raped aside and spread her legs to have anyone love her "for who she is", and save herself from earning her own living. Great message for teenage girls. Thanks, Anne Kelleher Bush. I'm not even going to get into the whole time travel/incest thing...
