Cassie Plot: All Cassie wants is a designer (English Mist) raincoat. Is that too much to ask? Instead, all that's gotten any attention in her family is the new series her father's been working on that deals with troubled kids. So it's no surprise when Cassie becomes enamored with rich, sophisticated, glamorous, Dana. To her delight, Dana takes an interest in her (and only her). And before you know it they're going on shopping trips, riding in Dana's fancy limo, hanging out in her enormous mansion, and planning trips to the city. Not only does Dana lavish her with her undivided attention, but an expensive gift (a silk scarf) as a token of her friendship. But there might be more to this friendship beyond all the luxury. Only Cassie's so blinded by the glitz that comes with Dana that she can't tell that maybe she should have paid a little more attention to her Dad's article. MY THOUGHTS: I remembered the oddest little details about this one. I remembered the English Mist raincoat lust. I remembered the silk scarf. I even remembered some of Dana's outfits and the brie she brought to school for lunch. Overall, this had a great message and I think it's one we all get wrapped up in sometimes. You don't have to be a teenager to get caught up in wanting luxury and material things. Because we're surrounded by things daily that seep into our self-conscious. Television commercials, marketing, and let's not forget the biggest of them all (social media). In this "show and tell" age it's all about what you have, or what you just bought, or pictures of trips and vacations you've taken. And nothing is private. Everything (and I mean EVERYTHING) is documented and shown off online. And if you're not careful you can fall into this trap. So it's understandable that if you do meet a person that can offer you all those things you might fall prey to their charms, what they present you with, and choose to let some things slide. Things that you'll think back on later and see were right there in your face. Just like Cassie saw that Dana wasn't all that nice a person (to anyone but her). She causes a rift between her and her real best friend and almost makes her miss out on the guy she likes because she considers him not good enough for Cassie. I don't know if I would have given Dana much sympathy after using me and almost having me arrested, but then it also tries to teach us the lesson of forgiveness. And that because of people's circumstances (that we might not be aware of) we should show compassion and sympathy despite the wrong other people do to us because there just might be a deeper cause lying underneath. And that we should at least be open to giving them the benefit of the doubt. I guess if you think about it in the way that Dana's parents are the WORST, and she's crying out you feel maybe a little sorry for her. But just a little because that's not excusable in my book to be a USER! Cassie is a better character (and person) than I would have been and so is her family and her best friend. They all give Dana another chance. But that would have been it for me. The sad thing is Dana doesn't even seem to realize the extent she's damaged her friendship with Cassie. And this is true also in life with people that don't do right by other people and then are clueless. You wonder how they could not realize, but they really don't. And unlike Dana at the end of this who I believe had some remorse for her actions, some people never do. And then I appreciate that Cassie's family wanted to teach her values. Some parents today might have just caved and given her the coat. That's why a lot of kids don't appreciate anything today. Everything today comes to them way too easy. Its good to see a family with values and morals that try to teach and pass them on to their kids. RATING: 7 And the message of this story is LOOK DEEPER! Do NOT be blinded by people that seem perfect and too good to be true.
