When she was younger, Natasha experienced heartache and loss that changed her life forever. She now owns a toy store in a rural town in West Virginia, where she keeps everybody at arms distance while still interacting freely with the towns people. In walks a gorgeous man with his adorable daughter Freddie and a woman that Natasha assumes is the man's wife. So she's furious when he looks at her with heat and passion and absolutely irate when he asks her out. She soon learns that this man is Professor Spencer Kimball, her new music history teacher at the college and a single father. Natasha isn't about to get soft and give into the attraction though. She needs to keep him at a distance so those passionate, stirring feelings will also stay away. She had them once before and has no need for them ever again. But Spencer can't leave Natasha alone. She is a perfect match for him and his daughter and fits seamlessly into their family unit. He also can't resist the attraction that pulls them closer together. But Natasha still isn't talking about her past and whatever happened still has the power to affect their future. If you've read enough Nora Roberts, it's kind of easy to place this in a timeline. It's early enough that it still has "the attack kiss" which was honestly a thing in some of her earlier works. The hero just sort of kisses out of the blue without consulting the heroine. At least in this story, the attack kiss happened after some acknowledgement of attraction, but it still felt out of the blue. And in more modern stories (not HP though) the heroine would have slapped the hero for it. This is also in the time of the head-hopping...I mean, holy crap, one paragraph would be Natasha and the next would be Spencer with absolutely nothing to signify the switch had happened. Talk about confusing, but IIRC also fairly standard for the earlier works. However this is late enough that we see sex scenes, which are passionate and romantic, but decidedly NOT erotic. The language is kind of vague with lots of describing of feelings and looks, but not of what they're actually doing....unless you believe they're wrestling. Lots of tumbling and covering and challenging and offering, but not a lot of penetration, sucking or biting. It usually ends with him "moving inside her" or "slipping into her" and then reaching new heights of pleasure together. This is fairly standard NR - the passion is there, but the steam factor is pretty low. I give props - I have read some children in NR stories that were completely unbelievable, either too adult or too child-like for their age or WAY too perfect. You also see a tendency for parents to be way too perfect, but this is quite different here. Spencer was once an awful parent trying to make amends and it really feels like he's still trying to figure it out. So the relationship between Spence and Freddie was really well written - you can honestly get feels from the way he describes how much he loves his daughter. It's probably my favorite relationship in the book...even more than Spence and Natasha. They were just okay. I liked Spence, but Natasha and her decision to remain aloof and distant because of her past trauma, made it hard for me to really like her. I think if more of her pain and struggle had been written in, I would have still liked her while seeing her struggle to remain aloof. But we don't learn about what caused it until pretty far in and she's so good at keeping her pain under wraps that she just came across as unfeeling (even worse because she was actually trying to be). In the end, we do learn what causes this and it's easier to sympathize, but in her pain she hurts Spencer, who by that time was my favorite character (NR really does write good heroes) and I wanted more grovel from her. Instead, she spills her story and gets lots of comfort and then forgiveness without really groveling for leaving Spence in suspense (haha!) and hurting him or for pretty much abandoning Freddie for over a week. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
