With that uninspired title and generic cover I’ll admit I wasn’t expecting much from this book. Nice surprises do come in poorly wrapped packages sometimes, though, and this was a nice surprise indeed. Sarah had made a bad mistake believing the pretty lies that came from Ethan Pembroke’s mouth. Now she’s a woman with a 4-month old son on the run from Ethan and his wife, the woman she knew nothing about when Ethan flattered and courted her with promises of a beautiful home and life after they were married. Turns out Ethan and his wife handpicked Sarah to be the broodmare for their next child, and Ethan cleaned out her savings account to make sure she had no way to escape signing a contract to give them the baby once she’d given birth. Pretty gothic stuff for a western romance. In exchange for getting the promissory note on his land back from Ethan, Zach Garrett is willing to track and retrieve the woman who signed over her baby and then welshed on the deal. He doesn’t know Sarah but he makes assumptions about the type of woman she must be and he doesn’t care about the circumstances anyway. He is an orphan, he comes from nothing, and he has no one and nothing to call his except that piece of land he’d borrowed against and he’ll be damned if he is going to lose it. In spite of the eyebrow-raising setup, the emotions in this story feel so authentic that I totally forgot I was reading fiction. I flinched over hurtful comments, got anxious when danger showed up, and lay in the dirt next to Sarah in one particularly heart wrenching scene, feeling her pain and anger and hopelessness. Both main characters made disastrous mistakes; both needed forgiveness in the worst possible way. Both were human. He just wished he could rest his head on her shoulder for a minute, but he couldn't. He couldn't tell her that he was worn out and lonely and tired of struggling. "I'll be fine in a minute." This would have been 5 stars if: (1) there had been fewer interior monologues. I’m not a big fan of so much of the book taking place in the characters’s thoughts. However, it bothered me less in this book than usual because the author used interior monologues to their best advantage: to build her characters into fully-rounded human beings and allow the reader to see both their determination and their vulnerabilities, especially during the first half of the book when they are silent, hostile adversaries, and to advance the plot with those thoughts. (2) the main characters hadn’t given in to their growing feelings and had sex under the stars when nothing between them was resolved. Did neither one of them remember where babies come from? Didn’t the author? Because the possible consequences were completely ignored. Wasn’t Sarah in enough trouble already due to sexual relations and didn’t Zach care enough about her situation to consider what might happen when a man deposits sperm inside a woman? I just can’t see Sarah saying yes to another possible baby. I just can’t. This scene needed to stop shy of completed intercourse because at least one of them needed to show some sense. Some of the dialogue in the last few pages got a little cheesy, but it was lovely cheese so I’m not complaining.
