As part of my own period of really focusing on understanding autism from the perspective of those with autism and those without (I am autistic myself, for full discretion), reading this was quite an experience to say the least. A fractured collection of thoughts, memories and perspectives, Donna's writing can be impactful, insightful and witty. Her command of words considering how this is written is really impressive. My issues are more to do with the actual content itself. Now, for full discretion I wasn't sure if it was right for someone like me to review this, considering how close to home the subject is to me. However, for those who wish for a balanced review I think it's fair to say that this book has really beautiful moments. As I said before, the actual language is brilliant, but my main issue is that there are issues when it comes to evaluating this as a collective peace. As what I've found with many other autistic authors, the problem you have as a reader is that you have to add credence and validity to the claims the author has to what is going through their head. You have no actual way of proving whether it really is as they say it is. As a result, at times reading some of these passages is like reading someone's acid trip. Even as someone with autism, part of me is skeptical to what is actually been described here. Yes, I cannot credit nor discredit someone else's experience, but at the same time none of this is actually helpful for those who are not autistic to understand what it is like to be autistic. While I certainly share some commonalities there is much I cannot say I share nor agree with Donna on here. As a reader, it is critical to remember that this entire perspective and experience, while perhaps applicable to Donna does not apply to autistic people or even highly functional autistic people as a whole. Secondly, while I understand Donna's desire to include song/poetry lyrics from time to time it does unfortunately break the flow of what's actually happening, bordering on self indulgence and adding to the 'autistic mysticism' (when autistic writers create something poetic concerning their disability which is meant to look "insightful" or "haunting" in a way perhaps a reader hadnt considered before) which can be quite prevalent in books like this. Of course, I do not wish for this review to appear mostly negative. I hope this has come across as balanced. There are truly wonderful and insightful moments, but like with all books like this it's important to remember that is simply a perspective and nothing more. It does not the entirety of autistic people.
