I always get a kick out of fictional books that focus on the topic of organ donation, seeing how much artistic creativity the author takes with the science involved and whether my job, testing for non-ABO antibodies to aid in the organ matching process, makes it into the story (it didn't :( ). Although the book was written in 1993, some of the inaccuracies I feel cannot be blamed on 25 fewer years of improvements in transplantation. If anything, we are today stretching the boundaries of what was possible in 1993, not the other way around. The primary one, which was mentioned a couple times, was that the coroner and morgues are the primary source of obtaining organs, legally and illegally, for transplant. Also, as seems to happen in every book where a patient is in desperate need of an organ, the patient ends up being AB-, a super-rare blood type, but one that would allow the patient to accept an organ of any blood type. If they wanted to really make a patient hard to match, they need to consult with someone like me who knows the HLA system and can devise the one-in-a-million scenario the authors are looking for. In this case, the patient needed a heart, and I don't work with heart matching, but I would think getting a heart that isn't from an AB- donor would not be too much different than getting a kidney from a donor from another blood type. Otherwise, though, it was an engaging story. When forensic investigator Daphne Matthews is doing a volunteer stint at a women's shelter, she meets a young woman with an obviously fresh surgical incision on her abdomen but no memory of how it or other wounds on her body got there. When hospital tests reveal she is missing a kidney, but no record of the surgery exists at that or local hospitals, Matthews realizes something criminal has occurred. Upon consulting with the Medical Examiner, he turns up other people of similar demographics who died missing an organ. Matthews then turns to Lou Boldt, a colleague who is on leave, apparently after the events of the first book in the series, but would be the best at putting the clues together. Ridley Pearson wrote one of my favorite books, 'Hidden Charges', but I don't believe I'd read another of his until now. Based on these first two, I will have to add more to my 'To Read' list. Perhaps I should have read the first book in the Boldt/Matthews series, as I believe he alludes to the events throughout this one, but I don't feel that my lack of knowledge about that book affected my ability to enjoy this one. Although Pearson reveals the key players in the organ trafficking scheme early in the book, they keep doing their surgeries as Matthews and Boldt close in on them. I didn't quite understand how the subplot of dogfighting and the main suspect's first entry into the 'sport' fit in or what made that dog so special, but perhaps that plot becomes the focus in a later book. Definitely look forward to reading more of Pearson's books, specifically the others in this series.
