Upon arrival at the last page of this epic story, a rich symphony of beauty, expressing the loss of Paradise in gorgeous arrangements of language wherein each word is precisely chosen, I am left, book in hand, contemplating the rich tapestry of song that Milton has woven on the loom of English heroic verse; the finished whole is vast in its sweep and exquisite in its details. I am stunned by its beauty, and left speechless as I follow Adam out of Eden, ruddy with a majestic glow in expectation of the birth and return of our loving King. Milton knew ten languages (Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Syriac, Aramaic, English, Italian, French, Spanish, & Dutch). Paradise Lost is full of Linguistic and literary allusions; Milton avails himself both of the words and the syntax of other languages, and makes purposeful allusions to famous passages in other books. As a minor example in Book I. 34-36, John Leonard points out the possibility of a pun in the Latin derivative deceived: Th' infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile Stirred up with envy and revenge, deceived the mother of mankind, with 'dis-Eved' (cross-linguistic wordplay with the Hebrew chava 'life' (Eve) , and thus conveying the meaning 'un-lifed', 'deprived of life' ). This is in fact, trademark Miltonic multilingual artistry. Milton relishes in his languages, and uses them to great effect. This is a very small and isolated example of the gems of linguistic virtuosity that lie waiting to be discovered by the astute and careful reader as the song progresses and unfolds. In Milton's Languages , John Hale argues that Milton's choice to write in English––in an age when Latin is still the obvious choice to ensure a wide audience––was motivated by the fact that English was, among all his languages, the one that allowed for the greatest versatility in this manner of interlinguistic and intertextual allusiveness. The final work, wherein English seemlessly adopts Latin word order and idiom is a masterpiece, and places Milton eternally in the traditional line with the other great epic poets of the west: Homer (Greek), Ennius & Vergil (Latin), Dante (Italian), Milton (English). An English contemporary of Milton writes of him with national pride and affection thus: Græcia Mæonidem, jactet sibi Roma Maronem Anglia Miltonum jactat utrique parem. Let Greece her Homer, Rome her Vergil boast. England boasts her Milton equal to them both. Milton is another reason I am happy to have learned English young; he celebrated his native English, addressing it thus with love Hail native Language, that by sinews weak Didst move my first endeavouring tongue to speak, and chose it for the language of his glorious and majestic English epic. Every English speaker should someday read it. See also : Milton's Languages , by John K. Hale.
