I am amazed at how this book, a bestseller in 1944 , dropped off the map. It was by a white Southern lady...her debut novel in fact...so it was, I suppose, inevitable that its focus was more on white folks than black folks. But, and this is key to me, it focuses on racism's viciousness and vileness via the white racists. It's not shirking responsibility for the sexual exploitation of black women by white men, or the way the white-dominated economy causes black families to endure almost intolerable levels of pressure to abandon their own in order to care for and serve ours. It's very clearly putting responsibility for a lynching onto the evils of racism. That there was a white man murdered was reason enough to commit the crime of lynching. The guilt or innocence of the lynched man was always secondary. Equally it's not clear that the central event of the novel is portrayed in a pure way. It's morally ambiguous. In many ways, the title of the book and Billie Holiday's rendition of the haunting, terrifying song , is linked to the racist white world *more* than the black world that its victims come from. Racism isn't a black problem, it's a problem for black people; racism is a white person's invention and our collective responsibility to render unacceptable. Its perpetuation requires selective blindness, as blaming the Other is a handy way to avoid looking in the mirror for the source of the infection. So Lillian E. Smith was really the right person to write a book that attacks racism's root cause: White, and white male, privilege. That she wrote about the black people of Georgia in less-than-modern terms is unsurprising, as is her treatment of women as less powerful actors in their own lives. It was 1944. The right to vote was 20 years old. Things have changed and thank goodness for it. But Lillian Smith's very good novel shouldn't be allowed to languish because it's of its time. I recommend hunting a copy up. It is a good yarn, well told, and proof that the segregated South of the Jim Crow era was not a monolithic, unquestioned social juggernaut. Smith didn't spring from nowhere. Her life is proof that there were always people of conscience willing to call their privileged system into question. Forcefully, loudly, and often.
