Although I admire David Pownall's writing, particularly his shorter works and his plays, I was deeply disappointed in this novel, indeed I was staggered by how completely it failed to engage me. I struggled through 193 pages before abandoning the novel - which is almost unheard of for me. I will continue to read Pownall's other fiction and give this novel three stars because although I did not like it many people did. Although this novel is frequently compared to Umberto Eco's 'The Name of the Rose' it is nothing like that novel - it is just a lazy comparison by second rate reviewers looking for shortcuts to conceal, in my opinion that they haven't read either book. One of the aspects of the book that left me cold was its obsession with Albigensians and Cathars as the centre of a vast 'hidden' conspiracy/organisation to which all masons, the White Cutters of the novel's title working on Europe's cathedrals, monasteries and palaces belonged and which Pownall seems to connect directly with present day Masons. I have problems with this premise for a number of reasons: 1. The Albigensians organisation is presented like a Medieval 'Illuminati' or 'Al-Anon' all pervasive, all powerful and completely invisible and immune to attack or subversion and with roots, members and control of not only those building cathedrals, etc. but at all levels of the English court and the Catholic Church in many places in Europe. The absurdity of this novel set barely a generation after the Albigensians had been driven from their home base in the Languedoc, in southern France, is too obvious to need exegesis. But the comparison with modern secret organisations is accurate in that they, like the one portrayed in this book, are divisive, fictitious, rubbish. If you are inclined to continue in a belief in supranational, secret organisation flourishing in Medieval Europe I would suggest reading Richard Stites 'Four Horsemen: Riding to Liberty in Post Napoleonic Europe' which, amongst other things, relates how in the early 19th century the 'Carbonari' (a revolutionary organisation) struggled to adequately coordinate their groups within the kingdom of Naples, never mind Italy or the rest of Europe. 2. Although invariably presented as 'good guys', proto new age hippies, Communitarian, full of understanding, patience, respect, toleration, love of crystals, feng shui, vegetarianism, macrobiotic diets and environmental awareness (I exaggerate but not by much) I am singularly unenthusiastic about Albigensians and Cathars, not because I think they were bad (though I did adore, and highly recommend, Theodore Roszak's novel 'Flicker' which places Albigensians at the centre of plot to destroy the world and bring on their millennium by encouraging everyone to indulge their worst instincts and habits) but because I know of no organisation, religious or otherwise, which did not betray its founding beliefs. That I am old enough to remember the fate of all those sixties communes, never mind Jim Jones's 'People's Temple' in Guyana also increases my natural cynicism. But the real problem with this novel, for me, is its dullness, the 193 pages I worked through were a torture of the banal and uniteresting. This is of course the great contrast with Umberto Eco's 'Name of the Rose'. It was equally full of anachronisms and absurdities but it was engaging and swept you up in both its silliness and deep intellectual examination of a Medieval movement and thought. There is nothing deep in this farrago of boring nonsense. But then there was over a third of the novel I didn't read - it is possible that I have deprived myself of one of the great literary second acts that saves many an ill begun novel from failure and boosts it to greatness. I wait to hear from anyone who finishes this novel for such news. In the meantime I can only say avoid this novel but seek out David Pownall's early work.
