**Contains spoilers!!** 4.5 stars Things I loved: 1. Sir Waldo - I mean what's not to like?? He's handsome, rich, athletic, virtuous, idolized and a PHILANTHROPIST!! Finally a perfect hero who doesn't cringe at the mere mention of paupers! He wants his newly inherited estate, Broom Hall, to become a school for young orphan boys! Needless to say he won my deepest respect from the first (and managed to keep it!). 2. Ancilla Trent. I LOVED HER!!! She was absolutely amazing! She was so genteel, elegant and sensible, and remained so throughout the story, even when she thought that she was being heedless because Sir Waldo had the disconcerting ability to throw her into flutters. “ She decide that her wisest course would be to put him out of her mind. After reaching this conclusion she lay thinking about him until at last she fell asleep.” I felt extremely bad for her having to watch over that abominable wild-cat, known as Tiffany. 3. Their first meeting. It was Beau.Ti.Ful.!!! Sparks flew all the way! You could feel the electricity in the air when they first looked upon each other! It was very well done. “Their eyes met, both pairs gray, hers very cool and clear, his faintly smiling” 4. Lord Lindeth ending up with Miss Chartley; they were both my favourite secondary characters and as soon as it was hinted at that they had the possibility of becoming a couple, I was all "Oh please, please Miss Heyer! Please have the presence of mind to make them end up together! To the devil with Tiffany!!". I was immensely scared that Tiffany would win Lindeth. 5. Miss Chartley. She was awesome, from the few glimpses we had of her. I loved the episode in Leeds. Way to go Patience! She deserved a lot more attention than she got (from the characters and from Miss Heyer!) and should’ve been more into the spotlight than annoying, vexatious Tiffany. 6. Sir Waldo and Miss Trent waltzing!!! "With you or no one!" Gasp!!! SWOON!!! 7. The simple plot! As much as I enjoy Heyer’s overpacked plots of cross-dressing/duels/gambling/drinking/elopements with wealthy handsome noblemen wearing wigs and mincing around on high heels, carrying fans, I really liked the calmer, country feel-good atmosphere of a good ol’ Regency comedy of manners taking place under the oh-so-hot sun of a Yorkshire summer. 8. The Regency slang. Heyer went full out in this one! Most of the time it was pretty easy to use the context to determine the meaning of words/sentences, but I admit that there were a few instances when I didn’t particularly understand what was being said. But overall I really enjoyed it! Heyer sure knew how to write! Some of my favourite: “chuckfarthing fellow”, “Town Tulip”, “Top-of-the-Trees”, “nambypamby nonsense”, “ninny-hammer” and my new favourite expression “making a cake of oneself” !!!! Things that annoyed me: 1. Tiffany. She was just plainly atrociously IN.TO.LE.RA.BLE. As much as I appreciate villains and selfish, shallow characters, she was just too much!!And the fact that she was beautiful only made it worse! She didn’t deserve it! Which brings me to 2. Every. Single. Man dangling around her!!! It was so irritating to hear of so-and-so going after Miss Wield and so-and-so being jealous, and then Sir Waldo (yes, Sir Waldo !!!!!!) giving her encouragement from time to time! Of course we know that he is by no means taking in with her, but still! I would have loved to hear instead that he was the one man who refrained from flirting with her, even if he wanted to “teach her a lesson”. 3. Speaking of which, she never does learn her lesson!!! She gets what she wants in the end!!!! SHE GOES TO LONDON!!!! Well, I was only glad for the sake of everyone else, particularly the Staples folk, that they were to be rid of her! 4. Miss Trent pretending that she isn’t in love with the Nonesuch when he proposes to her, because she thinks he has a bunch of illegitimate children!!! Of all the absurdities! And, what was very upsetting, the fact that she WON’T ASK HIM POINT-BLANK WHAT EXACLTY IT MEANS THAT HE HAD WRETCHED BRATS!!! Ah! I know that she was very picky with the proprieties, but come on! She could have found a way to ask him tactfully what was up! But no! Instead he had to be rejected, when it had been so obvious that he was as virtuous and straitlaced as she was, and so profoundly in love with her!! Poor Sir Waldo!! 5. As much as I love the Regency and its customs and manners, I can’t help but being a trifle annoyed at the exaggeration as to what is sometimes considered an “impropriety”. No lady can do anything by herself, but God forbid she asks the help of any gentleman for she is sure then of being reproached of setting her cap at him, which would be even worse! That part when some of the old matrons are gossiping about how Miss Trent is trying to catch Sir Waldo was too much to bear! All because they danced (twice! Oh, my Lord! How improper!), and he lead her on his arm to supper, and then later in the evening wrapped a shawl around her. It wasn’t as though they were seen making out on the terrace! And besides, as it never occurred to them, that hum, hello, maybe the reason for Sir Waldo’s singling Miss Trent out might be that he is IN LOVE WITH HER?!?!? Why else would he flirt with the governess ?!? 6. The word lief. It was decidedly over-used. I don’t mind the abuse of “devil” or “devilish” or “damn” or “dash”, but if I come across “lief” again!! Argh!!! 7. The fact that we are never given any insight into Sir Waldo’s developing passion for Miss Trent. We all know he’s falling for her, and as much as I appreciate Heyer’s “show don’t tell”, I would have liked a tad bit more of what was going on inside his head. We read about Miss Trent’s developing feelings, so why not his? I wanted to know from his perspective why he had fallen in love with Ancilla. We got what Laurie thought on the matter! Like, who cared about Laurie, right?!? 8. The ending. If I can even call it that. I know Heyer loves to wrap things up pretty quickly, as though she thinks that after the hero and heroine have kissed it’s time to end the story as quickly as she can, lest she should be tempted to get them into bed- action (LOL I don’t think so! I’m kidding she wouldn’t!), but really?!? That was exaggerated! A little bit more interaction between the two lovers after they are agreed to get married! I am reviewing the book right now, but I still feel like I haven’t finished it! When all’s said and done, however, my annoyances weren’t so profound as to out-weigh my overall enjoyment of The Nonesuch . The book was a marvel. Whatever I’m going to read next might seem pretty poor after this!
