Complete and utter bollocks. Since I was on a masochistic mood reading real trashy books, I decided to pick this one up. Yes, I've read Go Ask Alice (which by now everyone and their Grandma knows it's a hoax) along with Rick Emerson's Unmask Alice (which I also reviewed here, bloody good book that is!). With those books under my belt, I was well prepared for Ms. Sparks's other fake journals. First of all: NO TEENAGER writes so much purple prose in a journal that is supposed to see for his/her eyes only. So many adjectives for one thing, when one or two would've been enough (along with the "sameness", "nothingness", anything+ess that we got used to in Go Ask Alice ). Also, Jennie herself lacked any depth to her character, she was sort of there, trying to be your stock teenage girl character from your pic of any 90s TV series. Second point: Not even teachers speak in such a syrupy way like "Mr. J**k me off" did to Jennie, even if they're grooming her, which was actually the case. Also, I'm not sure if this was supposed to take place in the late 90s (the book was published in 2000, if I recall correctly), but how can a teacher nibble a student's neck in a classroom without at least a kid noticing (unless the classroom was vacant, and even then, maybe a passerby would've seen)? OK, a touch/grope here and there can go unnoticed, but a NIBBLE on the neck/ear? That shows some serious negligence in the school's part. And as we can read further into the book, Jennie was not the first "chickie little" (yes, I'm quoting verbatim here) Mr J got involved with. Maybe with the budding Internet, background checks weren't all that great - but here it seems like the school didn't even bother with that. However, I do applaud that Jennie kept the notes and diary entries for the trial. Ms. Sparks claimed to be a youth therapist, but it doesn't show here. Either these teens she supposedly treated write the same way, same sentences lifted word by word from each other's "diaries", or she made everything up. These teens (save for Alden Barrett, the main inspiration for Jay's Journal ) weren't real. A youth therapist would know how to deal with a r*pe survivor. The issue is merely glossed over, and the book focuses on Jennie's friends' issues and her parents' fights. If any of you expect an honest, truthful story of a r*pe victim and her treatment, go look elsewhere. All in all, it's painfully obvious this journal is not written by an actual teen. And don't give me the "it was edited from her notes" either. I didn't buy it in Alice's diary, and I won't do it here either. I will, however, try and read the Nancy and Annie's books. Just for the lulz, if I can find them.
