At my parents house the poster for this record is on my bedroom wall: [image error] The poster the added text that "Some ideas are poisonous, they can fuck up your life, change you and scar you." This poster came to mind pretty often while reading The Denial of Death . I hope this isn't going to come as a shock to anyone, but you are going to die. But you aren't just going to die, in the big picture there is nothing you will ever do, nothing you will ever be or effect matters one bit. In the long view we die, in the even longer view we don't matter at all. We will not be remembered, our entire stay on this planet will over time be totally forgotten. Poof, just like any of my ancestors prior to my great grand-parents are nothing but abstractions of people who had to have existed to give birth to people who gave birth to people who I knew in my life. Or as Morrissey sings: So we go inside and we gravely read the stones All those people, all those lives Where are they now ? With loves, and hates And passions just like mine They were born And then they lived And then they died It seems so unfair I want to cry In a psychoanalytical view of development (which I don't think I fully agree with, but which I think is much more accurate that some other cognitive theories of childhood development that would say that a child can't really comprehend death till they are closer to adolescence; maybe I'm an anomaly but I can remember brooding over my eventual death at five or six-and realizing that it meant that I would no longer be here, but everything else still would be) that Becker presents the child goes from a God-like state where every need is met just by willing (crying) it into existence, to the realization that it's body shits, that expels waste and that it is just a mere creature and not god-like (this is kind of heady stuff for whatever age your supposed to go through the anal stage of development). According to Becker no one navigates this primal dilemma successfully. Once the awareness comes that a)one is not immortal and b) that one is just a disgusting creature that has to eat and shit and eventually die-- then one just builds in repressions and neuroses to cope with that knowledge. Besides the fact that we all die, we all can't really deal with that fact. The dualism of having a mind that can think beyond the mere instinctual and transcend the body along with at the physical level being merely just another collection of substances heading towards decay is a conflict that will drive us through out our lives. Well according to Becker. The problem is that we all want to be something more than a shitting and fucking creature that dies. We want to be more than a vessel for our DNA. Our minds work in such a way that we believe there has to be some purpose to our existence, there has to be more than just staying alive. It's this part of our cognitive make up that at a symbolic, or meaning-driven level, that governs the way that we deal with the world. Even if one doesn't subscribe to the psychoanalytical premises of his argument (I have a bit of a problem with the high level of symbolic abstraction going on in an infants mind that can draw these complex almost Derrida-like deconstructions of shit and sex organs and lead it to ones own mortality, but whatever) I think one would find it really difficult to argue against the idea that we are all driven to be something than more than just a mere creature. Or to put it as Becker does, to be driven by the heroic or that which is greater than ourselves (our physical selves that would be). The details of all the different ways that people can attempt to strive for the personal heroism in the modern age I'm not going to go into, but basically there are two types; the unreflective type that takes society's norms as it's own and covers up the fear of death and the need to give meaning to ones life through a career, a family, materialism, being a good provider, a pillar of the community, a sports fan, etc.; and someone who at some point has thrown off some of these cultural repressions and realized that there has to be more to life than just doing these things and just surviving. One of the interesting things about this book is that it doesn't romanticize the latter. Becker doesn't seem to want to go out in the streets and tell everyone what an inauthentic life they are leading, how repressed they are because there is no unrepressed answer. It's kind of like you can take one of the predefined answers to life and that is one thing, but if you reject those you either have to a) go find your own answer and can support your own personal repressions and feelings of transference (which is why in his view Kierkegaard with his leap of faith and Freud with his agnosticism can each be their own successful attempts at personally dealing with finding meaning in the world, but which from an outsider point of view both can be seen as still living in the prison of their own neuroses and prejudices. I'm realizing now that I have no real way of dealing with this topic in a review. I can already see comments coming from MFSO that will be poking holes in some of the things I'm saying and I'm doing a piss-poor job at giving the main ideas of this work- a main idea that can possibly be stated as we are all sick inside, and once you come to this realization you can either stop fighting the sickness and try to create something that will give you the feelings of worth that you need not to put a gun in your mouth and pull the trigger, or you can let yourself be destroyed by your own fears and mind. This is a simplistic way of summing up the book and misses a lot. Sorry, I'm terrible at describing why books are really awesome. I'd recommend reading this book, it's really eye(mind)-opening in the ways we are trapped in our existence. If your happy with your life then this might be a mere curiosity of an interesting scholarly study, but it can also be a really great anti-self help book for people who can't buy into any of the answers out there because the answers are all lies.
