It's somewhat surprising to me that I actually own all three volumes of Richard Rodriguez's essays/memoirs/rants, because when I think about it the guy gets on my last nerve. He's Latino, born in San Francisco of Mexican parents, but grew up in Sacramento. He's also Catholic and gay. Which apparently allows him to claim the trifecta of identity politics, that rare triple minority status. To give him credit, Rodriguez gained a certain notoriety as a young academic for his principled refusal to take advantage of the benefits that affirmative action policies offered him. Unfortunately, he does not seem to have been able to avoid the trap of allowing himself to be defined by his ethnicity, and to a lesser extent, his homosexuality. Disappointingly, Rodriguez's writing career consists almost exclusively of endless public rumination about the status of gays, Catholics, and Latinos in general, and his own life in particular. Though he can write a mean essay when he exercises a little self-discipline, far too often he descends into a kind of maudlin, whining, self-pity. One wonders how he survived adolescence at all, given the enormous size of the chip on his shoulder. Life is so unfair , and why couldn't he have been born as a popular straight white jock? Well, excuse me, but donnez-moi un break! . There are plenty of worse places than Sacramento to grow up, and he wasn't exactly raised in poverty. At what point did he decide that the alienation of the immigrant experience was going to be his lifelong shtick? At age 3? 6? 12? To date he has published three books, each of a more or less autobiographical nature, at roughly ten-year intervals (1982, 1992, 2002). Each contains some biographical sketches and copious ruminations on the status of minorities in the U.S. Of the three, the first is by far the best, and probably the only one worth reading - it's crisply written and avoids the deficiencies of the later books. I would characterize the main defects of the later books as (a) meandering, undisciplined navel-gazing and tail-chasing, worrying the whole ethnic identity question to death with ever-diminishing returns (b) a tone that is predominantly whinily self-pitying (c) a creeping pomposity of tone prompting my reaction (a) you could just get over it already (b) oh, for christ's sake, try counting your blessings, which are multiple (c) if you want to write about the widespread use of cell phones in Finland, don't write "Everyone in the flaxen-haired capital of despair is on the phone, one hears". For that matter, I'm sure the Finns might object to the glib "Finland, a nation famous for sardines and suicide and short winter days.." Rodriguez didn't always write like a pathetic hack. But somehow he still walks around with that monumental stick up his ass and a pronounced sense of "otherness". Much to the detriment of his later writing. If he keeps to his schedule, we can expect the next volume of essays in 2012. Though you may hope that the Mayans have got it right and that we will all be spared a fourth volume.
