Colonialism in southern Africa: both sides left in destruction Doris Lessing, winner of the 2008 Nobel Prize for literature, tells the incredibly haunting story of the disintegration and descent into madness of Mary and her husband Dick Turner, simultaneously revealing the scathing truths of apartheid-ruled life in Rhodesia. This was her first book, published in 1950. What a debut! I'm stunned, I have goosebumps; I'm unfit to do this book justice, to convey the claustrophobic, solitary descent the Turners take in the unbearable heat of their barren, hopeless farm and tin-roofed house. The beginning of this book reveals the end: Mary is found murdered by her "houseboy", a native worker named Moses. The book then backs up a good fifteen years, when Mary is younger and living a rather enviable, independent life. It explains how she ends up choosing to marry, and the slow, hot, soul-destroying existence she shares with her husband on their farm. And it tells the story of her murder, and all that contributes to this tragic violent end. You get a clear idea of the rigid class system - rich white colonists at the top, followed by poor whites, then Afrikaners, and then blacks. Constantly toiling, yet ineffectual and blinded by his pride, Dick Turner keeps them spinning in poverty, season after season, year after year. The Turners are looked down upon because they simply can't succeed. They are a stain and shame on their people. Lessing sets the tone for this novel in the first page, illuminating the colonial attitude towards the black Africans.** It is made painfully clear as the novel progresses, especially through Mary's treatment of the workers in her home and on the farm, which originates from both fear and the poisoned world she has lived all her life. This is a story of poverty, of racism, of the twin solitude that marriage can be. This is a story of what happens when unspeakable lines are crossed. This is a story of the cost of segregation, where the propagators are also victims of a hateful system. It is also a story of southern Africa, a merciless, sun-scorched place where men struggle and die but the cicadas keep singing. ** I learned some nasty racist language in this novel, a sad education of the time and place.
