It took me YEARS to finally get my hands on Murakami's debut, and now I can't believe a book that transgressive won the Akutagawa in 1976 - while frequently called the Japanese Trainspotting , I think this is darker and (with the greatest respect to the wonderful Irvine Welsh ) less pop. In fact, it's more like a Japanese Naked Lunch , Junky , Closer or even Querelle de Brest . Strongly influenced by French existentialism, Georges Bataille and heroin culture (if you want to call it that), "Almost Transparent Blue" tells the story of a guy named Ryu and his clique, a bunch of young drifters living in a harbor city with an American air base. While the pastime of these friends could be described as sex & drugs & rock'n'roll, what renders the whole thing so disturbing is not the explicitness of it all, but the joylessness. This almost plotless novel is not only abysmally sad, it also explains nothing and excuses nothing: We learn that the characters try to fill an emptiness inside them, they are trying to feel something by chasing extreme experiences, but there is no easy trauma-subplot, no explanatory "and this is why" that lets us as readers sleep well at night: These characters seem unsettled by the pointlessness of existence, and they know no boundaries against society, against each other, and against themselves. We get detailed descriptions of public disturbance, drug intake, casual sex, violence, self-harm, suicide attempts, and, the Marquis de Sade be damned, the most brutal and repulsive orgy scene ever put to paper (prove me wrong, I dare you): The friends visit Black American soldiers, and two worlds affected by racism and othering spiral into an explosion of sex and violence. Is this objectification, rape or self-harm? Are parts of it the result of a drug haze, a hallucination? All I know is that I will never get these images out of my head, because they are so effectively written, and that's bad news. To add to the disturbance, the novel is full of strong images and metaphors, it oscillates between scenic description and drug-induced halluciation, and it's easy to see why it would be awarded the most important literary prize in Japan: It's prose that lets readers feel this milieu, that offers glimpses into another consciousness, and it's a dark, intense place, often distorted by strong drugs. The only reason why this is not mentioned more often in lists of high concept transgressive fiction is that the circulation of the text is not high enough, which is a shame. For casual readers of In the Miso Soup or Audition , or, God forbid, people who pick this up thinking it's Haruki Murakami (no shade, I like him as well), this will be extremely hard to stomach though, as reflected by the Goodreads rating.
