There is a shrill noise often lost in the background of the more important noises in the world. This piercing cry found abundantly around no matter where you go like pigeons flocking empty streets at the break of dawn, for whatever reason, seems to be relegated as insignificant and unworthy of the spotlight and stages of the world’s short attention span. Many names have been given to this jarring sound, but for the purposes of this cajolery or whatever this is, let us call it the reckless abandon of youth. The accumulation of mistakes, the period to be reckless and stupid, to burn out, be wild, to explore the often dissonant and sometimes psychedelic essence of youngness, free from responsibilities and pretensions. Perhaps it is the most beautiful moment in life, or perhaps it might be a dark nightmare to be a spurned and forgotten? When I was a bit younger I had my fair share of teenage angst that led me to a path of abandon, partly because of hubris, I wanted to have experienced life and all it had to offer me if I wanted to write something that would matter, because somewhere I’d read that a writer is only the sum of his experiences, and partly because I craved the thrill. Those days are over, but there are days when I still feel the call of youth. Days when I would look at the sky and think ‘Is this it?’ Days when I’d want to forget everything. They don’t come often, but when they come, I feel like I’m being gripped by the past, gripped by a part of myself slowly fading away and I get this bitter taste in my mouth. Almost Transparent Blue is a novella about this ragtag, exhilarating time of life filled with anger, confusion, and fear. Ryu Murakami takes the shrill noise and puts it into a record and plays it, only he amplifies it and puts it in the highest volume possible that your eardrums could burst. The vibration of the speakers working on their threshold imitating an earthquake keeps you on the edge and awake. As you might have suspected, it is very raunchy and somewhat episodic. Moments of drug induced euphoria, drunken revelries, to descriptive orgies and dark reflections fill the pages of this colorful book. And from the all of the colors of a psychedelic rainbow, to all the shades of intense darkness at the heart of an empty soul, surprisingly, a feeling of peace stems out. And this feeling of peace has the hue of an almost transparent blue. This is a rewarding book, but at times it was painful to read. Not because the scenes were too much for me, but rather it reminded me too much of a part of myself I am no longer in touch with, a past that I do not regret, but a past that sometimes I want forgotten.
