Doubleday & Co., 1964. Set in rural Georgia, 1946. Has this book disappeared from view? disappeared from libraries? It's a totally gripping 1100-page 2-volume novel that addresses racism, class privilege, small-town politics, sharecroppers, and all kinds of other things. I remember finding it wrenching to read at times, the scenes of pain and injustice are so convincingly described. I found it difficult to imagine how the authors could describe these things in such detail, esp. after I found out they apparently are Northerners, and did not seem to have lived here. I was going to dump the books, [which I picked up at a Dutch rummage sale, had never heard of it], as I will probably not reread them, but since they seem so scarce, I may relent and hold on to them... Here's the blurb on the book jacket: "Progress had been long coming to Arcady, but by World War II's end -- with the near completion of 'Sunset', a mammoth mechanized farming operation -- the little Georgia town wasn't too many steps away from full industrialization. Only two things blocked Henry Warren from fulfilling his goal of uniting the entire Arcade valley: Rad McDowell's farm, bordering on the river, and Reeve Scott's acreage, adjacent to Rad's and stretching across the valley to the through road. "Together, the pitiful little dirt farms of these two crackers-returned-from-the-War cut Sunset in two ... and threatened to spilt asunder the wound that 80 years of reconstruction were just beginning to heal. "As the rival forces of tradition and progress make a battlefield of the valley, several interlocking narratives unfold in this brilliant novel: a member of the archaic Arcady aristocracy attempts to dispossess the family of the woman who had nursed her through childhood and taught her the meaning of good; a powerful industrialist tries to recapture the thrills of his penniless youth; an idealistic young minister works to join his opposing parishes in a spirit of genuine brotherhood, only to meet vicious resistance from both camps; a judge whose activities on the edge of the law have made him wealthy seeks the political plum that has eluded him for 20 years; two physicians -- one spineless and guilt-ridden, the other unscrupulous and unfeeling -- bid for recognition in quite different ways; and the social structure of the whole community pulses and surges as its members try to make their way upward. "K. B. Gilden is the joint signature of Bert and Katya Gilden, husband and wife, who have previously collaborated on short stories and screen plays." [see also Wikipedia short page on Kaya Gilden] For a fascinating and disturbing account of ongoing racism in the South [Louisiana where the film was filmed] in 1965-66 see Wikipedia page on 'Hurry Sundown [film]"
