Philip Larkin well known for his poetry, wrote just two novels, I read the second of them, The Girl in Winter (1947), last year, and it made my books of the year list. Jill was published a year earlier, and although it is not quite so pitch perfect as that later novel it is still hugely satisfying, written with great insight and delicacy. It is an extraordinary character study, shot through, with lyricism and subtle social commentary. The narrative takes place during one term at Oxford university – in an unnamed college. In the autumn of 1940 John Kemp, a desperately shy eighteen-year-old undergraduate arrives in Oxford on a scholarship from his home in Huddersfield. I imagine this is probably the best evocation of Oxford in 1940 as it is possible to get. Cake gets stolen from other student’s rooms, essays are prepared at the last minute, rules always there to be broken. John arrives, and is directed to his room, finding it already occupied with an unknown roommate – who has opened all his preciously collected crockery and used it to entertain his friends. “‘Do you know – er – rather a funny thing, I think we’ve both brought the same kind of china –’ He was interrupted by a howl of laughter so sudden and boisterous that he jumped and looked round him in alarm. Everyone was wildly amused. Elizabeth snatched her tiny handkerchief again and holding it to her eyes, shook with merriment. Eddy Makepeace gave short barks of laughter, that were irritating because they sounded forced: Hugh Stanning-Smith chuckling in a well-bred way, and Patrick Dowling looked sideways up at him with a foxy jeer. ‘What – what’s wrong? He exclaimed, startled for once into natural behaviour. More laughter. His bewilderment caused a second, cruder burst, as if a comedian, having told a funny story, had proceeded to sit on his hat. ‘Oh God.’ Gasped Christopher Warner at last, taking his handkerchief from around the teapot handle and mopping his eyes with it. ‘Oh, dear! My dear fellow, these are your crocks…” Oh – the awkwardness of that scene – you can’t help but feel for John here. It is a brilliantly written scene. Full review: https://heavenali.wordpress.com/2018/...
