I recently started taking sailing lessons. The husband of a friend is retiring and considering using his passion for sailing and teaching to build a side gig offering sailing lessons. He offered several people the opportunity to be beta testers for his plan. The lessons are rigorous if a bit ad hoc. Our role is to help him formalize his approach. We meet once a week for 3-5 hours. We sail from late afternoon until just after sundown. I’m really enjoying myself. Unfortunately, a week has started to feel like a really long time. So the day after lessons about two weeks ago I picked up this book at a local used book seller as a means to scratch an itch. Prior to picking up this book, I had been watching sailing videos on youtube. One of the channels features a couple that I believe used to be from my area, central Texas. Now they seem to be living aboard a sizable catamaran cruising the Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic coast, and the Caribbean. I wouldn’t specifically recommend their channel, it skews toward the entertainment end of info-tainment, but they did review an ASA course they took. In it they mentioned the text they used for their class. This is not that book. It does, however look like the book they used and that seemed as good a criterion as any for buying a $8 used stopgap for my sailing fix. The book itself is pretty much what you might expect from an intro book. The first third of the book is very information dense and is flush with new terms and diagrams illustrating fundamental concepts. One downside is the odd chapters are sailing knowledge oriented and deal conceptually with sailing while the even chapters outline exercises to practice targeted sailing skills…the one thing I can’t do…. As the book moves on from the core elements of sailing, the chapters deal with critical, but tangential, issues in decreasingly informative ways. The two pages for troubleshooting outboard gas engines and inboard marine diesels was nothing more than a list of possible problems…no explanations of what the list meant, how to troubleshoot the problem, or what the remedy may be. This is understandable. With any skill, as you get into the details, it gets progressively harder to speak informatively in generalities. The view from 30,000 feet is always simpler. But just because a problem is understandable does not mean it is fun to wade through. Upshot, this book was informative for me, a neophyte, however, I found the later chapters frustrating to wade through and more like heads up about problems I cannot yet appreciate or prepare for but will one day face should I end up owning a boat of my own. An interesting addendum, the guy teaching my lessons is doing a great job. He is patterning our lessons on a course he took some years back. After reading this book, I would not be surprised at all if this very book, if not one very similar, was the text used for his class.
