Last week I read a novel Maud Martha and wondered as I was reading it, and when done, where I was for all of these years and never heard of that book prior to being on Goodreads. Today as I was reading this book the exact same question popped into my head. I guess better late than never. 😉 This book came out in serial form in 1888 in St. Nicholas Magazine, a popular American monthly publication designed for children. Imagine being a child back in the day and reading these chapters and coming to the end of a chapter and having to wait (at least) 30 days until the next chapter. When you’re left wondering what happens next in Sara’s life. There’s something to be said for serialization. I guess that’s the way a lot of people got their reading of literature from…literary publications that came out weekly or monthly. A riches-to-rags-to-riches story. I read this from a Puffins Book edition (2014)…it had drawings in it by Margery Gill (from Puffins edition in 1961) which I enjoyed as part of the reading experience. Miss Minchin was certainly a meanie extraordinaire. Sara Crewe almost reminded me of a saint (nobody can be this good, can they?), but I think her moral code is what made the book shine for me. She was a saint come hell or highwater. And she not only “do unto others as they will do unto you”…she affected other people so that they too did good. • A wonderful example of this was when she came upon a beggar girl who was starving…she had just found a coin in the muddy streets of London and could buy 4 buns for it from a bakery. She herself was starving from the mistreatment of Miss Minchin. But after she bought the 4 buns (and the woman who owned the bakery shop felt so bad for Sara she threw in 2 more buns for good measure) she stepped outside the bakery and gave a bun to the beggar girl…who wolfed it down. And Sara knew this girl was starving and was in even worse straits than she was, so she gave another bun and another…until she walked away with only one bun. Meanwhile the bakery woman had been watching this with amazement (she knew Sara was in bad shape and yet she was giving her buns away to the beggar girl), and she ended up taking the beggar girl in, employing her, and clothing her and feeding her… And get this, rewind to when Sara found the coin…she was starving and she saw the bakery across the road, but she wondered that perhaps the baker women had lost the coin…and so she walks into the bakery and asks if the baker women had lost a coin. How good is that??!!! I am anxious to get to GR reviews and reviews from literary periodicals on this book, so I’ll shut my piehole for now. 😮 I liked this book bunches. 😊 It was an interesting and enjoyable read, and it had a happy ending, and sometimes we all need that. Notes • Wow…this is interesting…I knew about the magazine serialization but not about the two plays: the 1905 book is based on an adaptation from two plays (1902 & 1903) that is based on the serial publication in St. Nicolas Magazine (1887-8). I found this in an abstract of a Master’s Thesis awarded to Johanna Elizabeth Resler in 1952 at Indiana University—Purdue University Indianapolis (Department of English) in 1952. SARA’S TRANSFORMATION: A TEXTUAL ANALYSIS OF FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT’S SARA CREWE AND A LITTLE PRINCESS (iupui.edu) https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/handle... • According to Burnett, after she composed the 1902 play A Little Un-fairy Princess based on that story, her publisher asked that she expand the story as a novel with "the things and people that had been left out before". 4] The novel was published by Charles Scribner's Sons (also publisher of St. Nicholas) with illustrations by Ethel Franklin Betts and the full title A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Being Told for the First Time. From: https://www.brooklinebooksmith.com/bo... Reviews from periodicals: • https://www.theguardian.com/childrens... • https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-en... Reviews from blogsites: • https://www.readingforsanity.com/2016... • https://joyfulantidotes.com/2016/11/0...
