Published in 2000 and alleged to be non-fiction. Basically a London Brick (which is not actually made in London but at Peterborough, Bedfordshire and Kent) of a book on London written in Ackroyd-ese. - somewhat poetic, distinctly flowery, vague, full of bits 'n' pieces but which do not tie together in a complimentary whole to make an overall picture other than one seemingly designed to make the reader go 'Wow!' The early stuff on Geology, Geography and Palaeogeography is utter bollocks written for the bloke on the No. 1 bus from Bermondsey by someone that should know better. He loves ‘feel’ rather than cohesion. Whilst giving the psycho- / mytho-geographers a rather large smack-down he appears to have joined their ranks utilising their 1+1+1=17 methodology. For such a huge book one might expect a clear history of London. This is not that book! Perhaps that is why he calls it ‘a biography’. But even as a biography it jumps around all over the place trying to deal with the subject matter chronologically and thematically. Ephemera are apparently just as important as foundations. Given his embracing of the psycho / mytho mystics, ephemera is clearly MORE important than foundation. This is not THE history of London, or even A history of London, but a personal investigation with bits of history and a plethora of etceteras thrown into the mix. And over it all is that stylistic Ackroyd-ese – there’s no other way to describe it – the smack of self-importance, the lack of accreditation, the use of a quote from 200 years earlier or later to describe something from a set time. But then we’ve seen / read it all before. His book from 5 years previous on Blake is the worst possible book you could pick up to discover what makes /made William Blake special as an artist and person in British culture. Ackroyd manages to turn the Dark Ages in London into some kind of bucolic romp full of ‘effect’ and ‘feeling’ Thus you have the classic ”The ‘first’ theatres of 1576, the Theatre and the Curtain, may well descend from the lost originals.” or may not….. who knows…. certainly Ackroyd believes HE does. The early chapter on the noise of the city is dull beyond understanding for several reasons; his Ackroydesque musings move from high episcopalian pomp tones to the ‘Lawks, s’Truth, guvnor’ wallowing delight in Cockneyism. Where he stands out in his own right is the recounting of the tale of Dick Whittington – it has everything that Ackroyd needs – folk tale, mythology, and most importantly loads of Theatah (luvvie) and pantomime. It is a blessing that each chapter is relatively short so that one can breath a sigh of relief that the many sections of ‘Olde Worde’ text and spelling will soon be over. You can generally tell you are approaching the end of another tranche when you reach his latest panjandrum: ”The history of London is a palimpsest of different realities and lingering truths.” We move from the Dark Ages to Elizabethan Gloriana in two sentences. It is the history of historians of ancient history of which Peter Ackroyd believes he is the Grand Master of the Lodge. Statements are just hung out there as facts and given little or no reference as to provenance but are presented as gospel. After 110 pages it is clear that this is neither biography or history but merely Ackroydography – a way of talking a lot and saying very little in book form. It’s not for me and I refuse to spend the time getting through the remaining 600 pages when I could use it far more productively - maybe as a London Brick!
