The dark side of the game is about the life of NFL players.It is a sports genre book. Tim green the author played 8 years in the NFL. He tells what it took to get there, what it was like during, and what its like after. What it takes to get there is pure determination and love for the game. The players that take leadership is because not just raw talent but they are emotional and get the team pumped. People now that are big named like Ray Lewis or Brain Dawkins.Those men were fun to watch, every game these men put themselves to the test. The best way to get to the pro's is an invitation to the combine if you get to the combine your chance double. If your not part of the combine it becomes a waiting game just hoping your the call of a GM.While in the NFL, its your time to work for the number 1 spot it takes the effort. Every year many people come in and many retire. The teams go into camp with around 70 or so players and by week 1 they cut down to only 53 players that are allowed to dress and be part of that team. the pain of the game is terrible, every person tends to get hurt some worse then others. Things as nagging as a cleat mark left from when some 300 pound man run on your leg. We tend to see all these players with tons of girls but its just as easy for them to get turned down just as easy as you would. It is easier for them to get celebrities just because they have heard of and seen this guy. The hate of the refs, nobody likes refs. The good calls they make get fully ignored the second a bad call is or isn't made. After the NFL doesn't mean your to old to play, players have retired before they were even 25 just because they got hurt to severe. Yes almost every player will be a millionaire just for playing a sport but the sport is no easy task. Many people love sports so much even when the retire they tend to go for espn or cbs or something. Just to be part of sports not physically but mentally because you get to go down to field and be at many many game. Many players retirement is great because they can finally get those injuries fully recovered and have great houses and cars. Many are so rich they wouldn't need another job ever again but still love sports just to much to leave. This book is great just because I could get into pretty easy and never got really bored and wanted to stop. I have probably read this book 3 times in a few years
