“He's as good at anything, and yet a fool.” AS YOU LIKE IT is a Shakespeare play that I did not much care for when I first read it years ago, but I have since become quite fond of. It is one of Shakespeare's mature comedies, written at the height of his prowess around 1599. It also boats the largest female Shakespearean role, Rosalind, and has a supporting cast that is well defined, and compliments the play’s themes quite nicely. AS YOU LIKE IT contains one of Shakespeare's most famous monologues, the "Seven Ages of Man" speech spoken by the melancholy member of court Jacques. However, it also boasts many other moments of pleasure. The highlight of the play is the third act, which is a delight of imagery and witty dialogues throughout. The play hits its thematic and comedic stride in this act and propels the action to its dizzying assortment of marriages in the conclusion. This text also boasts more songs than any other Shakespeare play, and like all of Shakespeare's work it has dark undertones to many of its more rustic elements. Both serve to enhance the text and make it a more enjoyable experience. Shakespeare's knack for accurate human characterization never ceases to amaze me, and this text’s many wonderful characters would make an acting company salivate. I have come back to this wonderful play again and again and will continue to do so. Quotes: • “What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?” • “Hereafter, in a better world than this, I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.” • “Sweet are the uses of adversity…” • “I like this place and willingly could waste my time in it.” • “Love is merely a madness…” • “Men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.” As for the Pelican Shakespeare series, they are good editions of Shakespeare as the scholarly research is usually top notch and the editions themselves look good as an aesthetic unit. It looks and feels like a play and this compliments the text's contents admirably. The Pelican series was recently reedited and has the latest scholarship on Shakespeare and his time.
