This is an expansion of my past micro-review reflecting on a read from 2008: Very satisfying read about the Lewis and Clark expedition, with a focus on Lewis and his relationship to Jefferson. To me it's great because of Ambrose's ability to render a great story while marshalling his skills in making sense out of the myriad of known historical details and context. He brings alive so many of the times the expedition almost met disaster due to bad judgments or naive approaches toward Native American tribes they encountered. His love of Western history shines through as does his personal experience with the Missouri River from so many camping trips with his family. The flaws of both men are not neglected. I cried at the end over the events surrounding the suicide of Lewis. My mind comes back to this book due to a recent read of a history by Howe on the 30-year period after this exploration (“What Hath God Wrought”). While the Lewis and Clark expedition experienced a welcoming response from most tribes, with essentially only one violent incident associated with a theft, the U.S. relations with the eastern tribes deteriorated to the point that President Jackson spearheaded the near-complete removal of most Indians east of the Mississippi River to Oklahoma Territory in the period 1830-35. Soon afterward, the U.S. acquired lands in the west even larger than the Louisiana Purchase as spoils of the Mexican War of 1846-48. As the settlement of the west proceeded and greed for land and resources married the national vision of dominion under the banner of “Manifest Destiny”, all tribes of the west were subjugated and placed on reservations. Everyone knows this history. The point is the story told in “Undaunted Courage” captures such a haunting state of hope and innocence. The book is among my top ten of all time because of its handling of a subject in a way that really impacted my imagination and outlook. It reads like a novel, one with an important quest, abundant adventure and wonder, and a story of a remarkable friendship and partnership between Lewis and Clark. Compared to Clark, the Virginian Captain Lewis was more diplomatic and trusting of Indians, more of a naturalist, and less a fan of slavery and less capable in organizational details and finances. Lieutenant Clark, who Lewis considered equal in authority on the mission, was less articulate and more attuned to military hierarchy. He was more wary about trusting Indians due to his Kentucky militia experience in fighting Indians. He was a great hand at navigation, mapping, hunting, and organizational management of the expedition. He brought his slave York along as a valet, but came to accord him more respect and roles of responsibility in the superb teamwork of the “Corps of Discovery.” Another delightful element of Ambrose’s account is bringing all to bear that he could of the story of Sacagewea and her essential role in the success of the expedition. A teenaged Shoshone woman and wife of a French Canadian trapper, she served as a guide and translator, defusing much wariness over many first encounters with Indian tribes on their journey. It was amazing how she gave birth to a son on the trip and managed with aplomb to bring the infant along on the harrowing excursion over the mountains and down the Columbia River to the Pacific Coast. Ambrose excels in portraying the perspectives of this band of travelers, their wonder over the beauty and vastness of this wilderness and their awe and special challenges in encounters with many tribes for the first time. Their separation from the rest of the world for more than 20,000 years made some of them essentially aliens, yet recognizably human with a sophisticated culture and successful way of life. Others had knowledge of Europeans from encounters with French trappers and mountain men, and, beyond the mountains, with Spanish missionaries, from whom horses were adopted and disseminated. The threat of the white man was more in the way of their weapons and trade goods giving advantage to one tribe over the other. Little did they realize that the expedition’s demonstration of a path into the west and a way over the mountains to the Pacific opened the door to a major invasion of settlers who would want the lands and resources for themselves. Even before that happened the diseases from the Europeans, especially smallpox, would devastate all the tribes due to their lack of resistance. Already at the time of Lewis and Clark’s wintering with the Mandans in 1804 that tribe had already been decimated from small pox. The mapping and documentation of Indian tribes, new animals and plants was an amazing geographical and scientific accomplishment. However, these successes could not sustain Lewis. He had trouble writing up the official account of the expedition and could not master the challenges of administration required in his appointment as Governor of the Louisiana Territory. Financial troubles and alcohol abuse appear to have contributed to his decline and the suicide inferred by Ambrose. Clark did better in reaping the rewards of his success, assuming a succession of positions in military and civilian administration. I was sad to see that despite his belief in Indian assimilation in white society he got tapped as Superintendent of Indian Affairs to implement a lot of the details of Jackson’s Indian removal policy. The impact of what Lewis and Clark accomplished is well respected these days. Do yourself a favor and read this book and gain some pride about being human. Read the book review Steve Sckenda for more articulate praise of the book. See the wonderful Ken Burns documentary if you get a chance (often posted as here to Youtube ).
