I wanted to like "Hand, Hand, Fingers, Thumb." I'd heard the mumurs. Read the hype. EVERYONE has been talking about it. While it wasn't bad, it doesn't deliver on the hype. I started off enjoying the book just fine. The first act is solid. Meandering a bit, maybe, but I was with Mr. Perkins. (Yeah, Perkins. Not Seuss. We'll get to that.) But then I get a little lost. The narrative thread is weak. As soon as you get to know one monkey they bring in another. Now, I'm not opposed to having a large cast of characters, I love "12 Angry Men" and "Game of Thrones," but it's almost as though Mr. Perkins doesn't really have a sense of the inner lives of these drumming monkeys. I get the sense that he hasn't done the work on them, hasn't done the character studies. Where did they come from? What was their family life like? Shoe size? What's their favorite kind of pasta? Gnocchi? I don't think Mr. Perkins knows. That really only gets us through act 2, to be honest. The third act is just a mess. Suddenly there are millions of monkeys and they're all drumming on drums. I really lose track of our main character — who, I might add, is never named, Cormac McCarthy much? — and it's almost as though you can't hear the story of these monkeys over the racket created (figurative and literal) by all the monkeys and all the drumming. Though the third act really fails for me, I do love the twist ending. Just so you don't hate me I'll throw this out there — SPOILERS AHEAD: Mr. Perkins removes all the millions of monkeys drumming on drums and we end with our original character, "The Monkey," if I may. The Monkey we came to love at first and he sends us out with a quiet, glacially paced "dum ditty dum ditty dum dum dum." It's a beautiful turn on our expectations of the genre, it's tendency toward always getting bigger, grander, wanting more. So, while it lost my for large swaths of the book, I give it three stars for a strong opening and helluva close. One last note: I was dismayed to realize that this isn't even by Dr. Seuss. Theo is now outsourcing his work? Who does he think he is? James Patterson? I'm not buying it. Boo on you, Mr. Suess.
