Scott-Heron published prose and poetry even before he’d embarked very far in his musical career but much of this collection seems to be the lyrics to songs from his long recording career. Like Dylan lyrics (or song lyrics by most anyone), they play better than they read and I found myself enjoying most the ones my ears knew best. An innovative songwriter and performer, Gil Scott-Heron was influential; but beyond influence, his political lyrics, his distinct perspective, and his linking of past to present, myth to reality, perception to misperception remain necessarily cold water tossed on the sleepy head of America. This brief book is a good resource to spend time with as you listen to his jazzy-blues recordings. The work is vibrant, caustic, a dissenter’s voice, a rebel’s cry, defiant, strong and true. Oh, and relevant. I write this a bunch of weeks after finishing reading it but a day and a half after the racist murders, the take-back-our-country terrorist provocation, of nine African-American citizens in a church in Charleston, South Carolina. Not just a church but a landmark church of resistance to slavery, Jim Crow, and those who oppose freedom, equality and justice. Scott-Heron: “The blues was born on the American wilderness / The blues was born on the beaches where the slave ships docked, / born on the slave man’s auction block / The blues was born and carried on the howling wind. / The blues grew up a slave. / The blues grew up as property. / The blues grew up in Nat Turner’s visions. / The blues grew up in Harriet Tubman’s courage. / The blues grew up in small town deprivation. / The blues grew up in the nightmares of the white man.” (Bicentennial Blues) It was a white man’s nightmare that prompted the murders of nine better Americans. Scott-Heron also saw our propensity for inertia: “It’s winter, winter in America / and ain’t nobody fighting ‘cause nobody knows what to save … it’s winter, winter in America / and all the healers done been killed or put in jail” (Winter in America). He also saw how television news would not get things right for fear of offending shopping (shopping, a metaphor for complacency): “The revolution will not be televised. // The revolution will not be right back after a message about a white tornado, white lightning, or white people. / You will not have to worry about a dove in your bedroom, / a tiger in your tank or the giant in your toilet bowl. / The revolution will not go better with Coke. / The revolution will not fight germs that might cause bad breath. / The revolution will put you in the driver’s seat. / The revolution will not be televised / will not be televised / not be televised / be televised / The revolution will be no re-run, brothers. / The revolution will be LIVE.” (The Revolution Will Not be Televised).
