I have very mixed feelings about this third edition of what was clearly a landmark book when the first edition came out, over thirty years ago. I first read this book, way back in 1979. It was a godsend and I and relied on it very heavily to cover the testing topics in what was the first undergraduate software engineering course ever taught at the university I was at. Reading the third edition after putting aside the first edition for about a decade, I was immediately struck by how much my thinking on testing owes to Glenford Myers and to this book in particular. However, as I continued reading, I became more and more uneasy. In a sense, how do you update a classic book? If the book purports to cover a field, you update it by keeping up with the field, adding heavily and judiciously pruning stuff which becomes obsolete. This has worked pretty well for Ian Sommerville´s or Roger Pressman´s massive tomes on Software Engineering, but this goes counter to Myer´s whole approach, which aimed at the heart rather than the body of the field and struck thrilling insights into the psychology of testing. The book had its faults, of course, such as Myers dutiful, plodding but ultimately not very convincingly coverage of cause-effect graphing and of higher-order testing, which though striking at first, slowly collapsed in time. So, how do you update a classic book. Corey Sandler and Tom Badgett seem to have approached the task gingerly and with great trepidation. They seem to have decided to touch Myer´s original book as lightly as possible, adding some sidebars on the "history" of Fortran, Cobol and PL/1 were, so that the modern day reader can wonder why on earth Myers talks about COMMON statements -a horrible and error-prone construct which, to its shame, is still carried around in Fortran-90 even though there are more elegant ways to circumvent it (see for example http://iprc.soest.hawaii.edu/users/fu... for details). Then, I can imagine Sandler and Badgett huddling together and deciding that, well the chapters on debugging and usability testing have to be redone and the book will probably become extinct unless some chapters are added on more contemporary issues such as usability testing, agile development´s impact on testing and testing web and mobile applications. So the chapter on debugging is duly, if not inspiringly rewritten, the chapter on usability is expanded (leaving some really obsolete Myers examples intact) and four new chapters are duly added. The worst of the new chapters is the one on agile development, which spends a great deal of time repetitively telling us what agile development is, but very little discussing its impact on testing and barely managing to slip in the JUnit tool. The chapter on web application testing devotes some time to the classic three-tier architecture (presentation, business and data levels) and goes on to provide a brief and sometimes repetitive overview of testing issues for the three levels. However, I fail to understand why the authors failed to tie the ideas on testing the presentation layer more strongly to the chapter on usability and why they skimped so much on testing the data layer -if there is a chapter on usability, I don´t understand why theey failed to add a chapter on database testing. The chapter on mobile application testing provides a good introduction to the topic but falls into the temptation, as in the chapter on usability, of mentioning so many topics, that the reader is left feeling helpless in the face of so many shadowy hinted-at complexities. Some of these new chapters have been edited rather carelessly -there is, for example a typo ("donstraints" instead of "constraints") and a spelling mistake ("shear" for "sheer") in just one page (page 215) and they are not as tightly written as the best of Myers. Even twenty years ago, I would have recommended this book without hesitation, now I am not so sure. Some readers will still enjoy the key insights from both old and new chapters, others will simply yawn and pass them by. Glenford Myers´ book was a landmark, but like many landmarks, the sheer volume of new developments has severely eroded it -however, the perceptive reader should still be able to appreciate its legacy. I wavered between giving the book three or four stars, but Sandler and Badgett deserve recognition for bravery and Myers still has my gratitude for introducing me to testing, so four it is.
