Review May 2021: Fun fact this series has survived all my bookshelf purges in the last five years. Every time I go through my shelf and get rid of books I will never read again, I have kept this series. Partly because of nostalgic and partly because I really love Freddie and Nick's story and it feels weird to not keep the whole series intact. So I decided the other evening to pull this series off my shelf and see if I *still* enjoyed it. Overall, I did. I think this first book is a product of the early 1990's romance genre in which the hero Spencer is very hands on, alpha male, you-will-love-me type. He's not a bad guy, by any stretch of the imagination, and he truly does fall for Natasha but he does have a tendency to bulldoze Natasha and her wishes throughout this book. He sees that she's attracted to him and he uses physical tactics to sway her to him (grabbing Natasha and kissing her, getting up in her personal space so she is flustered by his nearness and cannot protest, etc.). It's not my favorite thing and more than once it left me annoyed but even more than that, it just made me not like Spencer or respect him as a character. Give the lady some space! If she says she doesn't want to go out with you, then she doesn't want to go out with you! Come on, man, jeesh. Freddie at age six was still cute, albeit a bit more precocious than I remembered. Like she was too perfect of a child. I did like all her interactions with Natasha though, and their visit to Natasha's parents house in which she bonded with Natasha's dad left me grinning. Bumping it back down to three stars because of what I mentioned above but this is still a solid start to the Stanislaskis saga. Off to read Mikhail's book next! ---- Review June 28, 2014 : Okay Okay, Okay. I'm bumming this one up to 4 stars, probably closer to 4 and 1/2 stars. I think this is my favorite book of the four siblings (Freddie and Nick's book wins for fav overall). It's just so light and happy and you get to see things from Freddie's POV which I adoreeeeee. Review October 31 2012: Solid 3.5 stars. Really cute book. I love the introduction to the Stanislaskis, meeting them all for the first time is the best, especially seeing them from young Freddie's eyes. Loved Natasha and her interactions with Spencer, sweet story all around.
