This is a collection by essays by the whimsical Diane Ackerman about the vital, even divine, need for humans to take time to seriously kick back and have fun. “Play is a refuge from ordinary life (6),” Ackerman states, “…an alternate reality with its own rules, values, expectations (20) . . . .which lead people into an altered mental state …clarity, revelations, acceptance of self and other life-affirming feelings” (24). For her, “deep play” is the equivalent of spontaneity, discovery, being open to challenges. Ackerman adores nature, particiularly while riding a bike, devotes a good deal of her philosophies to the practice of communing with the beauties of the outdoor world. She also provides an interesting history of biking and its thereapeutic values to people over the last century. Her second chapter, entitled “at-one-ment” is a Zen-like discussion of perfection through deep play. Her third chapter analyzes the value of “scared places.” She mentions Stonehenge, Mecca, Delphi, Mount Arafat, etc., but notes that any person can have his/her own sacred place. “We need holy places, kept secluded, sprung loose from reality, separated from life’s routines . . . . (58) . . . . such places trigger in us an altered state of awareness, a shift in consciousness to a profound sense of spirituality, escitation, and emotional intensity” (62) Another chapter ruminates on certain people who have thrill-seeking personalities, and get inspired by putting themselves in danger in order to attain a temporary high, like that produced by cocaine (88). (No thanks, I say). “There are things you do even though they may be frightening, not because you don’t feel fear, but because knowledge is a tonic” (97). In the fifth chapter, “The Gospel According to This Moment,” Ackerman introduces a minister friend who calls himself an “existential Christian,” (Actually, that term is an oxymoron as existentialists are by definition, atheist, or at the very least, agnostic) and muses about how one can be profoundly spiritual without being religious in the traditional sense. “One problem with religion today is that it is mainly non-religious . . the orginal sacredness disappears in dogma and ritual (105) . . . Core religious experience has nothing to do with formal religion or, for that matter, a supernatural being . . . . Religion offers a passionate form of deep play, whose peak moments are subjuctive as they are intense. People create their own private religions” (106). Her sixth chapter is a nice essay on writing, interpreting, and enjoying poetry. “Poetry is an education in life. It’s also an act of deep play” (133). Her last chapter discusses the healing power of nature. “When we spend most of our lives indoors, what becomes of our own wildness? . . . We can lose our inner compass” (156). Ackerman insists that nature is a restorative when dealing with pain. When she had a broken foot, she craved the outdoors so much that she dragged herself on to a scooter for a ride. “Those doses of sunlight and wildlife were my salvation” (157). She also provides a strong case for the value of meditation, and urges readers to live life to the fullest, not only by seizing the day, but by seizing the night as well-- carpe diem and carpe noctem.
