Something Happens Contrary to popular belief, something does happen in this novel, in two pages towards the end. You could even argue that two things happen, one good, one bad. It’s not that important to know what they are, quite apart from spoiler concerns, because what is more important is what happened before the narrator, marketing executive Bob Slocum, starts his story. This something or these things happened to him and to his children, but he doesn’t know what they are. It means something to us readers, because it’s possible that it happened or will happen to us. If we follow Slocum’s story, we might find out, for our benefit as well as his. If we find out, we might be able to do something about it. Slocum’s story is structured as a tale about work, parental, marital and extramarital relationships. He tells it in the form of an interior monologue, frequently interspersed with a Socratic dialogue (containing parental theses in parentheses). In the absence of someone to talk to, the monologue often sounds like a verbatim account of Slocum’s discussion with an analyst. It could even be an attempt to analyse himself, an attempt at something therapeutic. Slocum’s description of the dialogues with his son can even be used to describe Heller’s novel as a whole: “The lines fly crisply in rhythmic questions and answers, and we both enjoy them.” The Condition of Slocum Slocum summarises his condition as follows: “I’ve got bad feet. I’ve got a jawbone that’s deteriorating and someday soon I’m going to have to have all my teeth pulled. It will hurt. I’ve got an unhappy wife to support and two unhappy children to take care of. (I’ve got that other child with irremediable brain damage who is neither happy nor unhappy, and I don’t know what will happen to him after we’re dead.) I’ve got eight unhappy people working for me who have problems and unhappy dependents of their own. I’ve got anxiety; I suppress hysteria. I’ve got politics on my mind, summer race riots, drugs, violence, and teen-age sex. There are perverts and deviates everywhere who might corrupt or strangle any one of my children. I’ve got crime in my streets. I’ve got old age to face. My boy, though only nine, is already worried because he does not know what he wants to be when he grows up. My [15 year old] daughter tells lies. I’ve got the decline of American civilisation and the guilt and ineptitude of the whole government of the United States to carry around on these poor shoulders of mine. And I find I am being groomed for a better job. And I find - God help me - that I want it.” It might sound like Trump-era America, but it’s actually 1974. "That Abominable Cafard" Slocum believes he suffers from some form of depression or melancholia: “Oh, that abominable cafard. I was over thirty years old before I even knew what to call that permeating, uninvited sorrow dwelling inside me somewhere like an elusive burglar that will not be cornered and exorcised.” "Vain as a Peacock" Slocum presents a different picture to his work colleagues (he doesn’t mention any friends outside his job): “He was that nice-looking, polite boy with a good sense of humour, wasn’t he?” “Generally, I am a happy, pleasant, humorous drunk…” “Virginia told me often I was handsome, cute, sexy, and smart…” “I am vain as a peacock.” At home, he tries to maintain a “facade of paternal good humour”. Still, Slocum reveals, “I often wonder what my own true nature is.” He doubts his own authenticity. And his wife’s: “What happened to us? Something did. I was a boy once, and she was a girl, and we were both new. Now we are man and woman, and nothing feels new any longer; everything feels old.” Growing Up He has grown up. But what does that mean? How is he different from what he once was? “That [boy] was somebody else, not me - I insist on that; it exists in my memory but that’s all; like a children’s story; it is way outside the concrete experience of the person I am now and was then; it never happened - I do insist on that - not to me; I know I did not spend so much of my time doing that; so there must have been a second person who grew up alongside me (or inside me) and filled in for me on occasions to experience things of which I did not wish to become a part…” On the other hand, there is a part of Slocum that is still a (naughty) little boy (he describes his own son as a “swaggering princeling”, a term that might apply equally to the father): “I am enjoying my fit exquisitely. I am still a little boy. I am a deserted little boy I know who will never grow older and never change, who goes away and then comes back. He is badly bruised and very lonely. He is thin. He makes me sad whenever I remember him. He is still alive, yet out of my control. This is as much as he ever became. He never goes far and always comes back. I can’t help him. Between us now there is a cavernous void. He is always nearby.” Growing Away Equally (and conversely), “something happened to both my children that I cannot explain and cannot undo...”: “And yet, there must have been a break somewhere, an end and a starting point, a critical interval in [my daughter’s] development of some breadth and duration that I cannot remember and did not notice (just as there must certainly have been a similar start of metamorphosis somewhere back in my own past that I took no notice of then and cannot remember now)...(Whatever happened to it, that baby she was? Where did it go? Where is it now? And how did it get there? Such beings, such things, just don’t happen one day and stop happening the next. Do they? What happened to the lovely little me that once was? I remember certain things about him well and know he used to be.)...” He talks of his daughter and himself in the same terms: “The mother and father are dead, and the little boy is missing; I don’t know where he came from; I don’t know where I went; I don’t know all that’s happened to me since. I miss him. I’d love to know where he’s been. Where in her lifetime (and in mine too, of course) was that legendary happy childhood I used to hear so much about (those carefree days of joy and sunshine, ha, ha, that birthright)?” "Nullifying a Whole Culture" To the extent that Slocum is typical of his generation, “I cannot nullify a whole culture, an environment, an epoch, a past (especially when it’s my own past and environment as well as [my daughter’s], and I myself am such a large part of hers).” Slocum speculates, “I know I must have done some horribly damaging things to her when she was little, but I can’t remember what those things were or when I did them.” "All My Fault" Paradoxically, he says, “I can’t believe it was all my fault.” A clue to Slocum’s plight lies in the fact that he thinks his 80 year old mother said to him, on her deathbed, that “You’re no good. You’re just no good.” Yet, it’s not clear whether this is just his defective imagination or memory: “Those were the last words I think I heard her speak to me.” “What’s the Matter? What’s Wrong?” If it’s true, then it’s possible that Slocum’s discontent derives from an insecurity and lack of self-esteem triggered by his mother’s comment. He was dependent on her positive opinion of him, and she withdrew it on her deathbed. He became or remained a child who lacks their parents’ approval. This locks Slocum into a semi-perpetual childhood: “I know at last what I want to be when I grow up. When I grow up I want to be a little boy.” In effect, he wants to be nine, like his son, whose gym teacher says of him that it’s “time to start learning some responsibility and discipline.” Cause and Effect The novel is driven by an obsessive preoccupation with cause and effect (and therefore fault, guilt, blame and shame). Slocum has tried to address these issues (particularly with respect to Derek, his retarded son) both professionally and in his own mind: “By now, my wife and I have had our fill - are sick and glutted to the teeth - of psychologists, psychiatrists, neurologists, neurosurgeons, speech therapists, psychiatric social workers, and any of all the others we’ve been to that I may have left out, with their inability to help and their lofty, patronising platitudes that we are not to blame, ought not to let ourselves feel guilty, and have nothing to be ashamed of.” Immature Sexist Slocum reveals an aspect of immaturity (and humour - throughout the emotional labyrinth of this long novel, there is a consistent, if irreverent, good humour, which is often overlooked by readers) when he comments on women’s liberation: “I wish these women’s-lib people would hurry up and liberate themselves and make themselves better companions for sexists like me. And for each other.” "Getting His Affairs in Order" In the end, Slocum decides to take control of his affairs. He tries to “get his affairs in order...Systematically, I am putting my affairs in order...I have taken charge of my responsibilities... Everyone seems pleased with the way I’ve taken command.” It’s almost as if Slocum believes that personal and family relationships can be managed in the same way that the company’s sales managers work: “They thrive on explicit guidance toward clear objectives. (This may be one reason golf appeals to them.) For the most part, they are cheerful, confident, and gregarious when they are not irritable, anxious, and depressed.” While this passage appears early in the novel, it does suggest that the same rules don’t necessarily apply to both circumstances. Or at least, not these rules. SOUNDTRACK: Linda Ronstadt - “You’re No Good” https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=haZPPBJ... The Dream Syndicate - “John Coltrane Stereo Blues” https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=ScO27Fc... Kings of Leon - “Joe’s Head” (from “Youth and Young Manhood”) https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=xk79gcP... Bill Cosby - “To Russell, My Brother, Whom I Slept With” https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqSd3Hh...
