the wonderful dark irony of Russian humor.... According to the story line, a trickster, "not too fat and not too thin," i.e. a rather average person named Chichikov, is trying to enroll the names of dead peasants (muzhiks) to increase his paper wealth and raise his stature. These are the nominal dead souls. Chichikov knows that serfs have value, even if it's just on paper. Most landowners jump at Chichikov's offer to buy them, because it means the landowners will no longer have to pay taxes on serfs who aren’t there anymore to work the fields. And what's in it for Chichikov? He's buying up all these non-existent people in order to use them as collateral for a huge loan and then flee with the money. I submit that the title "Dead Souls" is a double entendre because mixed in with the truly banal and silly characters Chichikov encounters on his quest, there are those who may have pumping hearts, but for all intents and purposes are like ghosts---dead souls---such as this person Chichikov encounters at table in a house.... "...It was hard to say definitely who she was, a married lady or a spinster, a relative, the housekeeper or a woman simply living in the house - something without a cap, about 30, and wearing a multicoloured shawl. There are people that exist on this earth not as objects in themselves, but as extraneous specks or tiny spots on objects. They sit in the same place, they hold their heads in the same way and you are almost ready to take them for a piece of furniture..." And Gogol offers how someone becomes a living ghost.... "Everything undergoes a rapid transformation in man. Before you know it, a dreadful worm has grown within him, and tyrannically sucked off all the vital juices for itself." Chichikov himself is going through this process. I suppose one could call it the evil of banality. Such a banal man (poshlyak) is utterly empty, there's no inner life. A dead soul in the making. Some of these souls, such as the character Mamilov, attempt a pretense at substance, but it's extrinsic only. Mamilov has a gazebo on his property with a flat green cupola, blue wooden columns, and an inscription: THE TEMPLE OF SOLITARY REFLECTION, but no ability to reflect on anything in a coherent fashion. He also lacks focus, a very modern problem. For example, "in his study there's always some book lying about, with a bookmark at the fourteenth page, which he had been reading constantly for the past two years." Nozdryov is another landowner from whom Chichikov is trying to buy dead peasant souls. Nozdryov is a widower, left with two kids he has no interest in so leaves them to the nanny. He's a frivolous party animal who loves cards and is always getting into fights and getting tossed from social gatherings. He's also a pathological liar. Though he seems brisk and energetic, he's glib, has no ideas and plans nothing. He's just passing through like another dead soul. Landowner and client, Sobakevich, could not be more different than Nozdryov. He's a cynic, conspiracy theorist, glutton and miser. Gripped by greed, he insists on discussing the fine personal qualities of the dead souls he wants to overcharge Chichikov for. And finally there's Plyushkin, who has suffered about as much travail as Job. Needless to say, he's eager to sell his dead souls to Chichikov. And like many in our world of Facebook, these living ghosts are obsessed with nonsense... “but mortal man— truly, it is hard to understand how your mortal man is made: however banal the news may be, as long as it is news, he will not fail to pass it on to some other mortal, even if it is precisely with the purpose of saying: “See what a lie they’re spreading!” and the other mortal will gladly incline his ear, though afterwards he himself will say: “Yes, that is a a perfectly banal lie, not worthy of any attention!” and thereupon he will set out at once to look for a third mortal, so that, having told him, they can both exclaim with noble indignation: “What a banal lie!” And it will not fail to make the rounds of the whole town, and all mortals, however many there are, will have their fill of talking and will then admit that it is unworthy of attention and not worth talking about.” Returning to town with his four hundred dead souls, Chichikov is ecstatic. But he soon becomes the object of nasty gossip. Chichikov had bought these souls to raise his social standing and his net worth. But he is now seen as a grifter and must flee for his life. ======= A favorite of Mel Brooks.... “Dead Souls,” by the magnificent genius Nikolai Gogol was a revelation. I’d never read anything like it. It was hysterically funny and incredibly moving at the same time. It’s like Gogol stuck a pen in his heart, and it didn’t even go through his mind on its way to the page. It truly raised the bar of what I considered to be important writing. It was a life-changing gift, and I still read it once a year to remind myself of what great comic writing can be."
