I don’t generally elect to read true crime books for various reasons, number one being the writers often sympathize with the perpetrators. Obviously, this is true in The Making of a Serial Killer, as Sondra London and Danny Rolling express their love for one another. Secondly, how many incidents can you read of sick-o’s brutally murdering and dismembering their victims? Yes, Danny was tortured as a child, as many inmates have been. He was physically and psychologically tortured. He had an unfortunate childhood. However, not everyone who experiences what he did ends up being labeled a serial killer. I believe there are many times in his younger life where he could have been salvaged. I say salvaged because the damage he incurred at the hands of a frigid and abusive father was likely too extensive and deep to overcome one hundred percent. That being said, I believe Sondra put into words what few others could have because of her relationship with Danny; he trusts her. Many areas of the book read like a case files (psych reports, etc…). Having worked in prisons as an Educational Psychologist for many years, I can say much of what Danny writes is typical inmate jargon. Inmates have all of the time in the world to write, draw, and think. He writes the typical inmate poetry, the draws the typical inmate images containing angels, dragons, and naked women. He speaks of Jesus, the underworld, and writes love letters to anyone he can attract (Sondra in this circumstance). Many inmates are like this. It’s kind of their “M.O.” What else do they have to do? I was captivated by the various personas. It kept me reading. If I were the victim’s families, I too, would be upset with the bloody details of my loved-one’s murder being broadcast for everyone to read and know. For example, cutting off the nipples, beheading and positioning the head, and the color of guts protruding from the incision. Danny obviously got off sexually by committing the crimes. I just hope he didn’t have the same pleasure writing the book and reliving the scenes. He says it was a painful process for him, and one could only hope it was. It would be interesting to have insight into Sondra London and what attracts her to a serial killer. They’ve both admitted they profess their love for each other. My only guess is that she also gains some sexual stimulation knowing that an incarcerated man who’s restricted from any physical contact with women or anyone turns her on. Many women who fall in love with inmates are soothed by knowing their man is behind bars and can never physically hurt them. They enjoy the longing and dreaming of sex, the letter writing, and knowing someone “loves” them, especially when the cases are high-profile. This can be the case with religious volunteers, teachers, self-help volunteers, and other “helping” types… Including sympathetic journalists/writers. It would have been interesting to read more about Danny’s ideas for revamping the prison system, which I also believe is a great need. As a society, if we choose to lock someone away for life, we must be humane about it. I believe Danny poses some great ideas that could be used to improve the way we do business. Additionally, death row shouldn’t be a place where people sit for 20 or 30 years. Inmates shouldn’t live their lives there until they die from old age. It should be more streamlined. Even with my objections and questions, I do believe the book is well written.
