(Spelling and grammar corrected November 2025) I remember reading this, or one of Velikovsky's other books as a teenager in Dublin in the 1970s and I certainly looked at a few others. Back then Velikovsky's books were everywhere, including shops and not just bookshops but newsagents (there was a time when you there were shops selling newspapers and magazines which had racks of paperbacks - all very ye olden days but it isn't really that long ago) and along with the various Don Juan books of Carlos Castaneda they were the preferred reading material of teenage boys who liked to see themselves as rebels (but whose mummy'' still washed and ironed their pjs) and an 'intellectual' avant garde having graduated from 'Chariots of the Gods' by Eric von Daniken. If I'd known back in the 1970s that Velikovsky's books were first published in the 1950s I might have been even more sceptical than I was. For me at 14/15 years of age Velicovsky, like von Daniken, Castaneda and Thor Heyerdahl (with his diffusionism theories) were all twaddle. I didn't believe everything historians and archaeologists said but believed that if you were to rewrite history, eliminate or change the chronology of thousands of years, you needed to do it with something stronger then a hunch and a lot of 'what ifs' most of which changed rapidly into 'once' (not if anymore) this happened so this other is possible' etc. each bit of speculation turned into facts that become the foundation for even more bizarre speculations. Although I'd never heard of Euro-centric thinking, it might not have been coined back then, it always seemed to me that it was people from outside of Egypt, Mexico, South America or Polynesia who came up with these outlandish theories. Inevitably these people didn't know the histories or cultures of these places in any depth and remade, used and often ignored or belittled these places. These authors were steeped in out-of-date silly cultural baggage (The Aztecs thought Cortes and Pizzaro were returning gods, the pyramids were built by slave labour, the people on Vanuatu cut down all their trees and destroyed their habitat) and often obscured and distorted more interesting and more disturbing truths about the harm 'white' men had brought to these regions. Does anyone still read Velikovsky? of course they do, there are people who believe that poor old Adam Weishaupt founded the Illuminati back 1776 and that it is still going strong running the world, that men in black exist and that the catholic church has always been dedicated to concealing that Jesus married Mary Magdalene and founded a royal bloodline (the Merovingian kings of France)! The Moon, and/or Venus, didn't pop out of its orbit to provide miracles in the bible because the bible is a collection of stories, like the Illiad or the Mahābhārata. Even if Jesus had children with Mary Magdalene do you know how much of his blood a 21st century descendant would have? I don't know but I can tell you that if Peter the Great of Russia (reigned 1682-1725) had (simplistically) 100% Russian blood by the time his descendant Nicholas II came to the throne in 1894 he had only 0.7% Russian blood. So in less than 200 years the Russian component in the Romanovs had disappeared. The same would have happened to the 'bloodline' of Jesus Christ. None of that is directly relevant to Velikovsky, but as a metaphor for how stupid his theories are it is pretty good. History, science and anthropology are wonderfully rich, complex and ever changing. They are so much more wonderful than all this pseudo crap so why not concentrate on reality then fantasy?!
