I read this quite a while ago when I was Scribd binging. I didn't like it, and skimmed a lot. The first 3/4 is mostly fluff; there are many OTT dramatics you would find in soapy-smut, but it just didn't work for me... If she cut out of all the filler, and just streamlined the crazy; I probably would've liked it. As is, there's a lot of parts moving, but there're going nowhere until the end. I don't think it's worth $$ to buy, but if you have Scribd, you can skim... the last quarter isn't so bad. The gist is... (these are more notes for me- don't read on unless you want the book details) SPOILERS Husband (Jason) is sick battling cancer; the wife Liza was an actress that pretty much put her career on hold to support his and kids. My notes say I was bored as hell until 70% in, then Jason is driving her sis (Lorraine-who's a hater, not as pretty/talented as h,) and they are discussing how the cancer has emasculated him; Jason doesn't feel sexy anymore... things get inappropriate; Lorraine starts rubbing his crotch-gasp-he's never felt so excited... He does the obligatory "We can't." "We've got to stop." BUT she kisses him, they're making out, and he has an epiphany, he doesn't have to actually f*ck his SIL to recharge his battery. He can just make-out a bit with her and feel like a man. After he's recharged, he again tells her to stop. Lorraine isn't having it... "That's right, give it to me, I want it, I want you, God, how I want you!" He's just about to push her away...eyeroll.. when BOOM there's a crash. Liza's home, and she heard every word, and she's devastated. She slaps sis, kicks her out...tells hubs he's scum and leaves. This was the "best" scene in the book, one of the only ones that made me feel some emotion. Days pass, Jason has a complete personality adjustment; he's going to therapy, wants to make marriage work. Liza has affair with her ex (whom she dumped for Jason) totally screws him over cuz he loves her so, but she goes back to Jason. Cancer returns, it's bad. Liza reconciles with sis, then asks her to visit him because she's probably the only one that can cheer him up... what?? We learn Jason's dad also cheated on his wife a bunch, slept with his wife's sister, and crazy cousin Howard and Jason are actually 1/2 brothers!! Howard's a nutter, keeps his wife preggers cuz he's so jealous. Recently beat the crap out of her because she was somehow "punked" thought she was going for an interview, but really it was a reality tv show that tries to get contestants drunk and cheat... she dances on a table, I think kisses the host, maybe takes off her shirt-her bra was showing. There's an epic showdown at hospital, Howard is losing his shit, but Liza calmly tells him she understands his frustration; he's crazy because he's hurting. POOF He's fixed, now he's an awesome hubs; he's also a match and saves Jason's life. Everyone's happy...the end
