Nothing screams 1980s more in a book than a girl's coolest outfit being a viciously clashing array of like 14 colors. What a time to be alive, that was. I remembered liking this one a lot as a kid, and I still did now. My parents are together so I've never been through divorce, but it felt like Martin did a good job of showing what that experience might be like for a teen girl. Stacey is really thrown for a loop, and alternates between being angry with her parents, trying to trick them into wanting to stay together, being scared but also a little anticipatory about the changes in her life. I thought her mom and dad handled it all mostly well, and the conflicts between them felt believable. I especially liked when they said some of their issues were personal and not things they would share with their daughter, because that's a lot more realistic than total honesty in that kind of situation. I also liked seeing how Stacey worked through all of her feelings about either staying in New York with her dad or moving back to Stoneybrook with her mom. Again, it felt very genuine, and probably how a 13-year-old would respond to such a situation. It was interesting too to see her have a bit of a lightbulb moment when she realizes that other than Laine, her friends in New York are really just…Laine's friends, who she ends up hanging out with by proximity. But they aren't HER friends, not really, whereas in Connecticut, she's got a group of girls, all of whom are truly her friends. There were a couple moments where you have to be a little generous and realize this was written in the late 80s. At the very beginning of the book, Stacey is babysitting for two kids in her building, and we find out quickly the family is Black. But Stacey says she doesn't think of them as Black, just as people, which…oy. "I don't even see color!!!" I bet you don't, white girl. But again, that kind of statement was probably considered fairly forward-thinking at the tme, at least among white people. Also, the way Stacey talks about Judy, the homeless woman who is usually near her building, it's as though this is the only homeless person she's ever seen and it's some kind of novelty. In New York City. Like, what. But overall this is one of my favorites just for how well it portrayed things, even if it's all done very quickly because of the length of these books. Plus I liked the reminder that there were people with even worse fashion sense than I had in the 80s.
