Well, the fact that this book of pseudo-science has respectable ratings and fairly positive reviews here, it appalls me. It makes the the ignorance and mysticism in general populace very evident that they, after failing to understand Science and scientific methods, have embraced the fantasy of pseudo-science which gives them the grandeur and connection with the cosmos which every human seeks. In this book, author claims an explanation of the biblical events of Exodus; which include the Earth standing still, parting of the Red sea, high tides, earthquakes, famine, swarm of vermins and elimination of Egyptian pharaohs; by a divine providence which had caused the ejection of Venus from Jupiter as a comet-like body and making a near-collision with Earth when Mars also happened to be around. He attributes all the catastrophies described in the ancient texts to this near-collision event of the three planets. He makes use of supposed concordance between myths of different cultures, taken from different timelines and blatantly ignores the prospect of diffusionist tendency of the myths to attribute for the similarity observed among stories of different cultures. He, then ventures further to embark upon some more fantastic theses, such as manna(sugar) falling from a tail of Comet to provide the sustenance of 40 years for a hundred thousand Jews. An entirely unfeasible prospect, if we consider the desired mass of sugar for such a purpose and the percentage of carbohydrates observed in Comets, such a comet would have to be more massive than the Sun. He imagines electric and magnetic forces operating on cosmic scales, without considering the magnitude of the forces required would have obliterated any life on Earth. He also draws an analogy between the Solar system and an atom, talking of planets as electrons and their supposed collisions as change in their quantum state by absorption of a photon. He doesn't only ignore the difference between electric and gravitational forces, he also seems to be plainly ignorant of basic atomic structure, where diffused electron clouds are found instead of imagined discrete electrons. He doesn't only take all the myths to be literally true at their face value, but also ignores the most sound scientific principles such as Newtonian mechanics. Many of the concordances among the various myths are included and considered by him, but I didn't see any mention of the discordances that might exist. Ejection of Venus from Jupiter is taken from the Greek myth that goddess Athena was born from the head of Zeus, which he translates word to word in cosmological language. Escape velocity of Jupiter is much greater than the speed required for an object to escape the gravity of Sun at the orbital position of Jupiter. If a body is ejected from Jupiter, it would possess the velocity to flung itself into interstellar space, it can't come near Earth and make itself a planet like Venus. There are hundreds of inconsistencies in this book, it would take another book to describe and falsify them. At best, it is a lame attempt to validate the ancient myths and fictions and establish them as true by making a supposedly scientific explanations for them. Despite the efforts of many scientists including Carl Sagan to describe this book as a whole lot of baloney and fantastical literature, it seems to be appreciated and embraced by those who have found their religious and mystical beliefs to be rendered false by application of Science. In an age where people seem to be retreating back to the dark ages because of uncertainties and turbulence brought forth by incompetent and malicious exploitation of technology, this book serves as a tool on which they could rely upon and ridicule the Science which they think to be the cause of their problems. However, this books claims to be Scientific in nature despite its blatant ignorance of Science and scientific methods, supporters of this book read it to validate and seek their mystical fantasies which Science so mercilessly falsifies. All the supporters of this book seem to confuse the term research with cherry-picking, when the theories which validate the ideas presented in the book are embraced and those are ignored or rejected which prove as counter-evidence of Velikovsky's hypotheses. This sort of double-standard is completely atypical of research culture and no effort should be spared to denounce such a propagation of ignorant pseudo-science with its false ideas. If the topics described in the book raise your curiousity, I will suggest to read the exquisite description and critical analysis of this book by Carl Sagan in his book Broca's Brain: On Romance of Science. Do not read this book unless you have excessive free time and capability to spend no more than three hours for this book of 350+ pages.
