What a sad and demoralizing sequel. Fear of Flying took the stance that women can desire, experience, enjoy, and pursue sex in the same manner as men. It was a groundbreaking stance that spoke to a generation of women who were taught to believe that only women of loose morals could enjoy sex, not a lady. Isadora Wing's guilty yet liberating sex fueled romp across Europe was endearing, relatable, and the voice of an entire generation of women. So what happened with How to Save Your Own Life ? Isadora has become insufferable---a spoiled, self-centered, neurotic, hyprocrite angry at her husband after discovering he had a longterm affair. The "novel" is one long winded rumination after another about how horrible her relationship is with her husband who is indifferent to her whining, selfishness, and neediness. There a lot of potty language and raunchy sex thrown in for shock value and then culiminates with several pages of cringe inducing poetry Isadora spends her days either whining to her extremely patient friends or screwing one lover, then skipping across town to screw another lover, then slinking back home to angrily screw her husband. Not to mention she also dabbles in some sapphic delights with her lesbian friend (who finally has an orgasm by cramming a champagne bottle up her hoohoo) and participates in a drug and booze fueled orgy. Yet hypocritically she remains angry at her "boring" husband for having an affair. Then Isadora finally finds the guts to leave her husband not through some incredible sense of inner strength but through the arms of another younger man. So much for feminism. So much for being strong, independent, self-sufficent women who don't need a man to complete them. Isadora is only happy if she has a man, preferably with a large cock. I really enjoyed Fear of Flying and it's a good thing women have come a long way since the 70s because How to Save Your Own Life sets feminism back at least five steps. It's no wonder Jong is one of the most revered and reviled feminists of the 20th century.
