This is nowhere near being one of Kings scariest books, but it may possibly be one of the deepest novels he has written. Being a child of the 60's, having grown up in the Vietnam era, this book really hit home for me. But it wasn't just because of the war itself. This was a look into the hearts of man (and woman). Interestingly enough, I started out in the first story being entertained in the fantasy of a tale that not only took me back to a time of my childhood but was also connected to King's Dark Tower series, a series I consider a masterpiece. So yeah, I was having a good time... but by the time I reached the fifth and last story of the book I was angry; angry at war, angry at the man, angry at the government, angry at the system, angry at the atrocities of life and angry at the cruelty of my fellow human beings. King's mastery in weaving a tale really begins when he introduces William Golding's Lord of the Flies as the book that Ted gives young Bobby to read. Throughout the five stories we see the the same theme take place in the characters that Golding gave us in LOTF. We have our young boys, stranded on an island to fend for themselves, slowly being overcome by their instincts, wildlings, feral. Chasing the pig, wanting to stick the spear up its ass, and finally when that doesn't quite satiate the hunger of the beast, they turn on one another. And so now, even though the boys (and girls) of King's story have all moved on...aged, they still carry the scars, the nightmares. Mamasan was murdered out there in the bush many years earlier but she still sits in their presence, forever staring with her accusing dead eyes. Eyes that last stared at them when they ran her through with a bayonet. Kill the pig...stick the spear in its ass! I can see where some might consider this a platform for King's politics, and even I have to restrain myself from using this review as a venting point. But I did say in the beginning that this book was deep. The 60's are long gone, Vietnam is history, but here we are again. When this was written the attacks on 9/11 had yet to happen. King delved deeper into just the moment. He shows us the beast. If you think vampires, ghosts and rabid dogs are bad, watch what happens when we put the controls of video games in the hands of our children, sit them down in front of televisions where they get to watch Hollywoods glorified war movies and then hand them M-16's and tell them to go and fight. Pretty soon Mamasan will be sitting in their livingrooms with dead eyes while they scratch at the scars on their bodies and the scars on their minds. Now, that will be one hell of a horror story.
