Schlesinger laces up the gloves and swings away in this political/philosophical biography/history. His main subject- or rather the philosophical underpinning of his wide-ranging view of many different subjects- is that a pure form of populist democracy, arrayed against the pernicious forces of corporatism and classism will, if not inevitably prevail, invariably be on the right side of history. This book was much more politically dogmatic than I expected it to be, but on this level there is a thorough investigation into the outcomes of Jacksonian democracy. The age of Jackson, as Schlesinger tells it, was the age of expanding enfranchisement under the reign of King Mob. In this sense, Schlesinger is personally a fan of Jackson; the image of Jackson as backwoods commoner and champion of the working man fits the liberal narrative that Schlesinger tells, and there is little historical static to get in the way of that. Unfortunately, some of Jackson's less liberal attitudes and policies are conspicuously omitted or sketched out in calculatedly sparse detail: Jackson's Indian policies, his penchant for retributive murder. That is a shame, one less than excusable, and it smacks of whitewashing. The fundamental struggle between labor and capital, between elite and commoner is enough to move the narrative, but being the only struggle depicted in a history covering over decade, especially a decade so fraught with social upheaval as this, cripples the book almost fatally. That disinterest in the smaller scales of history, in the everyday ramifications of Schlesinger's philosophizing and politicking, also makes this book a chore to read. Schlesinger is one of those old-school historians who makes a person a principle a little too easily, harrumphing magisterially about Grand Ideas while forgetting the fickleness and nuance and humanness of the people who held the ideas. Characterization is limited to a few drily humorous anecdotes, generally illustrative of the subject's philosophy. Schlesinger put a mark on historiography with this dense and opinionated Pulitzer winner; it's worth a read, but be prepared for that read to be a taxing and heavy handed affair.
