Plays Unpleasant (1898) by Bernard Shaw Penguin Project 08: #561 Widowers' Houses (1892) After reading Shaw's preface to these three plays I was slightly concerned that the socio-political language and contextual understanding seemingly required were going to render the plays themselves unreadable to me, however from the first scene of Widowers' Houses I felt in quite safe hands with his character writing. A good introduction to his views with the focus being on slum landlord Mr. Sartorius and his daughter Blanche, who abuses her servant, and how Trench, a poor doctor, wants to marry Blanche, but after discovering the source of her and her father's income refuses to anymore. I really love how modern-seeming the dialogue and relationship between Blanche and Trench is. It's very soapy and entertaining and doesn't read like how I would have imagined 1890s folk would talk. While I don't necessarily understand the scheme between Sartorius, Lickcheese, and Trench in the third act, I get the point of Trench succumbing to the unpleasant workings and enjoyed it for what it was. The Philanderer (1893) Despite no prior knowledge of Ibsen and the prefatory note not really filling in any gaps at all, this play was really rather enjoyable. The main chatacter is caught between two loce affairs, both of whom share his Ibsenist beliefs although to varying degrees, with one of then sharing his ideals on the disavowment of marriage and the other wanting to marry him despite this. The setting of a social club that only allows people in if they are neither a manly man nor a womanly woman is so dystopian and yet socialist during the 1890s. The dialogue reveals these really engaging sexual politics and a nice little animal testing subplot in there, too, with the scientist and one of the fathers, and all of the character interactions are a lot of fun to read. Mrs. Warren's Profession (1893) Definitely the densest of the three in terms of character development as a result of the topic at hand, specifically shown through the changing of the relationship between Mrs. Warren and Vivie. The way that their relationship seemingly grows closer once Vivie learns what her mother's titular profession was, but then completely ceases once she learns that the profession is still ongoing, is a very interesting turn of events. The male characters fill up the scenes nicely when Vivie and Mrs. Warren aren't stealing them, and give them both something to bounce off of. Shaw's dialogue is so enjoyable and fluid, and it's really a very enjoyable read. I'm especially looking forward to seeing a performed iteration of this one.
