Labor Day weekend is here, marking the end of summer. What an extraordinary summer it has been: almost no baseball, no trip to the beach, and pretty much all of my time devoted to reading. This year I have rekindled my enjoyment in reading Agatha Christie’s cases. I have long read mysteries in between denser prose and nonfiction to clear my palette, but I have found myself craving Dame Christie not as a palette cleanser but to see if I could put fit the pieces of the puzzle together and figure out whodunit before the end. My summer has seen me read much of Hercule Poirot, so I decided it was time for a change of pace and turned to Miss Marple of St Mary Mead. Miss Marple is approaching ninety years old. She has cast a long network of friends, nieces and nephews, godchildren, and former employees. Yet, she still has a clear head and sharp mind and at her age enjoys solving murder mysteries. This case begins on a train which passes Brackhampton station. Missus Elspeth McGillicuddy witnesses a dark haired man on a parallel train strangle a woman to death. Alarmed, she notifies the conductor, who writes off this behavior as a tall tale told by an old lady. En route to visit Miss Marple, Mrs McGillicuddy retells what she saw to the proper authorities, only to have each one tell her that she must have been seeing things. Miss Marple believes her friend. Other ladies might have been concocting tall tales, not Elspeth McGillicuddy. She is as honest as they come, and through Miss Marple’s network of police contacts, the ladies begin to unravel this heinous crime. Miss Marple dictates this case from afar. She installs herself at a bed and breakfast in Brackhampton and employs a former housekeeper Lucy Eyelesbarrow to work at the same job at Rutherford Hall, a manor with acreage abutting the train rails. The land includes an embankment where a murderer could easily roll a body down a hill and then transport to a hiding place where authorities could not find it. Miss Marple is getting on in age and too old to be snooping for clues but Lucy Eyelesbarrow makes for a perfect sleuth. She has a sharp mind, yet opted to use her Oxford education as a housekeeper, and has maintained steady employment since graduation. Always thorough on the job, it would seem preposterous that Eyelesbarrow decided to clean out a little used shed on the property and discover a body. Miss Marple had been correct again, and with Scotland Yard alerted, it would not be long until we figure out whodunit, or would it. Readers find out that the Crackenthorpe heirs of Rutherford Hall stands to inherit a large sum of money and land when their father passes away. The money would be split six ways, and, when Miss Marple discovered this, she thought how a murderer would, and realized that when money is involved, some people can get greedy. Once one murder is committed, it is it beyond the guilty party to commit a second or a third or even a fourth if s(he) is not caught. Miss Marple requested Inspector Craddock of Scotland Yard, a godson of a dear friend of hers. Because he is not the sharpest of inspectors, not surprisingly he requests Miss Marple’s advice on the case, and, with assistance from Miss Eyelesbarrow, the mystery resolves itself quickly. The back and forth a between Miss Marple and Inspector Craddock bring a smile to my face, as I wonder how dense the inspector actually is. In the end, it is the ladies who unravel the, in Miss Marple’s words, “simple” case, with Craddock and the local authorities wondering how she figured things out so quickly. Miss Marple has been a change of pace for me from the intellect of Hercule Poirot. She is as sharp as a tack for her age, yet is a common woman and does not think herself as superior to anyone. The Queen of Crime shows through Miss Marple that just because someone is aged does not been that they are feeble, making her one of the first writers to address ageism in a positive manner. Per her usual, Dame Christie withholds a key piece of information until the end, making it nearly impossible for the average reader to figure out whodunit. This is why I keep turning to her mysteries to see if I can figure out that clue midway through a book and devise my own theories as to the murderer and motive. My summer of reading the cases of the Queen of Crime might be coming to a close, but I will continue to turn to her mysteries as a means of keeping my own mind as sharp as Miss Marple’s. Palette cleansers, there are always other detectives and mysteries for that. 3.5 🕵️‍♀️ stars
