Title: Junie B., First Grader: Toothless Wonder Author: Barbara Park Illustrator: Denise Brunkus Genre: Transitional Chapter Book Theme: Losing teeth Opening Line/Sentence: Dear first-grade journal, Today we are having a speaker in Room One. Brief Book Summary: Junie B. Jones is the first one in her class to lose a top tooth. At first she’s excited, but then she’s worried she’ll look like toothless Uncle Lou. She also thinks the tooth fairy is a tooth witch, so her and her classmates ponder the fact that if there really is a tooth fairy, what does she do with all the teeth? At the end, Junie B. Jones comes to the conclusion that the tooth fairy recycles teeth and that the tooth fairy gave Junie B. Jones’ tooth to her little brother Ollie. Professional Recommendation/Review #1: http://www.clcd.com/#/bookdetail/1/1/... Kirkus (Kirkus Reviews, September 1, 2002 (Vol. 70, No. 17)) Good news, people!" Junie B. has lost her first tooth and she and is the first person in Room One to reach this milestone. Is Junie B. excited? Well, yes and no. First, she is excited about sharing the news, and the bloodstained spit cup, with her classmates. But, she is concerned that she will end up like Sheldon's toothless Uncle Lou. Then, she imagines that she will look so different that no one at school will recognize her. And there is the little matter of the Tooth Fairy. See, Junie B. knows "stuff about the fairy, that's why." The "truth" is perfectly clear to her seems so logical coming out of her mouth: the Tooth Fairy is really a Tooth Witch who collects teeth to EAT. Her mother challenges Junie B.'s emphatic explanation of the tiny cheek-pinching Tooth Witch flying on her toothbrush. But Junie B. has no patience for her mother's dense thinking. "I rolled my eyes way up to the ceiling. 'Cause sometimes I have to explain everything to that woman." Sassy and perceptive Junie B. is growing up, and Park's first-person narrative improves as her character ages. Junie B. has been listening to adults and loves to add grown-up words and colloquialisms to her speech. The reader is treated to words like "fascinating, reaction, pleasure, occasional, festivities and 'that's another can of worms." Junie B.'s swarms of young fans will continue to delight in her unique take on the world and her exasperation with the well-meaning adults in her life. A hilarious, first-rate read-aloud for the first-grade classroom. Professional Recommendation/Review #2: http://www.clcd.com/#/bookdetail/1/1/... Carolyn Phelan (Booklist, Nov. 1, 2002 (Vol. 99, No. 5)) As the story begins, Junie B. struggles with the discomfort of a loose top tooth and the prospect of looking different once it is gone. When the tooth falls out, however, these issues pale beside the question of whether to put it under her pillow, since the story of the tooth fairy just doesn't make sense to her. After all, what does the tooth fairy do with all those teeth? Armed with a scientist's drive to know the truth and a six-year-old's knowledge base and logic, Junie B. finds her own answer to the question. Occasionally the humor seems aimed at adults, but children just a little older than Junie B. will definitely find this beginning chapter book amusing and occasionally laugh-out-loud funny. With its vivid portrayal of a first-grade classroom and a child's point of view, this is a welcome addition to a popular series. Response to Two Professional Reviews: I completely agree with both of these reviews. The humor in this book is captivating and it draws the reader in more and more throughout the story. The book also ponders a question that some children may be wondering themselves, which is “what does the tooth fairy do with the teeth?” Junie B. Jones’ sass is unlike any other and her narrative is entertaining and thought provoking. Evaluation of Literary Elements: Junie B. Jones is a character that children can relate to. Junie B. is trying to make sense of the world, as are many other children. This book also has great tension. Readers want to keep reading to see what happens to Junie B. Jones’ smile and what the tooth fairy actually does with the teeth she collects. The mood in this story is amusing. Junie B. Jones’ quirky humor is entertaining and understandable, which keeps readers engaged. Junie B. also writes in first person, which allows the reader to step into her world and find out what she is really thinking. As a result, readers feel more connected to Junie B. Jones. This book contains some pictures, which is perfect for readers who are transitioning from picture books to chapter books. Consideration of Instructional Application: In my classroom, a mini lesson could be about vocabulary. I would write some of the big words Junie B. Jones uses in the book and go over them with my students and have them discuss what they mean, including festivities and pleasure. After the read aloud, I would have my students come up with their own sentences using the words we went over before we read the book and hypothesize how Junie B. Jones may have been feeling when she was using those words. I could even have my students come up with synonyms and antonyms for these words as well. I could connect my lesson to science because the story involves losing a tooth. I would have my students discuss why they think children lose teeth. I could teach them about why people lose teeth and show them a step-by-step process of how it happens. They could even write about what they think happens to the teeth after the tooth fairy collects them.
