I don't think I can review this book. I can't even decide if I liked it or hated it. The writing is exceptional, as Williams' always is. But the characters are unlikable and their lives almost incomprehensible. The story is not "about" any one character. There are a group of people, some more tangential than others, who bump up against each other. The book begins and ends with Alice, a teenager who is against environmental destruction while simultaneously appearing to not care about anything. She has discovered that the people she thought were her parents are actually her grandparents. They are good people but in this book that doesn't seem to matter. In general, good and bad seem to be irrelevant. Alice is friends with two other girls, Corvus and Annabel. Annabel's mother recently died and her ghost is haunting Anabel's father. Corvus just lost both her parents in an accident and, after a failed suicide attempt, seems to be drifting through life, half asleep, or, rather, either fully asleep or volunteering at Green Oaks, a particularly grim home for the aging or perhaps a hospice for the dying. Or some combination of both. This girls seem to be friends from default rather than any particular liking. Affection and liking are mostly absent from this book, except in one rather creepy exception of an older man "liking" an 8 year old girl. All the children seem to be oddly grown up while being at the same time absolutely children. I loved Joy Williams' 99 Stories of God . There too the humor was odd and often mixed with grimness but I found it exciting and intriguing; perhaps because of the very short length of the stories. The Quick and The Dead consists of a similar combination of sadness with a strange humor. I often found myself laughing despite also feeling sad at the story. This is a realistic novel that is not actually very realistic. It takes place in the desert (in, I think, Arizona) (one of my favorite locales) but the desert is not presented as beautiful but rather both vast and heartless, a backdrop against which the characters play out their relationships and their stories. In writing this review, I clarified for myself that I did like this book, quirky as it is. Williams is always unexpected and frequently hilarious. Maybe the unlikability of the characters makes it easier to laugh at the strangeness of their lives and interactions. People affect others in ways they never even know about and life seems to be as random (and perhaps as connected) as a pinball game. If the pinballs could talk and ruminate on their existence.
