Mulata is an extravagant modernistic myth imbued and permeated with powerful magic through and through. A certain fly wizard – it isn’t a fly that flies and buzzes but a fly that is a codpiece – strikes a bargain with Tazol, the corn-husk devil to exchange his beloved wife for the riches… The embodied Tazol, a wind with a young face, his mouth afflicted with moles along the wrinkles of his smile, was handing him a large cardboard box, the kind that toys come in. Yumí, if he had had the strength to lift it, would have thrown it in Tazol’s face. A box of toys instead of the riches he had been promised, after he had given him his wife, was the cruelest of jokes. Thus the hero’s misadventures begin… The tale is full of transformations, perturbations, and deviltry… At last, after many a mishap, the hero finds himself in the town ruled by ancient elemental demons wielding all sorts of evil… But one fine day the Christian devil arrives with his own kind of evil… The priest gasped at that diabolical and satanic spectacle, an Ecce Homo with the face of a screech owl, and, prae manibus , an Infant Jesus who looked like a fish, but at that very moment he had his revelation, he reflected that it was not part of the workings of the earth demons, destructive powers, shattering, brutal, but was the low comedy, without grandeur, of the captain of the rain of accursed angels that fell from heaven. Earth demons depart… However, both pagan and Christian devils are equally greedy, envious, lewd and vicious so using man’s avarice, envy, lust and other vices they reign over man… In the front, toward the center, facing the main altar, on a prie-dieu , that Requiem Mass was being heard by the certain Mulata, dressed as a dead bride, and Celestino Yumí, that rich fellow with whom she had only been married in a civil ceremony during the Fair of San Martín Chile Verde and who now, corporally present as a porcupine, was taking her as his wife, and with the shout of “Breedingtimetoday!” that echoed through the empty streets he buried all his needles of delight in her dark flesh, right there in the church, during the wedding Mass that was a funeral, pricks to which the Mulata, beautiful, like the back of the moon, responded with a roaming of her white eyes over the faces of the wizards chewing garlic, rue, tobacco, chile, mullein, clinging to the marital beast who did not soften his spines, but made them harder and sharper in the buggle-snuggle of the amorous game, in which she felt that the luminous spines were coming out of Yumí’s golden bones – a sun that was so internal, a light that was so deep… When new beliefs are winning, they mercilessly destroy all the supporters of the old beliefs that stand on their way.
