'Jill' by Philip Larkin is a frustratingly erratic novel. It starts promisingly, then dips considerably before rallying in its final section. I came near to giving up on it during the very dull and tedious middle part of the story. I persevered with it, and I'm glad that I did. I was left with the impression, however, that it's an unremarkable novel which had it not been written by someone who went on to become a very well-known poet would probably be largely forgotten today. The principal character is John Kemp, a young working-class student from the north of England who, while at grammar school, wins a scholarship to read English at Oxford University during the early years of the Second World War. During his first term at Oxford, John meets a number of middle class students, one of whom - Christopher Warner - is his roommate. Christopher went to a minor public school and is a confident and assertive person. He is academically lazy, appears to float from one social engagement to another and neglects his studies. John is his exact opposite. He is clever and studious but socially awkward. John becomes entranced by Christopher and his friends. Desperate to get Christopher's attention, he creates a fictional younger sister - the 'Jill' of the title - despite the fact that he actually has an older sister, Edith, who is a teacher in Manchester. He does so because he thinks that the outwardly confident Christopher may harbour a slight envy of his more ordinary life and the closer family ties that go with it. John begins to compose fictional letters from Jill and a diary by her. He leaves these lying around in the hope that Christopher will surreptitiously pick them up and read them. But, of course, the self-obsessed Christopher shows no interest whatsoever in John's extra-curricular life. So, the latter's plan fails. Eventually, John bumps into a young woman called Gillian - another 'Jill'! - in an Oxford bookshop. He becomes infatuated with her, a situation that for all kinds of reasons - not least that Gillian is a relative of one of Christopher's closest friends, Elizabeth - is destined to be fraught with emotional difficulty. I enjoyed the early part of 'Jill'. Larkin vividly portrays what life must have been like in wartime Oxford for the student population. One small example is that the station porter has to walk the length of the platform shouting "Oxford, Oxford" when John's train from the north of England arrives because the station nameplates have been removed for the duration of the war. Larkin also conveys very well the clash of cultures that takes place when the life of the working-class, grammar school-educated and somewhat diffident John collides with that of the ultra-confident, middle-class, ex-public schoolboy Christopher. The middle section of the book, which features the letters and diaries of John's fictional sister Jill, is nothing like as good as the opening chapters. Indeed, it's mind-numbingly dull. Things improve in the final third of the story, which concerns the impact of John's seemingly ill-fated infatuation with Gillian. Not surprisingly, perhaps, given its author's poetic pedigree, 'Jill' is suffused with beautifully descriptive language. The characterisation is also good but the pacing of the story leaves much to be desired. Far too much time is devoted to the fictional Jill and her correspondence. In my view, the use of that particular plot device unbalances what would otherwise be a reasonably readable and coherent story. All in all, 'Jill' is a bit of a mixed bag of a novel. It's unlikely to live long in the memory and it's not a story that I feel I can wholeheartedly recommend. 6/10.
