This book tells of the two branches of the Roosevelt family; the Hyde Park Roosevelts including Franklin who became President and the Oyster Bay Roosevelts including Theodore who became President. The two were joined when Theodore's niece Eleanor married Franklin. Hall Roosevelt, Theodore's brother and Eleanor's father had long passed away as a result of alcoholism and mental health challenges before the wedding and Theodore had become President. The wedding is famous for the reception scene when Theodore moved to the next room bringing the entire wedding crowd with him, leaving FDR and Eleanor alone. The book alternates between the narratives of the two families including the children of the two Presidents and focuses on the interactions and rivalries between the two. The Oyster bay branch were protective of their father's name and legacy when it appeared that FDR may be identified as the Roosevelt who would assume the "Roosevelt" mantle especially when he was the Vice Presidential nominee in 1920, but polio temporarily removed him from the competition. Meanwhile Teddy Jr. ran for Governor and Eleanor campaigned heavily for his opponent Al Smith, at one time trailing Teddy on the campaign trail in a "Teapot Dome" car to remind voters of Teddy Junior's connection to the scandal. But there were potshots from both sides, Teddy's daughter Alice who had physical beauty and self=confidence that Eleanor lacked, was especially vicious towards Eleanor. The author has a clear preference for the second generation of Oyster Bay Roosevelts over the Hyde Park Roosevelts and lays blame on Franklin and Eleanor's children's stunted maturity on the tension between their two parents and on the author's judgment that Eleanor was not a good mother. Theodore's children also had challenges in living up to the expectations of being Theodore's son though Teddy Junior was a true war hero during World War II and daughter Ethel and her husband Richard Derby provided stability for the entire family. On the other hand Kermit eventually committed suicide during World War II after years of sordid behavior. While so much has been written about Theodore, Franklin, Eleanor, and to a certain extent Alice, this book is unique in its telling of the lives of the children of the two Presidents. An interesting read
