Quotable: You see but you do not observe. In his book Mysterium and Mystery – The Clerical Crime Novel , which details the scores of fictional religious figures who have also been detectives, William David Spencer makes the astonishing statement, “In one very real sense the story of Jesus is a murder mystery.” He sees classic structure: Jesus as victim, humanity as killer, God as judge. “The quest of the theologian for the truth about Christ begins like the search of the detective for the mystery of evil… If some Christians question whether a mystery story can be a Christian story, they do not know their own faith thoroughly enough.” Maybe people read detective fiction for the same reason they adopt religious doctrine. We all desperately crave both internal order and cosmic understanding: a sense that there is a hidden force operating through and beneath us that makes life not only sensible and just but, more importantly, revels compassion at the heart of creation. Noticing what you see means you are present and accounted for in your own life. Perhaps one of the reasons we love the figure of the detective is that she or he can catch, if only for an instant, and if only in a small way, a glimpse of what it must be like to be God and know how everything started, why everything transpired as it did. The well-made detective story can be seen not as a realistic novel but more as a catalogue of magic tricks wherein we willingly suspend belief in the normal laws of physics – except that, in the code of the genre, the magician (the writer) must step forward at the conclusion to shatter the illusion and explain how it was all done. Unlike the case of a magic show, where the illusion remains unbroken as we file out of the theater, we cannot close the book and have this suspension of belief in the impossible maintained. We must be returned to the world of cause and effect, of reason and resolution. If your detective solves the case by employing spectacular powers of ESP, or by looking into a crystal ball, or by attending a séance in which the victim reveals the murderer through a medium, then you have not read a detective novel. You may have mystery, but not one solved by the process of deduction. God may be apprehended in the twining labyrinth of mystery, but true labyrinths lead somewhere; they take us on a journey. Indeed, the use of the ancient labyrinth is enjoying a resurgence today as a spiritual tool of discovery.
