This book found me. I was browsing at a local book sale, and the orange Penguin spine caught my eye. The back summary mentions the Certified Master Chef exam, a grueling 10-day course where aspiring chefs are put through rigorous tests on classical cooking. I immediately thought of Shokugeki no Soma (Food Wars), which I love. But it was Anthony Bourdain's glowing blurb on the front cover that sealed the deal for me. I later learned he and the author Michael Ruhlman were friends. I found the book on June 24th, a day shy of what would have been Bourdain's 63rd birthday. Reeling from a hard scifi run, I decided what the hell, I would read a book I'd just bought, ignoring the other titles that have been on the TBR for months. It turned out to be my quickest read of the year. It was fun, light, and engaging. The Soul of a Chef was published in 2000, I guess at a time when people were hungry for insider studies of chefs and their culture. An obsession with food and cooking was emerging. It was also the year Bourdain's own Kitchen Confidential, also a favorite, came out. The two books are similar to me, with the confident and compelling writing, and an obvious love of the subject matter. The book begins at the CMC exam. Here, Ruhlman focuses on Brian Polcyn whose sensibilities are somewhat at odds with the rigid standards of the exam and, by extension, the CIA (Culinary Institute of America). We then move on to the hip Cleveland restaurant Lola with its warm, boisterous chef Michael Symon, whom Ruhlman refers to as the "antithesis of the certified master chef." Finally, Ruhlman takes us to the restaurant Mecca, The French Laundry, presided over by its wily, exacting chef Thomas Keller. It is through these three charismatic chefs that Ruhlman attempts to unravel what it means to have the soul of a chef. The three chefs in the book have gone on to become superstars, but I enjoyed reading about their early evolution through Ruhlman's effusive writing. I literally had goosebumps on my head where I suppose the pleasure center might be. A fun read at the right time. Worth a return, again and again.
