Mid-20th Century North American Crime and Mystery This is the only one in this series that isn't in my county library system (14 locations) or my city library system (2 locations). Is there a reason? HOOK - 1 star: Lazy first line that goes: "On the most beautiful day any April could be asked to come up with..." PACE - 2 stars: Lethargic, as the story is more character driven than the... PLOT - 2 stars: Something about a real estate scheme involving MORE AND MORE high rise developments in Ft. Lauderdale. A man's wife has disappeared and she must sign some papers by a certain date or the guy loses a ton of money. MacDonald seems to use the date simply to create some suspense, but it doesn't work. (In the edition I read, the first 2 chapters of McGee #14, "Scarlet Ruse", appears and it continues a real estate story and perhaps explains things.) CAST - 4 stars: The aforesaid disappeared wife is impersonated by another gal. Travis does a ton of navel gazing, like "You are never going to like yourself a hell of a lot, T. McGhee..." and even changes his own name to Gavin Lee. Under this name, he is still Travis, as evidenced by a typical Travis thought: "I ambled around and admired one out of every forty-three tourist ladies as being worth looking at..." Now, if you're a private investigator (whenever you need some bucks, otherwise you're a beach bum) and you're on a case looking for a missing lady on a relatively small island, why would you discount 42 of every 43 ladies? Because this thought might be the most telling in this series about Travis himself imo. I sorta thought I might like to have a beer with him during the first 12 books. Now, I'm not so sure. And, like usual, Travis almost dies but survives. Out of character, he says to his friend, Meyer, "I'm scared. It's like being very very cold. I can't move well, and I can't think at all." Why, even Bond would never say stuff like that. So we have a new Travis, one that is going downhill, physically and mentally. Thus, a changing Travis. Interesting, all in all. Meyer is the brains, Travis WAS the brawn, so that "let's make some money" theme might not work anymore. Then there is this muscle man wearing no more than a white satin jock strap. Even though it's 1971 and Fort Lauderdale, I'll go with that if Travis is frequenting a gay/mixed beach. But he isn't. Then they wrestle. I can't picture it. Then again, Travis has changed his name...what else is going on? Travis as Gavin, a buried personality? So much going on here with McGee, I'm going with 4 stars because of all the questions MacDonald raises. And let's not forget, a missing wife is also someone else. ATMOSPHERE - 4 stars: We travel from house boat (all kinds of beds are described) parties to Grenada, where there are two seasons, hot and dry then hot and wet. And there it is again, two seasons with the two McGees and the two ladies playing the same person. Then, there is the boat named 'Hell's Belle' from which we hear singing voices: "What a friend we have in Jeeeee-zuss. All our sins and griefs to baaaaaaare." WTF? SUMMARY - 2.6 stars, or 3 here on goodreads. This is an odd one in this series. The plot doesn't matter much at all. Why is this the single novel in this series not in any library around me? I think because it's just so atypical of Travis, perhaps a mid-life change? I like that it's different.
