If Dr. Isaac Asimov writer of this novel, The Caves of Steel, was alive today he'd be quite amazed how fast robots have progressed since 1953 the time this was published. Not 3,000 years in the future, in the 50th century, (yes I know it ends December 31,5000). Today, news every few months these machines look more like us, walk faster, use their human-like hands , improved dexterity, can't wait until their voices become intelligent...rapidly approaching. Now this seems like a simple murder mystery, ordinary but with robots it can never be. Police detective Elijah Baley has a baffling one in New York the city is domed, no fresh air but safe from elements, though rather boring .To make the situation a little more difficult aliens are in town, not creatures with two heads but fellow humans, visiting from the outer planets, Spacers , colonizers of fifty worlds. They do not like how Earth is ruled, robots are disliked, progress limited here, strange concept to the Spacers, after thousands of years of separation the species have drifted apart becoming almost another kind. Solving the killing of a prominent visiting scientist the Commissioner Julius Enderby a friend from college is doing Baley no favor in assigning him the case. His nervous wife Jessie has she been hiding a secret, the pressure is intense the arrogant Spacers want quick resolve or there will be trouble. In the overcrowd Earth where food is scarce losing your job is not good for any, however he is given help, a despised robot from the visitors R. Daneel Olivaw, guess what the R stands for friends. Weird companions they make, so need to cooperate if possible, this is the fun, a machine and human getting to tolerate each without hate or else. The combination of the modern and old in the city is jarring to the genre reader, how can they exist together if they're so different, so far apart from another era, nevertheless still functioning together, I wonderful if a time machine brought people from the past to the future would we be friends or enemies. A question which can never be answered yet though amusing to ask but probably best not found out. The adventures are interesting robot and man, however predictable, still excites everyone. As to who the killer is naturally I can't say but if you get close I'll whisper in your ear. To my surprise good friends I guessed correctly then dismissed early , I am no Sherlock Holmes.
