This was written in 1977, but it feels a lot older than that; there's a definite Golden Age style to it. The plot is simple enough: about 1500 years ago, humans smashed most of their technology, purged the knowledge of how to rebuild it from their libraries, and has been living in a generally savage state ever since. The main character was raised in a university that seems more like a monastery, which may be the only place of learning left on the planet. He comes across a vague reference to a starport, decides to look for it, and the book is the story of his journey. As I would expect in Golden Age SF, the characters are rather flat, but they're not the point. The book exists to tell more of a philosophical story, to ask what might come after technology, and whether humanity could claw its way back from a self-imposed primitive state to a new semblance of civilization. In the 1500 years or so since the unexplained revolt, there hasn't been any progress of note; will our hero's journey lead him to the catalyst his people need? There are a couple of clunkers in the storytelling. For one thing, the "History" that is quoted a few times is described as written in small script to conserve paper, but its author is rather more verbose than I would expect in that case. There are also references to discovered notes; if paper is so precious, who would waste it on notes? An old man met on the journey refers to "cleaning his clock" as slang for beating someone up; is that really an idiom that would survive 1500 years of no technology more advanced than spears and bows? All the same, these are rather minor flaws for this type of work, and I am inclined to forgive them in the name of nostalgia. In the end, the question remains unanswered...but there's hope, and that's more than there had been before. I could easily imagine "A Canticle for Leibowitz" taking place in another part of this world, and it treads rather similar ground. It's a nice book for those of us who cut our teeth on the Golden Age classics, but modern readers may well find it lacking.
