"You can keep a dog; but it is the cat who keeps people becasue cats find humans useful domestic animals." Upped from 2 star to 3 star for that. I've finished the book, but with effort. The author is one of those people who laugh at their own jokes. He's so pleased with himself, that this edition has three different prefaces all about the author and how successful his books are, which to say all that is not very British at all. I managed one and a half. I didn't attempt the third one. The ending is a letter from his publisher telling him what a great person he is, so fun. I can't say I found it either funny or enjoyable right up until nearly the end. Perhaps the book is too dated although the English character remains much the same. Or perhaps it is because I have recently read several books on the same subject that were quite a lot funnier (and more recent). Understanding the British: A hilarious guide from Apologising to Wimbledon wasn't that hilarious, and was spoiled by the author, Adam Fletcher's ire towards those who had voted for Brexit. That's going to date the book so fast... The other book, Watching the English: The Hidden Rules of English Behaviour by an anthropologist and sly humourist, Kate Fox, was really good. The author captured far more than either Mikes or Fletcher and wrote without the political undertones of either of those authors. The last part of George Mikes book, which wasn't even intended to be humorous, was about how Britain, or at least London (Mikes seems to have equated London with the whole of Britain through the book, although those who live in the environs of Penzance, Stornoway, Belfast or even Ystrad Mynach are quite different. Fletcher broadens his "British" to include those who live in other parts of England, but still falls into the trap of presenting specifically English attitudes as common to the entirety of the UK. Some behaviours such as queueing, self-deprecation, It doesn't come easily to the British to jump up and down and applaud themselves on reality shows as it does Americans. The British have to be coached, urged and apparently rehearsed, as bigging oneself up is just anathema to the British and considered really, really bad manners and cringeworthy. always cracking satirical jokes, and talking about the weather are ubiquitous, but there is a great deal that isn't. London is perhaps the most cosmopolitan city on earth, it isn't England. Ireland, Scotland and Wales are different countries that are not analagous to different US states, but with vastly different cultures. The weather though is the same, middling to awful with a few weeks of sunshine a year that everyone complains about if it goes on to long as being too hot. Kate Fox avoids this, but she is a anthropologist so she is more rigorous - and accurate - in what she writes is the behaviour of the English. Because she has been trained to catch nuances, her book is by far the funniest of the three. But back to the last part of George Mikes book where he is railing against Britain, really London, being taken over by foreigners - the Arabs buying up everything and gambling a lot, the EEC (as it was then) exporting European attitudes to the UK, the Indians (and Pakistanis) coming and taking over the corner shops which he thinks, as just about everyone did, was absolutely wonderful since they stayed open "at the hours one wants to shop and needs to run out for something". He hit the nail on the head really, London has been very much changed by so many foreigners bringing their culture with them. It's wonderful really. He just didn't quite see it that way. Sometimes he uses 'we' as he is British now, but sometimes he is 'other', a Hungarian, It depends on what he wants to say. He ends the book by saying he respected the British more but liked them less when he first came. Now he tends to lack respect but likes them a great deal more. I'm just glad to have escaped from the weather and having to talk about it.
