I read the book Shattering Glass by Gail Giles. This was an awesome book because it really related to me. It was right around my age group and some of the problems they have, boys have my age too. Shattering Glass was the best book i have ever read for many reasons. I'm not much of a reader which was why I pick the shortest book. It was only 215 pages and I really enjoyed every part of it. The book is very suspenseful because the climax of the story doesn't happen until the end of the novel. This keeps the reader on their toes until the end. I couldn't wait to start reading it again to see if anything would happen. The book was very well written. the quotes at the beginning of the chapter were awesome. It lets you get a peek of what will happen in the end. This was my favorite part of the book. Shattering Glass was written in first person. Young Steward, the narrator, was kinda like me, he was athletic, he had good grades, tough parents, and was a follower instead of a leader. He was perfect for the role as a narrator because he kept a lot inside. the reader got to see how he felt about certain things. I really took great advice from the things that happen to Young. I now realize even more how being a follower can be good or bad. Young Hadn't been told to do anything bad yet, so being a follower was perfect until he was told to break up with Ronna. Then he realized how doing what he was told to do wasn't always a good thing. I am now writing my own destiny and being a leader. The book Shattering Glass had many ups and downs. It was about a chubby, nerdy kid named Simon Glass who was bullied. Then a group of popular boys had enough of people picking on him. They decided to be his friend and transform him into being the most popular kid in school. They did this until he started to get cocky. The cockiness ends up not being a good idea for Glass in the end. I wouldn't recommend this book to anyone unless it's a high school boy. It has a lot to do with our everyday lives and what things go on in our heads. Women wouldn't really like this type of book because it is told from the viewpoint of a high school boy. This book is also perfect for someone like me because it is a short read. This book was so good. I would read it again if i had the time. I hope the next person that reads this book enjoys it as much as i did. It is a very suspenseful book, will keep you wanting to read and never put the book down
