Overall, I liked the stories that focused on space rather than the dragonriders. The collection gives backstory and some additional information on the first and second generations on Pern. The dragonrider stories are becoming so repetitive at this point. PERN-C: Background as to how the planet got the name of Pern. Surveys by the first scientists from space. Dolphin's Bell: The evacuation of the Southern continent. The dolphins, who have been genetically enhanced and can communicate with humans, help with the transport of items across the water. There is a Threadfall and the colonists adapt to the danger out in an open area. A romance develops between two characters, which complements the evacuation. The Fort of Red Hanrahan: Sorka's family travels to an uninhabited location for a new Fort. Other forts and cave areas are overcrowding at this point with the population growth. It read kind of like a western during the travel portion, as the family has to ford rivers and journey across the land. The new fort ends up named Fort Ruatha. The Second Weyr: As with the previous story, the population has grown, and the weyr is overcrowded. The dragonriders discuss new weyr locations and who should be queens and weyrleaders. At the end, Benden Weyr is established. There is one steamy sex scene in this, which as is typical of the Pern stories, is kind of strange and rapey. Rescue Run: A spaceship exploring in the area gets a distress signal from Pern. The crew goes down to investigate and finds a group of Pernese, who swear there are no other survivors, and want to be taken back to the ship. I thought it was amusing how the crew was going to throw the bad guy out of the airlock, and then when he actually goes out the airlock mysteriously, the crew is all like "we don't condone murder!" When they were going to kill him anyway. And then they just assume it was a suicide cause he was crazy and no further investigation. Rescue Run was my favorite, as there was some space involved, as well as an actual conflict. It's kind of funny at this point that the bad guy is so easily disposed of in every Pern story, but then it's a hallmark of the series now. The Second Weyr bored me. I'm kind of over the dragonriders sitting around and talking for hours, without much happening. And then they all agree so wholeheartedly to a decision, and are just so chipper and cheery! Since these are stories focused on the early days, there are no Harpers or any of the most popular Pern characters.
