Things left off on a good note in the last one so I didn't know how she was going to amp things up again. But it was Christmastime and Caroline had the idea to wrap up these terrible gifts for the boys disguised as nice presents. Surprisingly, her sisters weren't on board with it and wanted the Christmas spirit instead. No way! Beth and Eddie had other things to worry about and weren't interested. Caroline knew it was up to her to see her prank through. She started out to compliment Wally every day until Christmas so he wouldn't suspect her gift was a trick. I felt bad for him when she said she liked his sweater and he was surprised and said thanks when she really thought it was ugly. In class Caroline put her plan in motion. The teacher set an assignment where you had to write a paper on your partner, one part interviewing them about themselves and one part about you living as them for a day. Carolina chose Wally straightaway, causing the class to react. It was so cute how kids teased him about being Caroline's boyfriend and said Caroline thought he was cute. When Wally told his brothers the news, Jake was the one to see the opportunity to get back at Caroline. He'd make her do all kinds of things that she hated. I was surprised that Beth said she thinks the nicest Hatford is Josh and she talked about his paintings being up at school. Caroline even put Peter up to stealing Wally's clothes so she could dress the part for her project. Dumb Peter almost ruined it by taking the clothes right in front of Wally while Wally was in his room. I was like you better not ruin this for Caroline! The boys talked to the Bensons and they told the Hatfords to spy on the girls using the loft in their house, and they got the Bensons to type up a notice saying they had permission to do so. Wally and Caroline met at the library but Wally gave such bogus answers to her questions she knew he was doing it on purpose to get her to do things she didn't want to. The boys came over to their house and informed their parents the Bensons had given them access to the loft. I couldn't believe they were so bold to go straight to the girls' parents. Josh was quiet on the way home and I liked that he said Beth didn't seem to mind them coming over much and that she's the nicest one. It just went from 0 to 60 because in the past books there was no indication that they liked each other. Mrs. Hatford dropped a little bombshell that she had met Mrs. Malloy at the store and asked for a recipe for parsnips and chicken livers because that's what Wally had said his favorite food was. She also said Caroline wanted to know when Wally went to bed and asked if Caroline was sweet on him and that she's obviously interested in him. I didn't like Wally didn't come out and say it was for a project; I know it would reveal that he'd lied to Caroline about his answers, but it's better than keeping the project a secret. Wally announced to the class that being Caroline was boring and I didn't like that. At least the class didn't laugh at her. She came in wearing his clothes and everyone laughed and I'm glad it wasn't at her, but with her. It was really unrealistic and inappropriate that she wore his underwear though. I hoped Caroline's prank would pull through, and it was promising when the whole class laughed about her wearing his outfit, but I should've known better. Caroline's pranks never pull through. She went on about how Wally is a liar and everything he told her was wrong, and the teacher failed both of them. Gone was all the promise of Caroline's performance and Wally's humiliation that caused his ears to turn red. Ruined! I hate that she keeps doing that. It's funny when the boys were questioning Peter on how Caroline had received Wally's clothes and they asked what he got in return, knowing he'd been bribed. They arrived home to find his clothes left in a bundle on the doorstep because Caroline had stuffed everything into his underwear and drew a smiley face on them. Wally didn't want to tell his mom Caroline had done it because then she might think she's done it when he was wearing them. They made Peter go to the Malloys to get Wally's clothes back, and while there the girls commandeered him and called the boys up twice asking to speak to Wally, pretending that he had left long ago. I wished for more of an impact but Wally ended up coming for him, and there was no reaction from the guys realizing that the girls had tricked them so it could've been better. It was funny though that they both confessed about the failed project to their parents and Peter told their parents that Wally and Caroline steal each other's clothes. It was such a cute moment when they both went for extra credit and the teacher made them find a solution together. They decided to rewrite the report and they asked the questions for real this time. She asked what he liked to do and he said when they're not teasing them? And Caroline said the same thing, when they're not trying to bug the guys. It was such a sweet moment but of course it didn't last long. The boys went over to spy on them and Eddie spotted them coming and alerted the others. Beth had the idea to act out a murder and stage Caroline to hit her over the head with a hammer in a mock argument. I loved that Caroline is getting all this time to practice her acting skills. It was HILARIOUS that Beth and Caroline were saying the words to Jingle Bells as they pretended to argue with each other. It's gold! Eddie remarked that boys are dumb and Beth said that Josh isn't so dumb and Eddie noticed she always sticks up for him. Beth said Josh is the nicer one, setting up a little something promising. Since the girls knew that the boys were going to the loft to spy on them, they had the perfect plan. Caroline pretended to hit Beth over the head with a hammer and they were reveling in their genius in the dark when sirens sounded. The boys had reported a murder and I LOVED that the girls acted innocent and hid all the tools that were their dad's gift for Christmas and made bows when the cops questioned them! I was shocked that the boys fell for that enough to call the police and report a murder and believed Caroline could really murder her own sister. Once the cops left and nothing happened, Jake realized the light had cut out of the room and Caroline hadn't been the one to do it. They knew they'd been duped and they decided to turn it around that they'd known it was a trick and called the cops to get them in trouble. At least the boys had fallen for something this time. I almost died when they were on the way home and the cops went to their house and they faded into the bushes. Their dad yelled their names out after they left and the boys wanted to spent the night in the Malloy's garage or in the woods to escape! I LOVED it! I was freaking dying as their parents chewed them out for spying on the girls' bedroom like peeping toms and their mom said it was disgusting. They were too embarrassed to admit to being gullible or that the girls were that good at acting. Haha! She has them know things I don't think they'd know though. Like the girls expected the guys to ask if they got in trouble, and the boys wanted to know exactly that. It's a bit too convenient. I was surprised that Caroline thought Beth was sweet on Josh and Beth said he was cute. That came out of nowhere! On the way to school they all got to talking about what happened and the guys opened up with a snowball fight. Eddie took charge and stuffed one in Jake's mouth. I wished for more detail about the fight but there wasn't much. The girls' parents invited the Hatfords over for hot chocolate and cookies and Beth was worried about having something to say and she was blushing. The boys made all these complicated hot chocolate requests and Eddie had the idea to get creative with swapping ingredients out. It's amazing what they can turn into a prank when you least expect it. The boys choked on the drinks but soldiered through which I was a little irritated with that the girls' joke didn't land strongly, but a good thing because the girls would've gotten in trouble in front of everyone. The whole moving platter thing was weird and I didn't know what she was talking about with the air pump that causes things to rise. It was cute that Wally ended up standing under mistletoe at their house and when he realized it he shot out of the house. Eddie had planned revenge on the boys ever since they called the cops, and she wanted to trap them in the loft. I thought she would literally close them up in there so they couldn't get out. But instead she painted the stairs, I thought so they wouldn't see the ladder and think the girls had taken it down, but it was to have them see that it was painted and not want to go down. 2 of them got paint on their clothes, and Josh and Peter went out the window. And it was ruined when the girls' dad got fresh paint on his new jacket. Even Wally said he thought Josh sort of likes Beth a little. Their dad's jacket was ruined and the girls had to pay for a new one. He made them call the guys and ask of their clothes were ruined and Beth talked to Josh and they had a nice conversation. Caroline finally found a gross present for Wally and it was vomit including mouse feet from their cat that I didn't know they had. I don't remember that from a previous book. As soon as I read that Wally wrapped his present in angel paper, I knew it was going to be a problem, the cause of the present mixup mentioned in the summary, because I remembered that's the wrapping paper Caroline had used. Wally had wrapped up his underwear and a note that said "Since you liked them so much." But I didn't expect for him to lose it! At school Caroline gave him her gift and I felt so bad that Wally's ears turned red from getting a gift from a girl and from Caroline and he said thanks and wondered if she liked him despite all the things he'd done. It was so funny that Wally had lost the present and asked his mom for its whereabouts but had to lie about it being for his teacher instead of Caroline. Therefore causing his mom to deliver it to his teacher when she found it. Hah! Caroline had mixed up the gifts herself and given Wally the present meant for her dad's secretary, a box for love letters. Wally wrote "yuck" on a note and dropped it on her doorstep, so she was able to find the secretary's address and deliver the right present. The woman had already received the cat vomit but disaster was averted because Caroline caught her before the woman could call her dad. Caroline realized she didn't hate them but would actually miss them and the fun they had. She vowed to never tease Wally again. Wally thought Caroline was in love with him and thought she was crazy. He wasn't ready for a girlfriend, especially Caroline. I had hoped it would spark some feelings. It was shaping up to be the worst Christmas ever for Wally as the title of the chapter implied. I liked that he couldn't stop thinking about Caroline, and the teacher because of the gift fiasco. He ran into her at the bookstore and she told him the box wasn't meant for him and he was relieved. It was so cute the way he asked what was meant for him and she said he didn't want to know and he said he did. And Jerold her her present was his underwear and now he's in big trouble with the teacher. Caroline offered to go to Ms. Applebaum and say the underwear was meant for her. They were laughing together and she gave it back to him. The girls' dad told them to go shovel to earn money and Eddie decided to do the Hatford's driveway to make the guys look like slackers. And to prove her point, the boys did come out and try to do it, didn't like that they got showed up. The boys agreed to help the girls shovel, and let them keep all the money, because Josh didn't want them mad at them anymore. It turned into a race of course and they started talking about all the pranks they'd pulled recently. Mrs. Benson dropped in and Wally said she was the mother of their 5 best friends, maybe, like the boys were no longer their best friends. The boys, minus Jake, were alarmed that Mrs. Benson was talking about moving back. She'd come because of Wally's letters to the boys detailing the girls' pranks at their house. Josh was mad at Wally for telling on the girls and said they're fun. Jake wanted to do everything they used to do with the boys but Wally and Josh said they could do those things with the girls. I hoped that they would really explore the cove and the coal mine because a change in scenery is in order. They thought the Bensons might move back and they could all have fun together, but I didn't like that idea. I don't like the idea of the Malloys moving out and the Bensons encroaching on things. Josh thought if the girls like it here their parents would want to stay, and thought the girls were having as much fun as they were. It was funny they spent the whole time spying when Mrs. Benson was checking on their house to see if the girls would have to leave. The boys spent the entire time worried about how they could be kicked out, but Wally's earlier mistake had already ruined things. It was funny how Josh sent a note asking So are you guys getting kicked out or what? But the note the girls sent back evaporated all the good feelings between them because Wally had been the one to oust them to the Bensons. The girls wouldn't give them an answer on whether they were staying or not. They thanked them for helping them shovel, and asked if they noticed they took their shovels and it will cost $5 to get them back! Right at the time their mom had ordered them to shovel again! Hah! The girls won this round! I was surprised by all the good feelings on both sides and it was kind of jarring since this is supposed to be a feud. It seemed too early for them to appreciate the others, and I felt she should have drew it out more. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
