I love the concept of A Humument - a clever combination of literature and art, the idea of remodelling an already written book to make a new, far more beautiful one. The story itself was a little disappointing, but not necessarily because I think Phillips lacked anything in particular, more because it was oversold to me as more of a structured narrative than it is. I bought a copy of the final edition of A Humument recently as a sort of way of researching it (basically just looking at the art) because I had been recommended Phillips as an artist by my art teacher and had tasked myself with creating an 'artist research' page on the book. Before I had never had any exposure to Phillips' work, and I was both fascinated and excited by his ideas when I learned of them. When looking into it to get facts surrounding Phillips' creative process, the origins of the novel, the plot of the book itself, etc., I admired the whole project more and more. Phillips managed to turn a 19th-century novel with bigoted ideas into a more modern romance story which undermined those ideas? This took him almost sixty years? I could actually get my hands on a copy of this book, and (to an extent, of course) read the story like I would an ordinary novel? So I bought myself a copy mostly just for the artwork and concept, but I decided to read A Humument as well, as there was no reason not to. Whilst the concept an art didn't disappoint (and the latter was generally much better than my own which I did for my art project, the one I researched Phillips for) the story did, if only a little. When I looked into A Humument, the sources I read made it seem (though this might've been just my interpretation) like the story was more... concrete, I suppose, than it actually is. I wasn't expecting a fully fledged story with brilliant characterisation, plot twists, etc., as the nature of the book would restrict that, but I was expecting a bit more than I got. Like Phillips himself writes in the introduction at the back, it's more like a pack of cards which could be read in different orders and therefore doesn't follow a strict plotline. I can't say I'm disappointed at Phillips in particular, however. Like I said, he admits A Humument is not a full narrative with only one readable order. It turns out, he didn't even make A Humument in the order the pages are - from what I understand, he went in at random, editing and editing until he had a finished 'treated' edition. When I tried my hand at 'treating' my own pages (of different books, not A Human Document which Phillips used), I found it quite difficult to form sentences that flowed from one to another as they should in an ordinary book, and instead had it flowing from one topic to another, with the intention that you could possibly shift everything about and read it in a different order. I'm more just a bit disappointed in the marketing I read. It gave me unrealistic expectations, I think. All in all, A Humument is a really beautiful book and a beautiful, very poetic read. There were some pages I had to stop when reading and just stare at for a few seconds - whether it was because the art was particularly captivating, or the words formed a particularly meaningful statement or question. One example of this is the question "What is art?" Of course, I have seen and heard this question posed before, it is not original to Phillips, but it made me stop and think, which I enjoyed, especially as sometimes I found myself reading the book very quickly as there are few words per page. I would heavily recommend trying this book to anyone who loves art and literature as I do!
