I think I give it 2.5 stars. I'm not quite sure about this. I liked it because it was what I needed at the time. Something light and not complicated and silly. It was like a teen slasher movie with magic, and less dead bodies. But it was so full of cliches and something the writing made me cringe. I like the main character and I definitely liked the magic in the book. It wasn't too paranormal, just rituals and spells and lots of faith in the magical. Plus, premonition dreams. So that was fun Two things though. 1) Why is it that, often (but not always), in young adult fiction, especially aimed at teenage girls, the "best " fiend(s) are never really good friends. They're always cliche or mean or petty or any other thing that is annoying and that leaves you wondering why the protagonist is their friend to begin with. I haven't read a lot a really strong friendships in young adult books. Especially between girls. And in this book, every single friend that the protagonist had, ended up being annoying, inconsiderate, cold, jealous, mean, or just plain incompatible. My world for a string friendship between two teenage girls where they don't argue about silly things and especially about boys. 2) Boys and love interest. Why do they always have to have one? It's like writers and publishers don't think teenage girls can get interested in a book if there isn't some kind of love story going on. Oh, don't get me wrong. I love love stories, and I think that when it's well done, it just enriches the story you are telling, especially if the story is not mainly a love story to begin with. But to make teenage girl characters constantly obsessed with getting a boyfriend, or talking about boys all the time, when your story is not a love story is quite annoying and distract from the story. In this book, I couldn't have cared less about Stacey's feelings for Chad. And her torment, because he was her best friend's ex, who she still thought she loved. And, cue drama, that brings nothing to the main plot line. And Chad didn't seem that much of a catch to begin with. So yeah, 3 stars for the magic in this book. Two for the rest. Because, even though a whole bunch of things annoyed me, I still wanted to keep reding to see how it ended.
