There comes a time when the growing frustration with the generally unfair paradoxes of existence becomes so unbearable that one needs to gain distance from himself to see clearly, to listen with the eyes and hear with the heart. Or simply one reaches a moment when action and emotional implication start to feel so forced, so disjointed, that a clean break is needed to reconnect again with the invisible chord of communion that binds us to others. Like the convoluted, meandering river that exists only in the flowing, as the Tao prophezied, life is bestowed upon us with all its unfathomable mysteries to be pondered about until the gnawing void of indifference dampens the impatient eagerness of childhood days. That is what happens to Gus Orviston, who at the age of twenty is tired of struggling against the numbness that has utterly obliterated his zest for life. Born into an eccentric family that is obsessed with fly-fishing, Gus embarks on a lone trip to regain his inner balance. Seeking solitude at the riverbanks of a remote rural area in Oregon, he settles down in a small wooden cabin that is surrounded by a dense grove of cedars that shrouds the location with their drooping branches. Secluded and isolated in and out, the disenchanted young man believes he will fill the hollowness that threatens to engulf him by devoting all his mental strength to perfecting his already off-the-charts fishing techniques. Weeks turn into months and by the time Gus realizes he is adrift in the vastness of his nothingness, he recoils from the sting of that so much desired individual freedom that now seems useless in the face of such desolate loneliness. He craves for human touch and that is the tipping point in his pilgrimage towards self-discovery. Duncan’s novel is much more complex and vibrant than the archetypal existential bildungsroman because he explores the limits of spirituality beyond the frames of institutionalized religion while drawing a symmetric allegory between Gus’ restless meditations on his relation with the world, his place in it and the art of fly-fishing. The result is an incredibly well-rounded metaphor, an uncommonly hybrid book composed of metaphysical pondering, self-effacing humor and breathtaking descriptions of the American wildlife that proves to be the key to Gus’ spiritual awakening. Highly reminiscent of Mary Oliver ’s naturalistic poetry and R.W. Emerson ’s philosophical pantheism, Duncan’s prose pulsates with boundless love for the natural world. Man’s soul is irretrievably connected to it and the divine is to be found everywhere in the here and the now; not in liturgical or organized prayer. Man’s soul should be the result of intimate, personal introspection rather the dogmatic notion of sacred purity. Duncan is as intense as he is unpretentious and his words flow naturally and unfeigned like the waters of a silvery river that seeks its final release into the vast ocean. Attitude changes everything. If he is respectful, the fisherman might become one with the hooked salmon, and the light line that unites them is the answer to the silent questioning of The River Why . What I discovered at the end of Gus’ line has become my favorite place to be: the self melted with the Eternal Now, the senses becoming what they perceive, the invisible line of light and love, so fine, so fragile and yet so indestructible that binds us, everything, all of it, together, secured in tight-knit gratefulness. Gus finally understood that the river wasn’t asking why, it was sculpting the answer with its unstoppable course, from its source to the sea.
