This is a good American novel which is well shy of greatness because the author's characters read with a few exceptions more like simple archetypes of the American Dream. The novel concerns the eponymous Silas who has discovered a paint mine and brought his high quality paint to market. His business success generates sufficient revenues to merit the construction of a new home on the water side of Beacon Street in the Back Bay of Boston. There he meets the archetypal Brahmin family, the Coreys, who have issues with the Lapham family's humble origins. The writing style is straight-ahead narrative, which proves to be a struggle to become immersed in: there's no stylistic invention here but the craftmanship is respectable. The dialogue seems stilted, cold and formal in places but that may tend to be so in Boston. The novel is emotively neutral: Silas is an honest man of action but deeply stoic with little to say even in the worst crises. Howells can write well enough but his style does not engage. I have a similar complaint of Henry James who seems to write elegantly and prolifically about little of importance. However, the writing style of James is luminous. As a Bostonian who has lived in the Back Bay, I was intrigued by his descriptions of it and Beacon Hill in the latter half of the 19th century. This book was also one of the earliest novels to focus upon the rise of business owners in pursuit the American Dream. The ethical idealism of Lapham and his wife -- some might say their naivete -- prove to be a challenge in the profitable pursuit of business in the big city. The family of Silas seems drawn credibly as is the young Tom Corey but pretty much everyone else seemed flat and archetypal. Howells was very well connected as a writer in Boston and traveled widely abroad during his life among the upper class. Howells is concerned about the true nature of the chimera of success and whether an investment in the dogged pursuit of it for financial gain is worth all the time and effort spent to gain it. That's a fair and relevant question, of course, to consider in your own life as you read "The Rise Silas Lapham." Sorry, but while I respect the writing, this novel simply left me fairly flat.
