Author Sondra London has an uncanny knack for picking sick puppies as romantic partners. She lost her virginity at seventeen to Gerard Schaefer, a serial killer who possibly murdered eighty women. She published Killer Fiction, Gerald's musings about his life of crime. This time around,, the lovesick writer hooked up with Danny Rolling while the man was on death row in Starke, Florida, the same place that held Ted Bundy until his execution in 1989. Ted's name appears on several occasions. Danny's dad had won a Purple Heart for his bravery in battle in Korea. Unfortunately, the wartime experience turned him into a brutal husband and father who handcuffed and beat his two boys and wife with regularity. He was also a cop. Like Mr. Bundy, Rolling was a peeping Tom during his adolescence and he eventually turned his sexual fantasies into reality as an adult. He claimed to have been possessed by a gargoyle-like demon during his murderous frenzies. His experiences with LSD while serving in the Air Force was a more likely explanation. Danny was arrested on numerous occasions and at one point was placed into solitary for 240 days. His descriptions read like Solzhenitsyn's Gulag trilogy. The man was a talented writer and artist and the book alternates between his work and that of London. It was during that period in the Hole that his murderous alter ego Gemini appeared. The rat and excrement flooded cell would only exacerbate the rage within. As with the other Starke resident, Bundy, Danny had a long series of girlfriends who were interviewed by London, and they all described a gentle and loving partner. The strangest hookup was with a country singer old enough to be his mother. Bunnie Mills can be found on YouTube singing country songs. As for London, a web search will uncover a video with her betrothed singing a love song to his intended bride. The meanies of the Florida prison system would not allow a wedding. How sad! Danny predicted that Bill Clinton would be our final leader and that WWIII would bring about the arrival of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He should have revised his prognostication before his sendoff in Old Sparky in 2006. The Making of a Serial Killer is a good but overlong(445 page) read.
