#woof what a tome. This was another in a long list of books that I was compelled to add to my “Want To Read” list a couple of years ago which I can’t for the life of me figure out/understand. Like, Oprah’s Book Club? Typically, these are three words that would send me in the other direction if only because I often find the books she likes to be overtly preachy, or fanatical, or over-the-top emotional and I just can’t get behind that type of book right naw, you know? But it was one of the first books I added, I didn’t want to be a quitter, and I had a long weekend, so I figured I might as well plow through it. Considering I really expected to not enjoy this book at all, a 3 out of 5 ain’t bad, but this book took me SO. LONG. to get into. Like, at least the first hundred and fifty pages. I just could not figure out how all of the characters were related or what the actual POINT of the book was, and the writing style was just not something I could get into, dialogue wise and whatnot. I went into it thinking it was about like, race wars and segregation and stuff? Nope – turns out it’s more about all of the incest and weird voodoo stuff going on in Mississippi at the time which, you know, is fine I guess, but not what I thought I had signed up for. And I just had a really hard time figuring out who everyone was, what made them tick, how they were connected, and all that jazz. Yes, eventually I seemed to pick up on some semblance of plot/direction/etc. and kind of went with that, and there were indeed pretty huge chunks that I found really interesting, but anything to do with Joody or Canaan and I was all #peacehaterz I think it’s hilarious to see how many people didn’t even finish this book. Like scrolling through the reviews, people are really crucifying it and that is hilarious to me, just because I had to steel my nerves to pick it up and read it, and had anticipated hating it so much, and can see why people wouldn’t be able to get through the first hundred pages. I mean, for a book that’s gotten such high praise and was endorsed by OPRAH for crying out loud, it really isn’t all that well received. #bless GoodReads and its ability to understand that just because Oprah gives you a car and promotes a book, it still might not be that great.
