I had this book on my to-read list for a while, and watching The Last Dance documentary moved it to the front. I really enjoyed it, though Sam Smith’s writing is a little corny. That style probably comes from being a daily sportswriter. This book covers the Bulls 90-91 championship season - the team’s first of six. It’s interesting to read a book about Michael Jordan before he becomes THE Michael Jordan. Everything written about him now kind of covers him in a glow that covers over his faults. When you listen to his teammates interviewed now they talk about Jordan as one of the greatest things that ever happened to them. But in the interviews for Smith’s book, they mostly want to kill him (and for good reason - Jordan was a jerk). Winning six championships covers a multitude of sins. I love behind-the-scenes sports reporting, and Smith does a great job highlighting all the drama in and around the team. It was a team in turmoil - Phil Jackson was trying to turn them from “Jordan and the Jordanaires” to a balanced team that could actually do some winning in the playoffs. That meant Jordan taking less shots and buying into the triangle offense, and this season is when you start to see that finally happen. (Interestingly, Jackson now says that the publication of this book helped shame/convince Jordan into playing more team ball.) Today we think of the 90s Bulls as a perfect team, but in 1991 Jordan hated Phil, the players hated Jordan, they all hated the GM, and it certainly didn’t look like they would even stay together long enough to win one title, much less the six they ended up with. A couple of notes: - In March 1991, during the Gulf War, Phil Jackson predicts 9/11!!!!! The scenario he described is eerily close to what happened ten years later. - In the Kindle version, it looks like they have put in the Epilogue (about Jordan’s first retirement, probably added in 1994), ahead of the Afterword (about the 1991-92 season, probably written for the paperback version in 1992). These should be reversed.
