This was a heart rending true story and it made uncomfortable reading throughout most of the book. The story of Francine Hughes and her marriage to Mickey is almost unbelievable and yet all too true. Francine married Mickey when she was just sixteen and he was several years older, Francine had been taught by her mother that a wife must be dutiful, keep the home spotless and to respect her husband. Mickey was an inadequate and uneducated man who felt that Francine ‘belonged’ to him and that he had the right to tell her what she could and could not do. Francine was a very naive and kind girl who tried so hard to keep Mickey happy and he just took her efforts for granted. They had not been married for long before Mickey started to be abusive, both verbally and physically, Francine did nothing to provoke him and she never retaliated. Over the years they had four children and Mickey continued to beat Francine even whilst she was pregnant. As the years went by the abuse got worse and worse and Francine was in constant fear for her life, she attempted to leave on numerous occasions but lack of money and support and the ambivalent attitude of the police made it impossible to get totally away from Mickey and she ended up having to go back to him even after she managed to secure a divorce. I have always believed that you should not take a life under any circumstances, but reading this book I cannot see how Francine was going to come out of the relationship alive. No one was able to give her sufficient help for her to break away and I started to think that Mickey deserved what happened to him. The way he treated Francine, the children and even the family animals was for me a reason to lock him up and throw away the key. I felt that because of Mickey’s own inadequacies and lack of education he felt the need to take out his frustration on those who were weaker, I have heard this described as ‘kick the cat syndrome’ and that is just how it seemed to be with Mickey. When Francine did what she did, she was in shock and at the limit of human endurance, I cannot truthfully condemn her action, she had suffered intolerably and had been driven to the edge of insanity. Despite her dreadful ordeal over fourteen long years Francine managed to maintain her lovely kind nature and her sense of gently naivety, she prayed daily and had trust in God that He would give her the strength to endure. This is a tough read but one that shines a light of what is going on in so many homes all over the world. It all happened in the 1960’s and 70’s and in some countries the laws have changed for the better but domestic abuse is still a very difficult subject to discuss and a lot of women (and men) suffer in silence or do not get the help that they need from the authorities. I simply wanted to shout at Francine, run, and keep running!
