Will miss this book. It was a friendly companion on many a bus ride. It's the first anthology I've read that ranges with complete freedom across different authors, styles, genres, centuries, nationalities. That made it much more fun to read because I never knew what to expect. Italo Calvino's novel "If on a Winter's Night a Traveler..." was inspired by the special excitement one feels when first starting to read a story - each chapter is the first chapter of a different book. The experience of reading this anthology recalled that sentiment. I think any of the included authors would blush to hear the label "masterpiece" applied to their respective contribution. I don't think the use of the term has any relation to popular or scholarly reception, rather it was a hasty invention of the publisher's early 1960's marketing department. Some of the stories are clearly pot-boilers originally dashed off to fill a few pages of a magazine, with a punchline akin to something you'd smirk at in a Sunday newspaper comic strip, perhaps never thought of twice after reading, and in writing, barely thought of once. Some of the pieces left me in awe. I like them too much to cheapen them with the label "masterpiece". Many were light. Usually the old stuff we read is heavy in one way or another. It was nice, in a few of the stories, to connect to a past sensibility during a moment when its only aim was to charm. These are the (33) stories I liked (in the order they appear): Señor Payroll - William E. Barret Houseparty - Walter Bernstein The Chaser - John Collier Fear - Rhy Davies The Riddle - Walter de la Mare The Heavenly Christmas Tree - Fyodor Dostoevsky The Ghosts - Lord Dunsany Truth and Consequences - Brendan Gill The Disabled Soldier - Oliver Goldsmith Her Lover - Maxim Gorky Proof Positive - Graham Greene The Butterfly - James Hanley The Hollow of the Three Hills - Nathaniel Hawthorne Fard - Aldous Huxley The Wife - Washington Irving If Not Higher - Isaac Loeb Perez The Wild Duck's Nest - Michael Mclaverty A Toast to Captain Jerk - Russell Maloney Germans at Meat - Katherine Mansfield Born of Man and Woman - Richard Matheson The Fiddler - Herman Melville The Pearl of Toledo - Prosper Mérimée The Standard of Living - Dorothy Parker The Oval Portrait - Edgar Allan Poe Three Letters...And a Footnote - Horacio Quiroga The Kiss - William Sansom The Shepherd's Daughter - William Saroyan Slipping Beauty - Jerome Weidman God - Eugene Ivanovich Zamiatin The Three Veterans - Leane Zugsmith Kong at the Seaside - Arnold Zweig
