I was attracted to this book by it's theme. A new author to me and I think she proved remarkable knowledgeable accuracy throughout based on the theme. While I have read few books on Native Americans and can understand the basic activities of the Indians so I had no trouble moving with the story. The Indians also had Christianed names which were tad hard to remember, with many characters and two names for a person it takes a while to remember them as the characters appears repeatedly. Evelyn Gibbons was of a different mind, sheltered, educated and of independent spirit. Daughter of a preacher Evelyn longs for something "beyond a simple home life and babies", so when an opportunity comes to teach the Indian children added to it seeing a vision of an Indian warrior on a spotted horse compelled her to charge. Moving to live on a remote reservation with no modern facilities near the broken tribe of Indians Evelyn was determind to bring out the Indian children and educate them. It was not easy. Not only she desired to teach the children but took few matters in her hands. - Seth and his adoptive daughters. - Making pairs between two obivious admirers. - Helping/ capturing the whites whose prejudices harm the Indians. - Finding the vision warrior. Black Hawk was a Sioux widow, who saw his wife and baby son brutally killed by the whites. Living in the hills away from prying eyes with his only living son, Hawk lives among with his people preserving the Sioux traditions. Hawk despises the Whites and he has been breaking the smuggling of whisky traders who were were selling whisky to the Indians by the whites which was making the Indians mad and lazy. Hawk was a hard man. He keeps his son away from the white traditions determined that his son will grow knowing on Sioux customs and traditions. Hawk holds his prejudices until he meets Evelyn - the woman of his vision. This story revolves on American Indians who were subjected to follow the white traditions. Their environmental, economic and social factors ignored. Among this strives a forbidden love - a White woman and a Sioux warrior. The story starts slow and is lengthy. People like Seth Bridge, Luke Smith, Marty Able and Sergeant Fubal Diemond who misuses and mistreat the conditions of both the Whites and the Indians. There are some harsh treatment of Hawk to a woman and tendency to do whatever he wants is right may be passable since the story blends his behaviour into it as if it's natural. Treachery is the highlighted part of the story which brings misunderstandings between the Whites and Indians. This book was a great read. I'll be checking more books from this author. Add note: The events of this story is true and only a character of this story. (I did not mention this character) The rest of the characters are fictionous. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
