"The Christmas Wedding Ring" is a very prettily packaged re-issue of author Susan Mallery's 1998 release "The Wedding Ring Promise". It took me a while to get into the groove of this story line and to find the appeal of the characters. I am a longtime Susan Mallery fan--so I kept reading. As the hero and heroine got reacquainted with one another and they grew on each other, they began to also grow on me. As a teenager, Molly Anderson was hopelessly infatuated with her older sister Janet's boyfriend. Dylan Black was gorgeous, charming, and a leather-clad, motorcycle-riding "bad boy". What made him even more irresistible to Molly, self-conscious about her braces, blemishes, and chubbiness, was his kindness. He often took the time to talk to her, and his gentle teasing made her feel like he really saw her and liked her for the real Molly. When Janet and Dylan stopped dating, and she soon found a "suitable" marriage prospect, Dylan decided to leave the area. Before he left, however, he and Molly had one last talk, and he gave her the golden wedding band he had intended to give Janet. He told Molly to hold on to the ring until she was grownup and ready for the adventure he had promised on his motorcycle. When that time came, she was to find him and give him back the ring, and off they would go. Fifteen years later, a grownup Molly is at a crisis point in her life, and when she comes across the ring, she decides to find Dylan and see if he remembers his promise. Dylan Black has become a successful businessman, owner of Black Lightning, a cutting-edge motorcycle manufacturing company. Dylan has also reached a turning point in his life, and Molly's surprise reappearance into his life comes at just the right time. Their "adventure" becomes the journey of a lifetime, one of personal discovery and emotional growth. Passion flares to life, kindled by friendship and mutual need--but will it be enough to last a lifetime? Will the holiday season become even more poignant and joyful with the gift of true love? Review Copy Gratis Amazon Vine
