Gardner is an academic, not a poet, and J&M is a product of academia. It is cold, calculated, sterile, and joyless. Even that most famous war epic, The Iliad (Mitchell’s translation, not Fitzgerald’s), was streaked with joy — because it was composed by a poet. But let’s talk about the bigotry in this poem. Gardner belabors his theme of time and eternity, but J&M is horribly passé . (Or maybe we have different concepts of morality.) J&M was published in 1973, and Gardner must have written through the Civil Rights movement, during the Stonewall riots, and after the wars in Asia. At least, he must have been aware that those events occurred or that people are human beings. So, I am befuddled by his carefully conceived prejudices. The characters who oppose Jason are derided for their sexuality. I tried to excuse this: perhaps making him a bigot was a subtle prod for us to hate Jason? But, no, the first instance of bigotry occurs before Jason steps on the page; it comes from the 20th century speaker: He spoke to his neighbors — a fat man, a prominent lord out of Asia known as Koprophoros. His slanted eyes were large and strangely luminous, eyes like a Buddha’s, an Egyptian king’s. . . . . he was vast—so fat he was frightening—and painted like a harlot . . . . Not a man in the hall could be sure if the monster was female or male—smooth-faced as a mushroom, an alto; by all indications (despite his pretense) a transvestite, or gelded. And yet he had come to contend for the princess’ hand—came filled with sinister confidence. (pp. 10-11) I concede that Gardner and I are from different generations, and time, thankfully, has helped the evolution of LGBT rights, but I am saddened that he would dislike a group of people so much that he would select them for unwarranted mockery. Is that description of Koprophoros necessary? Not in the least. The language that Gardner chooses to describe Koprophoros (e.g., “monster” and “sinister”) and the general tone of horror conveys a hatred of transgender people. (Did you catch the racism in there as well?) Jason’s nemesis, Pelias, was described as odious, and presumed homosexual actions were given as examples: He’d sit with his head to one side, lambishly timid, and he’d ogle like a girl, admiring me. ‘Noble Jason,’ he’d call me, with lips obscenely wet, and he’d stroke my fingers like an elderly homosexual, his head drawn back, as if fearing an angry slap. (p. 256) Gardner does not use this description to evoke any sympathy for Pelias. His actions are “obscene” (albeit in Jason’s eyes), and Pelias behaves with contrition (“fearing an angry slap”) for his admiration. Again, I found this scene to be unnecessary to the character or plot development. It was simply another vehicle for Gardner to display his distaste for the LGBT (or the gay and transgender) community whose most famous push for fair treatment began in 1969. In contrast, Gardner describes the relationship of Hylas and the Argonauts’ hero Herakles as strictly filial: Herakles himself had trained the boy in the business of a squire. He’d had the boy since the day he struck down Hylas’ father, Theiodamas, king of the Dryopians. . . . He took the child from the basket beside the field and brought it up, made the boy his servant—trained him as a shepherd trains up a loyal, unquestioning dog. There’s no hint of the alternate myth wherein Hylas and Herakles are lovers. Here would have been a fitting place for a positive representation of homosexuality, if Gardner wanted. All representations of homosexuality are negative. Overall, I found the poem to be boring and self-indulgent. That’s enough reason for me to rate the poem with one-star. The examples of homophobia and transphobia were jarring episodes. I chose not to write about Jason’s boasts of violently raping a slave, but I could have written about that too. I could have written about the racism. The only moments that stand-out for me are the ones when I was simply horrified. I admit that I haven’t read much Greek literature, and John Gardner is presented as the godfather of every fawning literature student. Even so, I’ve read enough in my 28-years of literacy to know what I like, and I don’t like this.
