Shiloh Season! All you can do is live your days normally and wait for Judd Travers to strike again. He keeps holding his grudge against you and your family. Is it because you took his dog? Or his sudden dramatic drinking problem? This is what Marty Preston and his family are constantly feeling and living among. Scared to even play in the meadow, afraid a bullet will go through their brains. Maybe it because he thinks you scratched his truck. Shiloh season was a really great and important sequel to the first book Shiloh. “Taunt with suspense, touched touched with a fine sense of humanity...a compelling page-turner.” (Booklist, starred review) I'm going to go with the fact that this was a ok and slow moving second book. It was still very good though because I can relate to it so much and it's topic never bored me. It is extremely interesting, it pulls you in at every angle and opportunity it gets. Now I find this series is a little hard to pick up and read because it is slow and a little boring but, once you're off you read it till the end. Trust me stick around and you'll end up loving it! The author Phyllis Reynolds Naylor did a terrific job once again putting this story all together. It just carried through so smoothly. I really want to see what happens in the next book, but I may take a break and read something else. I'm not quite sure yet. But I sat down to read it and didn't get up till I finished it. My favorite quote from this book is…” If Jesus ever comes back to earth again, I’m thinking, he’ll come as a dog, because there isn’t anything as humble or patient or loving or loyal as the dog I have in my arms right now.” This really was just a good quote by Marty that I liked. It is totally true and I just love that he thought of that! In this sequel, Marty finally owns Shiloh for good. Or so he thinks. Anyway hunting season is arriving soon and Judd has started to drink severely. It isn't safe to even go in they're own yard. Marty's father has talked to Judd already but he is convinced that him and his family are sabotaging Judd and his property. They tell the truth bit Judd won't listen. Why would they do things like knock down his mail box or scratch his pick up? No one knows what to do but wait. Until one day when Jude's dogs come minstrelsy lose and night Dara Lyn. Judd accuses the Prestons of doing it and try's to take Shiloh! Sorry can't tell anymore, you're going to have to go and read it! There are a lot of positives to this book yet again. Like when Marty gets to work for Shiloh's bill for sowing him up. Also when Marty gets a good grade on the job report in school. Even when everyone realizes that Shiloh is actually theirs forever! But, unfortunately there's always some negatives too. I don't mean things wrong with the book because there are no flaws. I'm talking about problems in the story. Like when Judd is shooting in the family's woods. Or when he tries to take shilo with him. Also when Judd gets into a car accident, although that is a good thing on the prestons part. Overall it was just a huge thrill seeker. I honestly give this book a ⅘ stars. I fell it could have been better and more thrill speaking than it was already. Left me a little bored. The format of the book was ok. It was a little short but very well written. I don't like a lot of short books because I feel like there isn't enough to the book but this one was great. It ended perfectly and how it should. It was so short though that I read it in like a couple of days. That's not bad but it made me get into it a lot. Also to keep pushing through. This isn't a book that is going to put you to sleep. It keeps you up and reading, even if that mean when your supposed to be in bed sleeping. It's very touching and then it will turn in a flash and have you wondering why that happened. I can relate to this book because once again I had a dog. And I had a very close relationship with her. I know what it feels like to care a lot about a animal. So when things happen and Marty doesn't think it's fair I get it. I know that a lot of people can relate and care so that's a good part about this story. Now finally, to wrap it up! I feel that almost anybody who reads this will absolutely love it. It's truly good and I'm glad I read it. Most likely a lot of people can relate to it, I mean come on who doesn't love dogs. I enjoyed this book a lot, you will too. If you liked this book grabs a copy of Saving Shiloh, the third book of the trilogy! Have fun reading and I hope you found this review useful!
