This edition of the book is highly outdated. This is an amazing book. I have gone back and have acquired or reacquired all five editions. Got the tee-shirt, got the stickers, and now I own DVD copies of the Travel Channel TV program (I don't get cable). If you are not certain about this book, try examining a copy from a public library. I first saw the first edition of Fielding's Travel Guide to the World's Most Dangerous Places in a Milpitas, CA Borders book store. I was one of a number of people tasked to put together a naive conference session on the topic of land mines, their detection and disposal. And there by chance was this book with a chapter on land mines. We had a bunch of other sources including people from LLNL, the Army CD on mines (about 800 types), and the founder of Autodesk who was most concerned with the topic. Over the years I've probably purchased a couple dozen copies for various friends and analysts. The Preface is a riot: this book is not for the politically naive holders of Lonely Planet or Rough guides. Tony Wheeler and his wife later responded with his own Bad Lands book, but Robert still has them beat. Or you might be one of the easily amused. Not every one will be amused by this book, Cambodia was not (initially). This book is not for the faint of heart. DP (this is how the skull character's book is known in short hand) is about 1,000 pages of issues and places by Canadian Robert Young Pelton now living in the town on my sister (Redondo Beach, CA) of all places. All copies of the book start out both philosophically and pragmatically defining what a dangerous place is. A 1..5 star rating scale is used, over-time a single star is used mean say "a criminal" place. The USA is a one star place. Violence is largely avoidable but not always. Small side sections of 2-4 pages cover cites like Los Angeles (Having a Riot) or New York. Mexico, the US's neighbor to the South varies in editions from 2..3 stars. Various 5 star (or open palm "Stop" hands) include North Korea (this is how journals learn to enter), Iran (remember Robert is Canadian), Iraq (vastly different place now), and what we now call the Congo or Central African Republic (CAR), some places which are noted for random violence. The Guide has separate subsections for tourists and business people. Earlier editions had non-dangerous places like Antarctica (physically dangerous), Japan, Switzerland, civilized places. This section was regarded as boring and subsequently dropped. The book has interesting political insights not covered by other travel guides. You can read about the old Charles Taylor. Then come sections on Dangerous Things: diseases (I know a little about some of these), the aforementioned land mine chapter, guns (very light from simple things, notably the ubiquitous AK-47 (I've smapled a few) to rockets and artillery (get out of there). One good chapter is on Bribes: giving and receiving (I have noted this and even used some): this is some of the nature of the 3rd world. Get used to this. A chapter exists on changing the world (Robert is not entirely cynical). And Robert has some extremely good recommendations on what to carry when traveling to these places. I'm aware of some of this advice independently and its good. He also even salts typos in his text. Now if you are at all squeamish: here are some of the warnings: photos of Russian roulette (real), a number of photos of plane hijackings in progress (here's how we hid the gun in a book), seriously armed 3rd child soldiers. Where countries have contrasting texts, some of this may alarm others. Two of Robert's co-editors have died by the 5th edition. He's a presence on Facebook, and he has his own web site comebackalive.com which is where he concentrates his time (thing change too fast in the world for print media). Robert has been taken hostage several times. He's sort of like the Joan Wilder character as celebrity traveling author and Michael Douglas' Jack Colton in one; and I don't even care for that Romancing the Stone movie. I think I finished the 5th ed. on the date below, but 1st edition was about 1996 or so, pre-9/11. I'm sorry that some earlier edition observations of Africa are left out. Get the book. Read it for yourself.
