For once, Strindberg offers us a little good comedy, almost familiar, interrupting (nearly) his anti-feminist speech, lamentations on the life of a couple, and his religious torment, does not sulk, especially our pleasure! More than in other novels, we must consider that the subject of this one takes place in Sweden at the end of the nineteenth century. If this distance in space and time is disregarded by the reader/spectator, they will risk missing some of the stakes of this work. Indeed, the action is located in the current environment of fishers and peasants. Thus, many are astonishing or picturesque references to the daily life, customs, and mentalities peculiar to Sweden. Hemsö is supposed to be a fishing village in one of Sweden's micro-archipelagos. But you will have trouble finding that name precisely on an island in Sweden (there is a "Home" on Gotland). In fact, under this name, Strindberg stages the island of Kymmendö, lost in the dust of the Baltic Sea archipelago southeast of Stockholm. Strindberg knew this island well, having stayed there in his youth. The story's plot centers on the arrival of a peasant, Carlsson, in a fishing village on Hemsö. He tries to fit himself into the small local company. He is very hardworking, but his naivety, his lack of knowledge of the environment in which he arrives, and the peaceful hostility of the fishermen who see the unknown land will not facilitate the achievement of this objective. On a background always famous and funny, Strindberg scrolls in front of us a gallery of characters adorned with temperaments and personal issues, a slight caricature, but colourful enough for the viewer to attach to it: Mrs Flod, widow landowner, including Carlsson covets the hand, and defends this poor Carlsson against the gossip of his entourage; the Inspector (Customs), constantly indebted to everyone, always looking for ghost smugglers; Mrs Styv, a fishmonger who judges a lot of things according to the price of fish; Rundqvist, a valet of Madame Flod, a chronic slacker always lying on a bench; the hawker, indeed seller of odds and ends, but also concoctors of financial scams and tricks of land which Carlsson will fool; the pastor, who annoyed his parishioners by making them sing endless hymns at the office; Ida, the pretty girl from the corner, on which everyone (young and old) wants to get their hands, and more if affinity. The accessible language and the lively, colorful reactions of the characters continually draw attention, and the situational reversals that accumulate at the end of the play read like a farce. But the characters, well-drawn and faithfully maintained to the end, the critics and ironies underlying the vices of some and sneaky schemes of others allow this work to rise to the level of a comedy of manners, fun, and without great metaphysical hindsight. In addition, standard notations on everyday life's details add to the show's flavor.
