Alice Vavasour is engaged to John Grey, a kind man whom she loves, but she fears that she will be stifled by his quiet life. She longs to support a husband in his political ambitions, and political ambitions are just what her disreputable cousin (and former fiancée) George Vavasour has in spades. Alice breaks off her engagement with John, and though she swore years ago never to love George again, she finds herself slowly drawn back to him. (I really, really wish that Alice could get together with Dorothea Brooke from Middlemarch and form a support group for idealistic young women who want to live vicariously through their husbands and make horrible relationship decisions because of it.) It's kind of hard to talk about Can You Forgive Her , because it's 3/4 incredibly acute human insight and 1/4 incredibly and sometimes offensively Victorian sentiments. I absolutely adore Alice: her pride, her principles, her fierce conscience, and her chronic self-doubt. I love how those qualities all blend together, so that it's impossible for her or even the reader to tell exactly where one starts and another ends. And as painful as it is to read, I love the depiction of how Alice's fierce independence doesn't always protect her from manipulation--the way that it sometimes leaves her open to it, because she can't bear to admit that anyone is influencing her--because it rings absolutely true. Trollope is brilliant at showing the tangled ways that people make decisions, and I think Alice is one of his star examples. And then there are all the passages where Trollope asks his readers if they can possibly forgive Alice even though by breaking her engagement "she had thrown off from her that wondrous aroma of precious delicacy, which is the greatest treasure of womanhood." Not to mention the ending, when after finally agreeing once more to marry John Grey, Alice thinks: "She had taken her fling at having her own will, and she and all her friends had seen what had come of it. She had assumed the command of the ship, and had thrown it upon the rocks, and she felt that she never ought to take the captain's place again. It was well for her that he who was to be captain was one whom she respected as thoroughly as she loved him." Even animated GIFs of puzzled and horrified cats cannot fully express my feelings. Just . . . really? And yet, I don't think you can dismiss the novel as merely sexist. Trollope does, after all, spend pages and pages arguing that Alice should be forgiven. And then there's Lady Glencora--one of the major secondary characters--who is a stereotypical ditzy society girl, except that she gets one of the major moral dramas of the novel: deciding whether or not to leave her husband and run away with another man. Even though she spends most of the novel seriously contemplating adultery, she's portrayed extremely sympathetically. Not to mention that one of the main reasons she's unhappy in her marriage is that she hasn't yet had children and she knows her value depends largely on her production of a male heir--and Trollope's portrayal of that is biting. (And I haven't even mentioned Kate Vavasour, Alice's best friend and George's sister, who loves Alice, idolizes George, and has spent years campaigning for them to marry. Trollope could give some modern writers lessons in how to write interesting and dramatic female friendship.) So it's not a novel with which a modern reader can entirely sympathize, but it's brilliant and fascinating and painful and fun. Definitely one of my favorite Trollope novels so far.
