Sticking with the Brits, this is Fielding's first novel. Bridget Jones meets Bob Geldof, half set in London with another pretty young woman thinking herself always too fat, loving an abusive asshole, drinking a lot and freaking out about make-up and stockings and shaving, the other half with her working as an aide in a refuge camp. Since Rosie is more intelligent and competent and assertive than Bridget, even though both are creatures of the publicity and media world, and since Fielding herself has worked on documentaries about UK aid for Africa, this is plausible, and actually more welcome than the London chapters, even if those were what would later make Fielding big (even though mentions of catastrophies in Africa et al were always present, and always mixed with quite plausible results with the ditzy heroine's other exploits, humanity as the balancing stone of what is meant to be the eternal female and just makes me sad). Fielding is more directly outspoken here - what people could read out of BJ, or ignore if they were very shallow, is here criticised more openly, e.g. weight issues and other (self/society) inflicted plagues esp. in contrast to famine. I had said after "Is That It?" that I wondered just that, what happened later, how did that aid actually work, and this book actually shows that - and Fielding says that in order to keep on living in this world, everyone keeps having to forget the hell "down there", again and again, which is why Cause Celeb can't be a hit. It would be unfair to my other books if I gave this lots of stars, but it's also unfair how few it has - guess that's due to fans of BJ, which in retrospect seems worse, because Fielding is smart and either caved in or talked down to all those who made chick lit into a genre. ETA-THREE: Fielding addresses some of the issues that Geldof didn't in ITI, and that came up during or after Live Aid, e.g. the starving as monkey-men. There were more uncomfortable truths that on the flipside aren't that negative - mad bastards can rise to do good, and good people don't care less about trivial things under dire circumstances, to say so would be a lie - faced with hell on Earth small personal concerns can actually become accerbated. ETA: not only readers but critics coming to this book belatedly seem to read it oddly slanted and plain wrong ... Muhammed is a great character, O'Rourke is not a hunk, that's the point, and there are some genuinely funny scenes in the camp (the purple dog and the fungus man) and a nerve-racking finale, a minor happy end against the backround of the reality of the situation. The sad end is how Fielding predicted BJ herself in these very pages, and how the world reacted to either.
