If this were the first Christie I had read instead of the 22nd consecutive Poirot novel I might love this more than I do. I eventually warmed to it quite a bit, but I am also developing powers of discrimination. It feels true to form. Nothing all that memorable compared to the best of her works, the crème de la crème, but this one is solid, impressive in its own right. Does this sound like snobbery? I dunno. Christie is very good even at her averagest. This one features Dr. Morley, a grumpy dentist, who is one of three people who all die in short order, including Miss Sainsbury Seale and Mr. Amberiotis. Scotland Yard pronounces Morley’s death a suicide, presumably remorseful after he discovers he has accidentally poisoned Amberiotis. Seale’s death they discover later, though she almost immediately had gone missing. No relationship to Morley, Inspector Japp figures. But what does our bourgeois Belgian detective think about it? Ah, mais oui, it is but of course the murder and we must use our little grey cells to rationally piece this puzzle together! One interesting feature of the series is that when Christie wrote the first one Poirot was already retired, he was pretty old, but since the series became an international sensation, she had to continue, for literally decades. How to account for his aging? In one sense she just ignores it, though in this one she actually has him admit that he feels his age. Only for a moment, though, then he’s just the same! I have no idea how Christie will handle this in the coming decades! Will he at least get a cane or wheelchair? Another interesting feature of the series as it emerges now, in 1940 when this book is published, is that there is a war on! How do we account for it? Christie is an admittedly escapist mystery writer, and not political in any obvious way. She writes cleverly amusing entertainments! The only reference to complicated political events at all in this book is in the form of diplomat Alistair Blunt, who is one of the Good Politicians, fighting for Right and Democracy against fascism. But Blunt makes ethical errors, too; how to do we square these things? (Read to find out). Other than that there is an array of possible suspects, the plot resolved in a way that I never figured out, of course, for which I admire her, though I also feel the need to read something grittier! I'll say 3.5 but round down for a little weariness with my assumed task of reading ALL of them. Not her fault.
