“He’s building imaginary lovers, friends, sons, younger brothers, slaves, gods. It’s a vaguely creepy thing, and it means a fucking ton to him” My favourite (so far) of the George Miles cycle and the first text where I'm really impressed by Cooper's prose. At first I wasn't sure if I was just grasping at something to find good (to justify to myself why I'm reading this author?) — namely that the sentences are written and structured in a way that feels incredibly perceptive and genius in construction. "The boy was hunched over, playing a solo. He meant every predictable note." I'm not sure if it tops The Sluts for me (maybe!), but it's certainly much more powerful and "moving" — if that's the right word. It's also the first book in the George Miles cycle (4 out of 5) where everything starts to make sense— his experimental use of narrative voice, the recurring obsessions, the psychoaffective and violent dimensions of authorship. I think Cooper is one of the only authors I've read (granted, that isn't very many) who thinks about the ethics of writing in a way that feels both mind-blowingly new and yet so right . But in no way does he moralise or prescribing any kind of moral program! That's what makes it so good I think. The writing here feels less gratuitous than some of the previous texts, but at the same time it sheds light on their gratuitousness. What's the difference between being a pornographer or a writer? What violence do they both share? There's a strong, implicit analogy between writing and sexual violence. What is to be done with the violence inside us? Once again, Cooper seems to convince me that fiction — in general!— is perverted. “Maybe I’m sort of like one of those jailed child molesters who practically beg not to be given parole. They’d rather lie in a cell jerking off with a copy of Bop magazine than live a celibate life among evil temptations. It’s better for all if I stay locked in here. I.e., friendly and removed on the surface, but secretly lost in impossible thoughts and addicted to putting my weird fantasies into sadly inadequate words.” I know I'm not selling this, but it's def worth a read. I'm excited to get through the rest of the cycle — even though the works aren't continuous, it's like I'm following a second-order plot of how Cooper is consciously working through his psychic life. Loved the indie rock soundtrack to the whole thing too. Listened to a lot of Pavement while reading this. Maybe even a 4.5/5. Hard to tell because I had a bit of a break in the middle of reading it.
