Update June 2024: Since Thibault (you're either psychic or have unnerving timing!) caught me precisely when I was leafing through my newest Alice acquisition, I gotta update the review: I now own a 4th illustrated edition of this book, a special edition with art by Benjamin Lacombe, one of my favourite illustrators! So, all counted, I own illustrated editions by: 1. Salvador Dalí (my favest of faves, my treasure, my papery baby, my Preciousss, 2. Arthur Rackham (second favest of faves, got properly apologised to for being kicked from its #1 pedestal when I found Dalí), 3. Tove Jansson (no Hobbit worth her salt can not own the edition by the same artist who did Hobbitses, and did them prettily at that), 4. Benjamin Lacombe (this man is so to my taste he can't do ugly in my eyes, even when I wasn't much impressed by his take on Alice that I just bought). I also own "The Annotated Alice," which would be my 5th, and in addition to these, I plan to acquire two more gems for my collection: the pop-up version by Robert Sabuda, and the 150th Anniversary Edition by David Delamare. Now, ye probably are scratching yer heads an' wonderin' why I'd want so many versions. Well, sit down and lemme tell ya! Once upon a time, the oldest and truest of lies . . . /Jane Yolen voice on. It's really a very simple tale, ladies and gentlemen and Cheshire cats, "Alice in Wonderland" was the first and only children's book I had in a childhood devoid of children's books. I wasn't even exclusively Alice or mine at all, can you believe it? It was a dual Alice and Peter Pan edition with gorgeous and colourful illustrations whose artist I've been unsuccessfully trying to locate again ever since. I never found that edition again. And why not, you ask? Because it didn't have a blasted cover! Problem with being the runt of the litter and born decades after the other pups is that by the time you arrive, everything is already chewed up and in a state of disrepair. The other pups already hogged on your parents' good looks, the best milk, and the best books, leaving you to be the ugly duckling fed on cow's milk and reading one single inherited children's book held together with thread (yeah, not duct tape, my siblings used THREAD to sew the book's loose pages together!) and prayerful wishes. Thus, I have no idea who created that edition, and probably never will. Anyway, that Alice book taught little me that: - Mushrooms shouldn't be eaten (I still look at them with suspicion, even when my sis says they're safe), - Decapitation is a thing (all my traumas can be traced back to this discovery), - Roses can be painted (but they didn't say that paint dries them up and kills the roses), - Cheshire smiles are effective to unnerve teachers and bullies alike, - There was something in England's air that made old chaps like Carroll and Barrie not want to grow up to be normal adults. Fond memories, eh? Just don't ask me what Peter Pan taught me, though. _________________________________ I had no intention of revisiting Wonderland anytime soon, but I saw this edition illustrated by surrealist Spanish artist Salvador Dalí . . . and I couldn't resist! The oeniric weirdness of Alice's world truly fits Dalí's no less weird style like a glove. It's as if Wonderland was made with Dalí in mind, like certain dresses are tailored to flatter a certain figure or certain lyrics are made to be sung by a certain singer. That said, I think Dalí wasn't at his bestest here, because some of the illustrations he painted (in what appears to be watercolour, judging by the watery quality of the drawings) were . . . not impressive, to put it mildly. Why? It's Dalí, for goodness' sake! Yes, but I stick to what I said. My own theory is that it was because Maestro Salvador isn't an illustrator, he's a painter. Meaning? He creates his best work of his own volition and his most spectacular displays of surrealism at its best come when he's not told what to do. In other words, Dalí was working by being "prompted" by the text of the story, not by his prodigious imagination alone. Paint me this, and he did. Paint me that, and he did. I suspect he's the sort of creative that needs free rein. Or maybe he just was having "one of those days . . . " Anyway, the final product is still a good one, to which I'm awarding 3.5 stars rounded up to four.
