Within the first few pages of this unusual novel one is tempted to start the review with something along the lines of “Catch 22 as written by Hunter Thompson.” In fact, skimming the ‘net I came across several already published reviews that began in just that fashion. I don’t begrudge the reviewers for doing it the easy way. Simply put Bahal tells the story of Minty Mehta (known to everyone as MM) an Indian reporter/investigative journalist covering the Indian military. Told completely in the second-person, the story instantly grabbed me and kept me involved, even during some rather long sections that told me more about the inner workings of the media in modern India than I would ever wish to know. The only other ‘second person’ narrated novel that immediately comes to mind is If on a Winter's Night a Traveler by Italo Calvino. Calvino’s novel also brings the reader directly into the story as it winds its way to the conclusion. MM, whose motives for doing what he does remain unclear for much of the book, befriends the maverick Major Rodriquez, a member the Army’s Special Forces unit stationed in Kashmir. Rodriquez, like MM, is a man who is more than he appears on the surface. Seemingly a career military man, Rodriquez is involved in any number of illegal smuggling operations. Drugs are only the tip of the iceberg and it becomes evident that MM has something more than profit on his mind as he becomes involved in the black market. Whether it’s weapons or drugs MM will do whatever it takes as long as it will allow him access to those with whom Rodriquez works. Unlike the persona that Hunter Thompson brought into his writings, there is no joy to be had in the drugs that MM uses. The drugs, like the other risk taking in which MM becomes involved, allow Minty to numb his emotions and give him a reason to live. Deeply scarred by the loss of the only woman he ever really loved, MM’s indulgence in rough sex, drugs and danger keep him from sinking further into a deepening depression. Rather than Thompson, Bahal’s protagonist reminds me more of the characters that peopled the novels of William Burroughs. Men and women who were looking for any immediate rush to fill the void in which they existed. It is immediately apparent that Bahal knows the shadowy areas of Indian society. Himself an award-winning journalist in his native country, he brings vividly to life a society and culture, which I had never known existed in that country. This isn’t the India of Rudyard Kipling, or Paul Scott’s Jewel in the Crown, but a society much like our own at least in terms of the values (or lack of them) that are all too apparent in the early years of the twenty-first century. An amazing book, especially from a first time novelist. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
