Dennis Cooper had sex with Leonardo DiCaprio. Maybe. At least in this novel. The mirror piece to Frisk in Cooper's meticulously constructed George Miles Cycle, "Guide" picks up on the same themes: Revolving around desires and obsessions that tear down the walls between fantasy and reality, the novel is once more narrated by a character named Dennis Cooper who, one more link to "Frisk", writes novels about serial killers. Another major parallel is the threat of HIV/AIDS that can be seen as the real-life catastrophe that manifests in some of the hallucinatory violent episodes we read: For the people in the book, the fascination lies in the control over bodily harm, while HIV/AIDS just strikes. Many characters affected in one way or another walk the line between life and death, an experience heightened by the major role of drugs (heroin as a means to prolong bardo and dissociative drugs as a means to destroy the order of reality). As Dennis, our narrator, is not exactly a straight edge dude, his grasp on reality is fragile, and as the the real-life Cooper is fascinated by fandom culture (which will later give us the extremely dark comedic parable The Sluts ), "Guide" involves 90's rock musicians like the members of "Blur" and "Silverchair" as well as, ähem, Leonardo DiCaprio. Another new twist to Cooper's pre-occupation with mediated culture is that apart from the filming of violent acts that (within the logic of the text) might be real or not, "Guide" also ponders the ethics of journalism and writing in general when it comes to representing marginalized people, and it wittily does so by rendering the Dennis-character highly dubious. Aesthetically, the work is very ambitious: The text is fragmentary and told in interlocking story arcs, with a whole cast of characters. I sometimes struggled to get through the structure, because it's not written to be immersive, but in the end, I always wanted to know where this might lead. Still, I will not even bother to re-construct the plot, because really, it's about the aforementioned themes that are played out in nuance by employing a wide array of literary personnel. Somewhere in there, we read the real story of how Cooper met George Miles and what happened to him - the author didn't even know when he published the beginning of the George Miles Cycle that his muse had shot himself. Now I can't wait to read how Cooper finishes the pentalogy with Period , and then I'm on to the coda I Wished . Irvine Welsh interviewing Dennis Cooper about "Guide": https://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandc...
