This collection was top tier. Solid. It took me by surprise. I have found a special place for me in the old science fiction world lately. Robert Silverberg is a name that often pops up when dwelling in that world. I had randomly picked up one of his novellas for a dollar a couple of years ago, and had actually enjoyed it enough to pick up another one in my next visit to the bookstore. I enjoyed both and thought, I’ll pick up some of this guy when I see him, he makes for quick entertaining reads. Then I read a non-fiction piece Harlan Ellison wrote where he mentions his dear friend “Bob” Silverberg, and that made me look into him even further. Surely if he was Ellison’s close friend and Ellison gave him props, then he was bigger than I thought. That should be obvious to anybody that has any decent knowledge in the world of SF, but it wasn’t for me, a total newbie in that realm. Anyway, I was out of town and saw this collection, and what better way to acquaint myself with a writer than by reading his “Best Of” collection. I don’t know what I was expecting, but holy god of Earth and Ganymede, this shook me in my seat. I was enthralled from page one. You can see how these stories would inspire modern shows such as Black Mirror. The first story is about cannibalism, and what a man would do to survive. Eating of Shakespeare’s pages was insane. That was “Road to Nightfall.” I feel that “Warm Man” and “To See the Invisible Man” were similar in themes. One is about a man who is an amplified empath, and the other about a man who is punished by being shunned from society. So far, so good. Then we come to a science fiction story that actually takes place in space. Oh, good ol’ space exploration. “Sixth Palace” was terribly witty, and shows how greed can end a man. Now, for one of the best and my second favorite, “Flies.” Oh, man. This one was insane. I loved it. I turned page after page in a terrible hunger to see how it would unravel, and unravel it did. “Flies. Wanton boys.My sport Mirabel. I’m a god now, did you know that?” Imagine looking down to an ex-lover and explaining you are a god now. Insane. Hawksbill was good, “Passengers” was very tragic, though the concept was a far stretch. I suppose that plays into Silverberg’s stories, and what makes a great writer. Stretching concepts. Now we come to my absolute favorite: “Nightwings.” Man, this one had it all. Fantasy, sci-fi, everything. It would take me pages to express everything about it. I need to read what actually became of it as it started a trilogy or a full novel, or something like that. “Sundance” was a trip too. Just like the protagonist, you don’t know what the hell to believe either, and that was magnificent. This was my third favorite. Last story was probably my least favorite, “Good News from the Vatican.” The concept was cool, but other than a passing idea, I thought it was too stretched for a full story. Overall, damn. I need more Silverberg in my life after finishing this collection.
