It took a few days to read this hallucinatory and bizarre novel, and boy, though disturbing and maybe at times overly sexually explicit, it is a masterpiece of the grotesque. Mr. Ballard links sex and technology through fetishizing the mutilations of bodies during car crashes, of where this becomes an audacious way to communicate and literally "come together"; since the novel has page after page of where semen is seeping from some orifice. The characters at play are a fictionalized version of James Ballard, and his wife Catherine who are often looking for sexcapades to bolster their conventional and boring marriage. Ballard meets the mysterious and scarred Vaughn, who is obsessed in crashing his car and himself (possibly to death) with the idea of colliding with actress Elizabeth Taylor. James and Vaughn have an affair, as does Catherine and Vaughn; and James with the detached, and rather forlorn Dr. Helen Remington, grieving over the loss of her husband in a car crash. Rounding out the characters is Gabrielle, a woman who is one of Vaughn's disciples and is physically mutilated. Ballard writes his sexual experiences as "two semi metallic human beings of the distant future making love in a chromium bower" (Ballard 162). There are extremely disturbing images of sexual violence, assault and mutilation that was uncomfortable to read to say the least- especially a harrowing scene where Vaughn fucks Catherine and assaults her physically by beating her during sex; and of how Ballard develops "fantasies were part of the affectionate responses exchanged between us as we drove along the motorway together" (Ballard 181). But oddly enough, I understood that violence, sex and car crashes and the mutilation of bodies were sexual fetishes that become a means of communicating in order to process being alone. Not everyone will agree with my praise of this novel-it is divisive enough that it will repel some, while there are readers like me that felt repelled by it, I also found empathy reading this. This is is the second Ballard novel I've read aside his immortal "Empire of the Sun", and felt both books were about human beings who found themselves attempting to connect with others in moments of violence. I did see the David Cronenberg film starring James Spader as Ballard; Holly Hunter as Dr. Remington, Elias Koteas as Vaughan, Rosanna Arquette as Gabrielle, and Deborah Kara Unger as Catherine, and found that both the film and novel match up, and the 1997 update from the 1970s setting made it an eerie moviegoing experience.
