I think every avid reader must have a list (even if it's just in their head and not actually written down) of books they would like to read, but never seem to find the time. My list of "someday'' reads is quite extensive, but I have vowed that this year I will read more books from my own library shelves and also more books off my I'd-really-love-to-read-that list. When I found out years ago that Ian Fleming (author of all those lovely 007 spy novels) wrote a children's book that one my favorite children's movies is based on, at first I didn't believe it. I had to look it up to get proof. At that point, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang made it onto my list of books I wanted to read. And I finally did it! Well, I listened to an unabridged audiobook version -- but that still counts! And.....it was just....lovely!!!! The book is almost completely different from the movie....but that's true of almost any children's book adapted into a film. The Pott family includes Commander Caractacus Pott, his wife Mimsie and their two children Jeremy and Jemimah. Sometimes the family has a bit of financial trouble because the Commander is a bit eccentric....he's an inventor. Sometimes the things he invents are quite useful....and sometimes not. One day he invents a sweet that whistles and sells it to a candy company. He uses the money to buy a car.....and not just any car. After a bit of sprucing up, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang joins the Pott family. She's not just a car.....but a very very special car. A drive to the beach will teach the Pott family just how special Chitty is! What adventures they have! I still love the movie with Dick VanDyke (the whole scene with the whistling candy had me humming Toot Sweet in my head).....but....the book is just happy, lovely and wonderful!!! The audiobook I listened to is narrated by Andrew Sachs. It is unabridged and runs just shy of 2.5 hours. Sachs did a wonderful job...he reads at an even pace, and did great sound effects and voices for the characters. I have hearing loss, but was easily able to hear and understand every bit of the story. So glad I finally got to enjoy the original story. I hope someday they make a movie that follows the book....the story really is great!!
