“..let her take him back to her bed if she will!... but let me bear in mind that the woman walks and laughs somewhere at this very moment whose neck he’ll be coling next year as he does hers tonight… It’s a forlorn hope for her” The Woodlanders, one of my most treasured reads, is an remarkable and somewhat dramatic story where self-interest, pleasure, infidelity, and ambition clash voraciously with the rural simplicity of the woodlands of Little Hintock and its modest inhabitants, and where social custom is to once again cage people to the lives they were bound to accept but not desire. In marriage and in class. Whilst a sad tale of unrequited love, betrayal and buried emotions what we get in return is one of Hardy’s least known, but in my opinion one of Hardy’s most intense and accomplished novels. A deeply profound novel where love and nature play leading roles with such power and poignancy that the reader is left touched, mournful, and quite literally heart broken. As one of the books most powerful phrases becomes implanted in your mind “You can't tell the heart. The heart hopes. Most of all where it's hopeless.” The Plot Melbury, a local timber merchant, who once wronged a man by seducing his fiancé away from him, has now promised his daughter Grace to his surviving son, Giles Winterborne. Yet his ambitions for his daughter’s marriage to someone of social standing and wealth stand in stark contrast to the man who, in the end, by error of paperwork and not understanding the full terms of his holdings, is to lose his properties and wealth. Grace herself, a delicately feminine character is now the social hope of the family and becomes the books focal point for morality and duty, as she struggles with her obligation to Giles and her fascination with Edred, the local doctor. However, Edred, a philanderer and serial womaniser is to make his declarations of marriage at the yearly Midsummer eve event when the village girls attempt some spell or enchantment which could afford them a glance of their partners for life, at which point Giles is to lose his love. All observed by Marty South, a local girl, desperately and passionately in love with Giles, who is to play her part when she is forced to sell her beautiful hair to adorn the head of the woman Edred is to abscond with. However, in this intense story of nature and love, there are more heartaches and twists as Hardy completes his rich tapestry, and love appears hopeless. Review and Comments I read this book at school for English Literature classes and loved it despite having what I thought was quite a complex writing style. However, it caught me then as it caught me now. Here's why!!! A perfect combination of vivid prose, deeply drawn characters and the use of nature to write such a heart breaking and soulful story that was so representative of living standards, class structures and attitudes of the period. Hardy’s painstaking portrayal of the countryside and nature is not lost to the reader, and becomes an almost invisible character, plot, and theme, central to the story. Little Hintock, despite the images created of boundless freedom, beauty and serenity was to be the place that harboured such uncompromising ties to a rigid social structure, and with converging destinies, would deny many of the characters love. A place that would breathe life into all living things yet harshly extinguish it without compromise. It is therefore fitting that one of the most tragic scenes was nature denying life to one of the main characters. The angry weather, cold and dampness was to finally extinguish that flame the reader so anxiously wanted to continue burning, in the hope of some justice. However, in one of the most tragic scenes the man that was loved so deeply by one but who loved another, would surrender to the woodlands. There are many threads woven into this rich tapestry of marriage, infidelity, unrequited love, social immobility - and finally the locks of hair sold by Marty South to the wealthy seductress was “… how it had begun and tragedy had its end” , and what was seemingly a simple act to raise money was to ultimately cause the destruction of the one of the books most unsavoury characters. Typical Hardy to spin these threads but it is not until the end that the tapestry is complete, and we finally sit back in awe at the masterpiece created. Haunting yet enchanting, beautiful but tragic. A book where yet again social freedom loses to duty and obligation but where love – the real kind!!! in its stubborn capacity to yield loses to nothing but still remains cursed, as the characters are bound in heart and soul and tied by fate. Atmospheric, tragic, and uncompromising where love, nature and fate take centre stage, and in true Hardy style we as readers are left heartbroken.
