While most of the books that constituted the full "Histories” are now lost to us, what remains gives us a fascinating insight into the intrigues of many of the Roman emperors of the first century of the common era. Tacitus, born in the 60s, lived into the first third of the second century, and throughout his work makes it very clear how far he believes the ethos of Rome's rulers have become debauched in the post-Republic era. For those who remember the television series "I, Claudius" from the last half of the 20th century, they would not be at all surprised at the antics, plots, paranoia, and cruelty that so characterized the rule of Nero. Unlike Homer's Iliad, in which we frequently encounter vivid descriptions of war with all of its gore and blood-letting, Tacitus observes murders and assassinations aplenty, but he does so without -- thankfully -- giving us the awful details. Sufficient to say that in a culture of the upper class that revels in deceit and plotting -- predominantly that of the Senate and the powerful -- many who emerge victorious in gaining the upper hand "today" soon find that their "tomorrow" will bering a quick, and often fatal, reverse. The Histories also give us a detailed report of one of the civil wars that came to characterize periods of Roman imperial history as -- when an emperor died, or was assassinated, without a clear successor -- various Roman legions would put forth their own favorite as the next emperor, a claim rapidly contested by other army units. While Tacitus, like most ancient historians, gives us very little information about the common people -- the overwhelming majority's of course -- we do get some evidence of the sufferings they endured when the legions went on rampages in the midst of civil war. Tacitus remarks that there is nothing worse than civil war, as there is really nothing to distinguish brother from brother once imperial emblems disappear. Soldiers of one faction in Rome searching for members of others easily mistake ordinary citizens for members of the opposite party, women are ravished, and property confiscated and destroyed. Tacitus comments about the horror of "brother killing brother." In one particularly sad and moving scene, he describes how a son encounters and kills his father in one civil war engagement. Both hailed from Spain but were fighting on opposite sides. Neither recognized one another at first because of the heat of the battle and the helmets they wore. However, as the father fell his helmet became dislodged. Recognizing his father, the younger man cried out in anguish, cradling his father's body. He then performed what Tacitus calls his "last duty as a son" in burying his father. Tacitus notes that a group of soldiers from both sides, witnessing this event, momentarily stopped fighting, perhaps for a moment pondering the insanity of civil war. As irresponsible rhetoric continues to heat up in our country in our time, we would be well advised to remember how costly civil divides rapidly become. The dastardly and honor-less politicians and bloviators cheering on these divisions must be aware of how violence, once unleashed, cannot be controlled.
