AH&T3I Update: 6 read, 22 hardbacks to go! I love the Three Investigators. I also love the Hardy Boys. However until this book, the two book series are quite different. For example, all three of the Three Investigators are 15. None of them have a driver's license or even a learner's permit. To get around to the places they need to investigate, they either need to ride bikes, use the car they won the use of for 30 days in a contest, or ask a couple of workers at the Salvage Yard, owned by First Investigator Jupiter Jones' aunt and uncle, to drive them around in one of the old beat up trucks from the salvage yard. All of the stuff that the Three Investigators have comes from fixing up recycled junk, like their walkie-talkies, or an old printing press, or even their secret headquarters made out of a damaged 30 foot mobile home. Even their office furniture was singed in a fire before the boys got it. All three boys work at the Salvage Yard for extra cash and to pay for a telephone in their headquarters. Sometimes work gets in the way and they cannot investigate a case for a couple of days because of their work at the salvage yard. Jupiter is the smart one, but not so athletic. Pete is just the opposite: athletic, but not as smart and gets spooked easily. Bob stands in between the two extremes: he is somewhat athletic, but he also works in a library and operates as the research and notes-taker of the group. Almost every adolescent boy can relate to the Three Investigators in some way because most boys can see themselves in the shoes of the Three Investigators. The Three Investigators solve cases the old-fashioned way: hard work and then Jupiter deduces the solution from a bunch of strange clues that seem to puzzle everyone else. In contrast, Joe and Frank Hardy are 17 and 18 years old respectively. Old enough to have a driver's license. and they put those licenses to good use. The Hardy Boys own their own motorcycles, a motor car, a motorboat called the Sleuth, and have access to an airplane owned by their famous detective father. Early in the series, the Hardys needed to call on the pilot of the plane to fly them where they needed to go, but later on we learn that both boys are licensed pilots and can fly the plane. They are also great fencers--a sport that every boy knows! Money or time does not seem to be a problem for the Hardy Boys as anytime they need they can fly off to South America or Mexico or wherever they need to go. And both boys can, and sometimes do, solve the case. Of course, things usually fall into place just like magic for the Hardy Boys--just like the perpetual summer break that they seem to be on. They just always happen to be in the right place at the right time and poof! They solve another case. There is something just a little more elite about the Hardy Boys. They act maybe a little more like superheroes than actual teenage American boys. But then we get to the Secret of Skeleton Island, the sixth title in the Three Investigators Series and the two series become somewhat entangled. The Three Investigators are sent to star in a movie on the other coast. They fly expenses paid to the Atlantic from the Pacific. No bike use here, and the car from the contest is back home. Also, no secret headquarters. So they get stranded on a lonely island. No wait, they are rescued. No, they get stranded again. Dang, trapped in an impossible situation. Poof, they find things that no one has ever found before them. Poof again, and they are rescued again. With about 10 pages left to go in the book, boom! There is the solution to the mystery. It all seems very Hardy Boy-ish for a Three Investigators story. Now this is still a very good book and it is enjoyable to read. People love the Hardy Boys just like they love to go to the movies to watch Marvel Superheroes battle it out or Batman fight Superman or whatever other superhero story may be out there. It can be, and is, fun stuff. Yet, the Three Investigators series carved out a slightly different niche in the first five books of the series. This sixth Three Investigators book simply takes a different course and mirrors the Hardy Boy pattern more than it does its own pattern set up in its own earlier books. With that said, enjoy the Three Investigators in the Secret of Skeleton Island. It is a fun book to read!
