Did anyone else keep expecting Agents Mulder and Scully to show up? Or was it just me? Perhaps the book would have been better if the famed agents HAD made a cameo. Of course this book was published a couple years before The X-Files made its debut on TV ( its publication even preceeded "Beyond Reality," the little-known Sci-Fi Network show I am convinced was an inspiration for the X-files )....but this story is about time travel, so it could have been possible. It was also about aliens. Of sorts. Basically a woman goes back in time to prevent the end of the world. And she ends up killing her past self in the process. But since it's kind of her fault the apocalypse happened in the first place, perhaps she acheived her goal. Just not in the way she expected. And... I think I'm done with Pike books. This one was particularly bad. As in CRINGE-worthy bad. The characters were flat and all had the same voice. The plot jumped around, required enormous suspension of belief, and, at times, it seemed like the author didn't know where he was going with the story. He was just rambling, and that made for an extremely convoluted plot. Also, I found it hard to believe that the main character could be so stupid as to not recognize his girlfriend in her future form. Or himself, for that matter. I mean, "Howdy, Stranger. You look freakishly like me except older and way cooler. And, by the way, your GF looks freakishly like a slightly older version of my crush. I'm severly creeped out, so I'm going to back away slowly and forget this ever happened." If only. Yeah...I just didn't like it. It was a little too angsty for me. And I just didn't like the narrator. He wined waaaaay too much. And I swear by all that is holy, if I have to read one more book where an emo male narrator is in love with a MPDG character, I will vomit. I quit reading a little more than halfway through and then flipped to the epilogue (and all its spoilery goodness), which pretty much summed up the entire story as well as made an attempt to explain some of the finer points of why the weirdness happened in the first place. I need to go and read something awesome now. p.s. A computer with less than 1 MG of memory. LOL!!!
