I thought this was a wholesome, if strange, book about a curious family and a kitten they "find" (have thrust upon them by a girl who has too many rescue cats to find forever homes), but toward the middle of the book, the story starts d-r-a-g-g-i-n-g o-u-t, and I found myself less interested in finishing the story, despite its length, which is unfortunate, because the story of a typewriting* kitten sounds cute and wholesome on paper. *which shows just how dated this book is, that today's younger readers won't know what this is It's a book 2, yet it feels like it can easily be read by itself (other than the fact it's SLOW-paced), although I'm actually a little disappointed that the cute cover art isn't replicated in the interior illustrations; that is, the (I assume) new cover design for this edition is much cuter than the more photorealistic inked drawings inside the book. The cartoony cover has much more personality than the rather dry sketches inside, which tend to depict Pinky as essentially a black blotch. The interior drawings are also framed from a distance, as though from a cameraperson keeping somewhat at arm's length, while the cover is more up-close and personal. The fact of "Uncle Benny" is also a weird story element, to put this emphasis on how this 3-year-old going very quickly on 4-year-old is the mom's brother, so he is in fact the other children's uncle who is younger than they are. I don't know that it adds much to the story, other than the mother sort of coddles him, as her baby brother. Also, that he has a DEAD locust as a pet... o... kay... I guess the main thing I don't like is how long the story takes to get to the point. They're on vacation, and it describes EVERY SMALL THING they do on this extended vacation, even when it's not exciting and doesn't really progress the plot, especially the parts that are completely predictable (the fact that they're reminded to close the window and don't until it's very late). Like, I could have done quite easily without the "nobody can sleep because a guy with a sleeping bag shows up, but here's what everyone thought while they couldn't sleep" chapter. Also, it's weird that the children are THAT interested in sleeping bags, like... they're just wraparound blankets? I guess I don't know the appeal that they would be so gung-ho about wanting to try out this guy's sleeping bag. (Okay, it WAS the 1950s, but... they really had THAT little entertainment, especially with multiple pets?? [TOTALLY not jealous or anything]) Not really recommended... I don't think it's BAD as such, but I just don't know who would be interested in this book... readers who liked the first book? I'm not sure, since I didn't read book 1.
