Though his eyes were warm, his smile betrayed him. Lucas Davenport is smart, good-looking, rich, and so obviously effective a cop that he transcends departments and has his own Office of Special Intelligence, an acknowledgment both of his well-tended network of informants and his well-documented tendency to go off and do his own thing. He's destined to be assigned to every high-profile case the Twin Cities have to offer. Oh, and he drives a Porsche. A character this cool shouldn't work as anything other than the most basic wish fulfillment, a checklist of desirable traits. But amazingly, he does work. Sandford excels at fully developing his hero until Lucas seems organically the kind of person who would be like this and until he runs into his own limitations and some consequences. Sometimes I think one of the most valuable traits in an author is the willingness to risk the reader disliking the protagonist: that keeps the story moving smoothly and under its own logic rather than the logic of whatever the author thinks will appeal. Sandford tells a good, compelling story, and he lets the reader form their own opinions about Lucas. Most likely they'll be favorable, but there's room for them to not be. After all, over the course of the novel, Lucas threatens, bullies, plants evidence, loses his temper, engages in some shady sexual ethics, and effectively sets a woman up to be attacked by a serial killer. He has a motivation for all of this, but Sandford doesn't bend over backwards to make sure you agree with him, he just lets Lucas work. The end result is that Lucas is a character rather than an argument about what is best and most heroic, and dammit, I like him. Also, he earned that Porsche by designing fantasy roleplaying games and his unsalable magnum opus that he designed just for fun is a Civil War reenactment RPG that he plays with his nun best friend. That's kind of adorably geeky. Lucas is called into action in Rules of Prey because of the "maddog killer," a serial rapist and murderer who is on the verge of setting off a city-wide panic. Lucas knows how to work a media circus and also how to get sometimes-shady things done behind the scenes, so he's assigned as kind of a rogue investigator operating outside Robbery-Homicide even though he's in cooperation with them. We also see the maddog's perspective. Sandford makes his headspace suitably slimy. In his own way, the maddog is an interesting character: pathetic enough to be realistic, smart enough to be dangerous, and both human and alien in his motivations. If Lucas has a good shot at understanding him, the maddog understands him back. In the best example of this, the killer is smart enough after a near miss to completely clean his house of anything even tangentially connected with his crimes, all the way down to the potatoes in his kitchen (he'd used one in a sock as a cosh). When Lucas breaks in, he's smart enough to notice that the total absence of any connecting evidence is in and of itself kind of suspicious--the complete innocent the police briefly suspect, on the other hand, had lubricated condoms that might have matched the maddog's--and deduce that a clean-up has been done. He plants photos of the victims deep under the mattress to seal the deal at a later date. But then the maddog, knowing about Lucas's penchant for gaming, deduces that he wouldn't be above cheating, and then he finds and destroys the photos. Sandford is great at the thrilling step-by-step process of tracking and capturing a killer. The case here has the complications of real life investigations. There are seemingly significant leads that turn out to be dead ends, characters who complicate the investigation by hiding unrelated crimes, headaches over how to manage the whole thing in the press, and realistic fuckups that never feel contrived. It's all lighter-toned than a Michael Mann movie, but it has the same quality to me of just treating its genre tropes straightforwardly and with depth rather than trying to subvert them, and you get some awesome, gratifying entertainment out that. And here, one hell of a thriller and series opener. I'm already onto book two.
