What another mixed -up kid trying to discover in life what is real , important and indeed even worth living book, the great German writer Herman Hesse's life resembles the plot to a certain degree, his popularity spiked sky high in the decade of the turbulent, chaotic unrest of the 1960s. The sensitive youth Emil Sinclair a shy fainted-hearted rather aimless boy of ten living in a town by the Black Forest in Germany before the cataclysm of the First World War...No surprise an older boy Franz Kromer sees the weakling, bullies and threatens Mr. Sinclair into becoming a pathetic and reluctant juvenile delinquent a virtual slave , any petty crime he will do. Afraid to inform his loving parents or sisters, a bit of a coward, we would say unkindly. Intimidated , but like an angel of mercy another kid by the name of Demian brings light into a world of endless, shadowy night of drab darkness, terrifying the jerk and despair evaporates, from a boy he hardly knowns , hope flows. Mr. Kromer disappears into the background but his new, mysterious friend is a vague apparition too, maybe, still will he endure , help the helpless, give direction , bravery and strength which Mr. Sinclair desperately requires to feel normal, whatever that is. Thus the teachings begins in earnest for the would -be confused seeker of truth, knowledge and enlightenment. A quest , a rather slim one to discover a spiritual heaven on earth , to perceive God's will if not his grace. It is a bumping road, a journey which seems infinite yet required for salvation. The novel is a genuine voyage, yes not only an entertainment, but a look into the possible. Sinclair becomes older if not wiser, will he prevail though ? Demian where has he gone , the boy Emil , a student dreams of this enigma, the image floats in his brain and finally at last sees his hero on the lonely streets, he's attending the same university. Meeting the mother of the friend and idol , Frau Eva , a beautiful, charming, intelligent, charismatic older woman, the magic is apparent the attractions very palpable. However nothing last forever or seems real , the troubled man boy nevertheless becomes content, this is home. No more wandering around, quite a refuge from the distractions, noises and the phony people, even better than in his parents and siblings house. A difficult almost plotless story, a deep exercise in obscure religious beliefs, and rites, as the mind of a child and body grows to adulthood. Experiences mental aberrations, uneasiness, but could be a monumental path forward . Still lots of others from all walks of humanity, living in many corners of our enormous sphere have liked, however, more I think did not and will not. But I did very much so.
