Right from the introduction, this book made clear that it wasn’t going to be an academic look at the previous years when abortion was a crime, but rather a regurgitation of pro-abortion talking points laced with selected stories and statistics to attempt to prove the talking points. If you want a comprehensive look at this time period, you will not find it in this book. The Salient: Reagan does a thorough job exploring the underground abortion industry in Chicago, the pro-abortion movement, theories underlying the pro-abortion movement, and the stories relating to those who had abortions. There were numerous accounts of unlawful and unmoral conduct towards women, such as warrantless full-cavity searches and humiliation relating to sexual partners and experiences when investigating unlawful abortions. Regardless if the women's actions were unlawful, that doesn’t justify doing or using inappropriate tactics when investigating. The Dubious: Even the historical information that was provided was unabashedly one-sided. Reagan barely (as in only a few times before the conclusion) mentioned the underpinning reasons why the anti-abortion movement: when life begins and what are the moral reasons to take that life. Even Margaret Sanger’s opposition to abortion was based upon this fact. Instead, Reagan e reduces the argument, both now and then, to misogyny and attempts to control female sexuality and reproduction. While there were, and are, misogynistic statements and attempts to control women’s sexual behavior, this blatantly misrepresents the primary reasoning behind the anti-abortion movement, which is the humanity of the fetus. According to Reagan, initial laws to prohibit abortion were simply a power play by doctors to get control over the abortion process and, of course, misogyny. While improvement of maternal mortality was only briefly mentioned, there was no mention of the significant improvements in social programs and support, destigmatization of out-of-wedlock births (while not entirely, there is certainly tremendously less stigma today), and great improvement in laws protecting women (e.g. rape by husbands, domestic abuse laws). A huge theme of the book is that the medical profession becomes a third arm of the state is required to “enforce” the laws, but the medical profession (and other professions) also participate in the enforcement of other laws (e.g. child abuse). Another consistent theme of the book involves the humiliation women went through when these crimes were being investigated and prosecuted. Except as noted above when the state used unlawful or inappropriate tactics, yes, when you commit a crime (even one you don’t think should be a crime), humiliation is involved for yourself and your family. It should be noted that at every opportunity Reagan chose to quote or point out in the text of the book misogynistic and racial statements made by those who are anti-abortion, which were extremely common for the periods discussed, but she failed to point out those pro-abortion proponents’ same moral failures, such as Margaret Sanger’s well-known racial prejudices and eugenic beliefs. In short, Reagan’s work is plagued by her clear hardline views on the “necessity” of abortion (frequently mentioned) without every actually analyzing the issue other than looking through the eyes of similar-minded persons throughout the time of the book. She concludes the book with scare tactics her perceptions of what will occur if abortion is prohibited again as well as blatant mischaracterization of the anti-abortion movement.
