If you want to know more about Truman Capote, this is a better entertaining option for you. Composed of 14 short stories, Capote made himself a character in each. In the last one, in fact, he appeared as 2 characters conversing with each other. I had a nice time reading most of them because he seemed like a very versatile writer who was not afraid to experiment. I understand that these small masterpieces appeared in various magazines (New Yorker, Esquire, etc) during his time. So, probably that's the reason why each of them had to be fresh, engaging and interesting. You see, to keep the readers always looking forward to his piece in each issue of the magazine. I. MUSIC FOR CHAMELEONS Music for the Chameleons. 3 STARS The narrator is a guest in a lovely house in Martinique. There is an aristocratic lady in the house and she takes care of chameleons. She plays music for them to emit different colors. I am not sure what Capote's exact message is but I thought that the colors of the chameleons symbolize the ever-changing opinion of the aristocrats with regards to the aboriginals in the island. Mr. Jones. 2 STARS So, who was Mr. Jones and why did he disappear so suddenly? What was Capote's motive in telling his reader that the narrator saw him in the train again? I just did not get it. I know there is a point there somewhere but sorry. A Lamp in the Window. 4 STARS I liked the ending. It was unexpected. I like it when Capote shows his quirkiness, i.e., his fun side. We know he was gay and gays are fun people. So, this story comes off as sincere and fun too. But don't get me wrong, this is not funny. Know what I mean? Mojave. 3 STARS An old masseur who is left all alone in a desert by his prostitute wife while he is urinating. In their trailer is the wife's lover whose hair is full of smelly pomade. Despite what the wife did, the elderly man says that he still loves his wife. This reminded me of gay men who knew all along that they were being fooled by their lovers and yet they were blind. So pathetic yet we all know this happens, gay or straight. Hospitality. 3 STARS Seems like this one is a true-to-life experience of Capote while growing up during the Depression. I just wondered where they got all those food while many Americans go hungry like what I read in Out of the Dust and of course book:The Grapes of Wrath|4395]. Dazzle. 4 STARS Very funny childhood story of a gay boy Capote. He teased the reader on what he would ask the witch for. I thought I knew and then Capote made a twist but still I got it right. This is a breakthrough story because in here, Capote made known to the world that when he was young, he wanted to be a girl. II. HANDCARVED COFFINS A Nonfiction Account of an American Crime. 4 STARS A well-loved politician in an small town in the South has been discovered to be the mastermind for the killing of members of the committee. The said committee denied his huge track of land the proper irrigation since the river was diverted. I liked the story telling and the playfulness of Capote's character (yes, he is in the story just like the other stories in this book) especially the references to Jane Austen and Edith Wharton's male characters. I should read a Wharton and resume my reading of Austen books. This comprises half of the book. I think he wrote this as a follow up to In Cold Blood. However, according to Wiki, this is basically fiction as there was no criminal case like this. However, Capote is one of the characters here and the events parallel those of In Cold Blood. In that said masterpiece of him, Capote did not appear as a character. III. CONVERSATIONAL PORTRAITS A Day's Work. 3 STARS Capote joins and observes a girl Friday cleaning the houses of the rich and famous in Italy. Not all of them are rich and famous but with juicy stories. There is a reality TV show like this, I think. Hello Stranger. 4 STARS "Shades of Humbert Humbert," says Capote but George Claxton doesn't read books because he hates literature. When they were young, Capote did all the book reports of George while the later did all his assignments in Algebra. Capote flunked first year Algebra thrice even with the help of a tutor! I think I can relate to this. Not in my case, but someone dear. Hidden Gardens. 2 STARS I got distracted by the shift in narratives. All I understood was a guy with a huge prick and he put it on the girl who inquired about it and the girl's hair turned white overnight (because of intense pressure). Maybe Capote meant this to be a joke and I took it seriously? Derring-do. 2 STARS Maybe I was just too tired while reading this part late last night. It seemed like another In Cold Blood criminal case this time with a serial killer facing execution soon. Other than that, this one did not leave anything in my mind. Then It All Came Down. 3 STARS This one also has similarities with some scenes in Capote's In Cold Blood. Well, this book was his follow up to that best-selling novel of him, right? In here, Capote is conversing with an inmate in the maximum-security cell block. The inmate, Robert Beausoleil, was charged of multiple murder. In the conversation, Capote or CP is namedropping; claiming to have met Lee Harvey Oswald, Priscilla Johnson, etc. Based on Wiki, party-boy Capote hobnobbed with the rich and famous. A Beautiful Child. 4 STARS Ha! This is the cutest story here. Marilyn Monroe, the sex goddess during Capote's time, appears as herself talking with our genius writer. It reminds me of beautiful girls in the campus with gay man as sidekick or bestfriend. This made me want to read a book about Marilyn Monroe. The way she expresses herself here is... cute! Nocturnal Turnings, or How Siamese Twins Have Sex. 5 STARS Don't be misled by the title. There is nothing obscene here. They slept in the end. "They" means Capote and Capote. Two personas in one body. They talk to each other and unlike the angel and the demon, the ying and yang, they are not completely opposites. So, you have to really take time to read their banters. Brilliant and funny. Very Capote. I think this collection of his works was entitled "Music for Chameleons" because like what was in the first story, we readers are like chameleons that change our colors depending on the music provided to us. In this case, the music is provided by Capote. He writes, we read. Then our reaction varies depending on his style. And he has a lot of those (styles) up his sleeves.
