Born into a cash-strapped family mostly of small farmers, Vilhelm Moberg (1898-1973) was a major figure in 20th-century Swedish literature, writing novels and plays both for the stage and radio, as well as nonfiction, including two volumes of a history of Sweden which he died before completing. His major body of work is the four novels which make up the Emigrants series, of which this one, originally published in 1952, is the second. It uses fiction to tell the story of the first generation of the great wave of immigration from Sweden to America, beginning in the mid-19th century. Moberg had his own family connection to the immigrant experience; of his maternal grandparents' seven kids, only his mother stayed in Sweden. All the rest immigrated to America; they corresponded with the family in Sweden, and later financially assisted his parents. He grew up reading a lot of letters from America, took an interest in the country and in the Swedish-American community, and eventually (while writing his series) visited many of his 100+ American relatives in their own country. When I read this book as a 12 or 13-year-old boy (it was one of many I ran across in my grandmother's bookshelves, on my frequent visits to her), I knew nothing about the author, and had no clue that it was part of a series until I saw bits and pieces of the film adaptation(s) starring Max von Sydow and Liv Ullmann, made ca. 1971 but aired on PBS in the 80s. (What I saw of these was well done, IMO; but I didn't see the whole thing, and have never read the other three books.) So I'm writing this review from my memories of about 57 years ago, supplemented by a library check-out of the same edition I read to refer to. (That edition, of course, wasn't the 1995 reprint to which this review is attached; it was the 1954 first U.S. edition, translated by Gustaf Lannestock and published by Simon and Schuster, but the former has a much more attractive cover. :-) ) Granted, if I would re-read it now, I could probably appreciate aspects of it better, and there's a fair amount of detail that I've forgotten. However, there's also a fair amount that I remember quite well, along with my impressions as a reader at the time; and the book did have a particular interest and significance for me even at that young age, because I'm of Swedish stock myself, and grew up listening to my grandmother's memories of her early life in southeastern Minnesota, where this book is set. (She was born there in 1886, but her parents were recent immigrants.) Granted, this book is set about a generation before her time; but I still felt a kinship with the characters, and a sense that their experience, though fictional, tied into my own real-life heritage. Given that a Goodreads review isn't a professional review, but rather simply part of the record of an ordinary reader's lifetime experience with books, I think I can do it sufficient justice for our purposes. I'd place Moberg solidly in the Realist tradition. Even as a tween kid, I could tell that he knew a lot about the history of the time period (this book covers the years 1850-51, beginning in New York harbor with the arrival of the ship carrying Karl Oskar and his family) and about the lifeways and physical environment of the newly-arrived immigrants. (Now, learning about the huge amount of documentary research, both in Sweden and in the archives of the Minnesota Historical Society, that he put into this project, the solidity of the historical description isn't surprising.) But it's integrated nicely into the text; there's never a lecture-like quality. There's a certain amount of sordid content --Moberg describes some of the machinations of thugs and grifters out to take advantage of the naivete of uneducated new immigrants, for instance-- and not all of the Swedes are paragons of good character and/or common sense. Some content I would describe as "earthy." But there's no sex, and no significant bad language (if there was, it would have stuck in my memory). In English translation, the prose is straightforward, richly descriptive, and never bored me; the narrative pace is steady, neither white-knuckled nor particularly slow. Most of the major characters were likeable or at least sympathetic (though Robert I wanted to shake some sense into). There's no direct preaching of a message here; insofar as there is one, it arises from the storyline itself. The overall impression you take from it is admiration for the great majority of decent, hard-working people determined to build homes and better lives for themselves and their families in a new land. I was struck in places by their sense, and appreciation, of the vast contrast between the highly class-conscious, oppressive milieu of the old country and the much freer, more democratic ways of the young U.S. (It wasn't a surprise to learn, in researching Moberg for this review, that politically he was very sympathetic to the downtrodden, and wanted to replace Sweden's monarchy with a republic.) While I didn't pick up any sense that the author was necessarily a Christian himself, his treatment of the strong Christian faith of Danjel and some of the other immigrants came across as respectful. To me, the spiritual journey of the reformed prostitute Ulrika was really moving; and I read this at a time when I hadn't yet made a personal Christian commitment myself. (This book's title is a biblical allusion, from Exodus 3:8 which serves as an epigraph: "And I am come down to deliver them...and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.") From the bits and pieces I saw of the film adaptations, I know the later novels of the series have some depressingly grim and grisly content, dealing (among other things) with the bloody Sioux uprising of the early 1860s, and featuring the massacres at Sleepy Eye, New Ulm, and their environs, which don't tempt me to read the books. But, while I won't share any spoilers, this book does end on an upbeat and optimistic note. Tragically, following a losing battle with clinical depression in his later years, Moberg took his own life at the age of 74. But he left a legacy of genuine contribution to the world literature of historical fiction in the 20th century.
