Until this book and except for some of his political writings I've never much liked Sartre. The first exposure to him was in high school through three of his dramas. Read quickly and never seen performed, I wasn't impressed. The second was Nausea, an early novel also read in high school--I couldn't finish it. The third, in college, was the collection, Essays on Existentialism. I found myself in profound disagreement with his take on depth psychology. The fourth, in seminary, was Being and Nothingness. Here, as earlier with Nausea, I felt I was reading the symptomatology of a neurotic, not philosophy. Still, I did enjoy some of his political pronouncements and found myself in broad agreement with existentialist philosophy as it was attributed to him by other authors and in some of his essays. The Words, however, was a pleasant read. The very concept of essaying an autobiography of one's youth was intriguing. Here Sartre considers primarily his first ten years and the three most influential figures of his childhood: his widowed mother and her parents, the Schweitzers (yes, apparently Jean-Paul was distantly related to Albert, though he receives but scant mention herein). Of the three, most important was his grandfather, the great authority figure who, directly and indirectly, appears to have led young Jean-Paul to a career as a writer. Most of this book, however, is not about persons. Most of it appears to be an effort to describe a state of mind, Sartre's state of mind as a boy and, by implication, how that led to his being what he found himself to be at the time of his writing of this autobiography as a fifty-nine year old man. Here, naturally, one suspects a great deal of second-guessing, of the present overlaying the past--and indeed Sartre devotes a good deal of attention to the centrality of teleology to his developing sense of personhood and purpose. Only at the book's end does Sartre seriously deal with the influence of the Protestant and Catholic idealogies which were among the givens of his upbringing. I found this approach illuminating and wish there had been more of it.
