This is a strange one. The main relationship here isn't between the hero and heroine (Adam Deveril and his wife Jenny) but between the hero and his father-in-law: pushy millionaire Jonathan Chawleigh. Heyer has a wonderful talent for mixing hilarious charicatures with rather subtly drawn and insightful characters. Chawleigh is wonderfully well-intentioned, but he can't see that his generosity is over-bearing and insulting. Deveril is too proud, but it's understandable that he wouldn't want to be a dependent charity-case. Watching these two men alternately fight and finesse their way to a respectful understanding is gripping. But hang on - isn't this meant to be a romantic comedy? Well, there is the usual Heyer humour and stock characters: over-bearing mothers; stupid young men; impetuous beauties. But otherwise, there is not quite so much banter as one expects from Heyer, and no farce! Partly this is due to the difficult heroine: Jenny is plain, sensible, practical, humourless. I respect her, I feel sorry for her, I think I would like her if we met real life, but she's not a great romantic lead. This makes the romance painful and bittersweet. Jenny's love and devotion to her husband is more pathetic than anything else. Her stoicism in the face of his love for Julia is heroic, but so terribly self-abnegating that it begins to look like masochism. And her talent for manipulating him into comfort and happiness looks almost machiavellian to the modern reader, although perfectly understandable in a woman living in the regency period, whose entire happiness depends on her husband's good will. I must say that I'm glad that Heyer never does sex scenes. Deveril is still deeply in love with his sweetheart, Julia, for most of the book. And the early scenes between Jenny and Adam are mostly marked by awkwardness and anxiety. Yet she's pregnant long before they overcome either of these hurdles which means they must've been having some dreadfully dutiful intercourse. In the end, they never really do overcome entirely. They end happy (it's not a spoiler! This is a Heyer romance for goodness sake!), but the stress laid on the practical, not romantic nature of their love is rather melancholy.
