Having previously read and very much enjoyed some of Joy Williams’s short fiction, I’d been looking forward to reading this novel for a number of years. I’m not sure why it took me this long to reach for it (well, okay, books just tend to get buried in tbr lists). The central characters are a trio of teenage girls (Alice, Annabel, and Corvus), all three of them motherless and two of them parentless altogether. They are all portrayed in a somewhat one-dimensional way, each of them uniquely distant from her surroundings. These young women carry space around them that no one can fully penetrate, despite many varied attempts, both by each other and by the other people in their lives. Largely the book dwells on death, grief, and the ability to move past it or not. Characters either are obsessed with death, live isolated lives as a result of death, or quite simply die themselves. It’s an odd book. At times it read to me like it was written by a skilled short story writer transitioning to novel form, and yet Williams had written three previous novels so surely she would have figured the process out by this one. I can’t comment on those other novels, though, because I haven’t read them. The plot starts and stops, typically following one character for a chapter or two before switching to a different character. The plot never goes anywhere, which is not always a problem in a book. But at times it read like short stories sewn loosely into the larger text. Again, not necessarily a problem, except here it didn’t work for me because the sidetracks followed characters I wasn’t interested in. Williams introduces some of these characters past the halfway mark of the book, when I was just getting warmed up to the existing slate. I had a hard time caring for these people, and wished for the story to stay with the primary characters. Other GR reviewers have noted the formal nature of the dialogue, which distracted me a little at the start, chiefly in conversations between Alice and Corvus, but I grew used to it. Williams does a good job of showing us the American Southwest—at times rolling out the desert before us through a cinematic wide angle lens. She makes her points about environmentalism, the questionability of its effectiveness and the varied motivations of its adherents. It’s an open text and there is a lot one could take out of it. Perhaps Williams intended it to be this way. Perhaps she left that space around the characters so that there would be room for different types of readers to reach toward them. Unfortunately for me, despite my long reach, I could not get close enough to them. It’s been a long time since I felt so disappointed over not being able to fully connect to a book, over being so close yet ultimately leaving unfulfilled. It feels strange and unsettling, and yet that’s still something to take away from a book.
