Night Chills follows three very evil people, a billionaire, a rogue government researcher, and a rogue U.S. Army general, as they carry out a mass mind control experiment using a combination of subliminal messages delivered through various media sources (e.g. local TV stations, local newspapers, local radio) and a drug developed by the rogue government researcher Ogden Salsbury that "primes" the population so they are easier to program through the subliminal messaging, which is delivered after the drug is administered. The experiment is carried out on the entire population of ~400 people in the mountain mill town of Black River. Things go predictably awry, and the experiment turns into a fight for survival for a small group of townspeople who aren't affected by the drug and are still free to fight back. Don't read this book. Especially if you are female. This is probably the most misogynistic, viciously woman-hating piece of literature I have ever read. I'd like to say Koontz was just creating evil characters here who hated women, but he's done this before, notably in Demon Seed , which was just one long awful slog of a crazed home AI keeping the female house occupant prisoner, the AI having perverted thoughts about her, obsessing over her, trying to control her, etc for like 300 pages. So at this point it just seems like Dean Koontz hates women for real? As if that weren't enough to avoid this one, it also features multiple graphic scenes of rape, a graphic scene of brutal child murder that would never be published today, and a plot that's so moronic and unbelievable and that is executed like bad fan fiction. Seriously, this book is just one large trigger warning for so many people, and if Koontz tried to publish this today he would probably be canceled for all time, and justifiably in my opinion. This is a vile, disgusting, idiotic book, and the only reason I don't rate it one star is because the topic of subliminal messaging is one I'm interested in, and in all fairness aside from its horrible content it was slightly better-written than some other Koontz books I've read. But that's not saying much. Recommended for diehard Koontz fans only. All others should avoid it like the plague. P.S. This is the first review I've written in quite a while. Sorry about that guys (if anyone cares?). Things haven't been so great lately, so I just haven't had the energy to write reviews. Especially since a lot of the books I've yet to review were mostly crap. I mean, who wants to sit there for an hour writing a review for a book that didn't really even deserve the time I spent reading it, let alone the time it will take me to review it on top of that? Hope you guys are doing well. I hope to catch up on my reviews, but I'm not sure if/when I will. Can't promise anything. Whoa! It's like I've broken the fourth wall! I'm now talking directly to my review reader. Hi review reader! Thanks for reading this review. You're the best. Talk soon. Bye for now! :-)
