n 1999 when Richard Preston’s The Hot Zone: A Terrifying True Story was first published, I was driving between to teaching assignments and was listening to this book being read on the air. I never heard the first few minutes of any read nor all of that days reading. I thought I was hearing the latest Michael Crichton medical thriller. The parts I got to hear gave me far more chills than Andromeda Strain. My thing about science fiction is that I have to know how the monster is slain and how the good guys win. Still thinking it was fiction and by the wrong author, I spent years looking for copies of this book. Then I got all my misapprehensions corrected. I got and read a copy. Realizing it was not fiction, I read the scariest book. This was before many people had heard the word Ebola and before the nearly annual outbreaks including the recent one that brought a few cases to America. Yes this is history written in the style of journalism and therefor for popular consumption. But the reviewers who try to score it against some kind of technical or strict science bases are missing the point. Ebola is for real scary stuff. It is a horrible way to die and compared with even other fatal diseases it is hard to describe without being dramatic. As thrilling as the novel Andromeda Strain was- knowing what Ebola can and does do, and what extremes are necessary to study it make for way more than edge of the seat reading. The monster has not been slain and the good guys at best can regain some control. Otherwise well-meaning people; people smart enough to know that what was killing their monkeys in Reston, Virginia was serious, almost caused an outbreak in and around Washington DC. That is a simple statement and around it revolves the larger story. Mr. Preston has written the facts and with them comes drama. He style is not detached but it is what it needs to be to tell a story that- well take your pick, scares the willies outta ya, or reminds you to be humble in the face of what nature, bloody in tooth and claw and virus can do to mere humans.
