Set in Vienna, this book follows Gisela and her talented but penniless father who, after his wife’s death, has just started performing again as a pianist. After one of his performances, Gisela is left alone at the hotel and wanders through the gardens at night—only to run into a mysterious man who saves her from being spotted by some troublesome drunken students. They end up falling for each other even without knowing what each other look like. The man’s name is Miklos and it turns out that he’s a Hungarian prince! He’a forbidden to marry a woman without a title, let alone related to a musician (apparently it’s not respected in Hungary—it’s considered an eccentric hobby by the upper class, not a vocation kegkkrhkrhl). After a stolen kiss and some secret meetings, Miklos tries to leave her since they’re doomed never to be together! But fate steps in when Miklos happens to be at the same party as Gisela when a solider can’t take no fit an answer. Mad that she rejected him, he demands satisfaction from Gisela’s father in a rapier duel. Miklos steps in and wins against the solider, but not before Gisela’s father gets wounded badly enough to injure his arm and prevent him from playing piano. But that’s okay! Because Miklos decides to marry Gisela anyway, even if he has to abdicate. And then, in a classic Hail Mary play, a solicitor shows up to reveal that Gisela’s father has inherited the title of Marquis, a tin of money, and a few estates in England since the last of his family passed away and he’s the only surviving relative. Now Miklos and Gisela can get married with the approval of his family, and sing and waltz and live happily ever after. The plot was pretty romantic in nature, but I just couldn’t stand Miklos. At times he let his own self-pity and suffering get out of hand and lashed out at her (verbally), and that really threw me out of the narrative because Gisela was still in the dark about who he was. Ugh. But I liked the romantic subplot of Gisela’s father and the woman who had loved him all these years, finally getting her chance to be with him. And all the piano performances and Vienna as a backdrop was a nice change of pace for a setting. Show more
