2021-05-05 Not sure why I had not gotten around to writing a review of this crucial book previously. But what prompts me now, is the growing clarity of how pervasive the errors/evils of this book... and that I am watching this very neat video on the book by Jordan Peterson: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j_MXS... One of the points he makes is that Marx & Engels never really consider the problem of the environment and man's struggle for life within it. Not sure I thought of that before, but it is absolutely true. Peterson lists 10 points about the book like that that are very insightful. My main focus about reading this book and observing history over the last 50 years or so is the amazing death and destruction that this book contributed to and how it is almost beyond comprehension. Certainly most people CAN'T really conceive of this much evil. The general estimate that seems in the middle ballpark is about 100 MILLION deaths in the 20th century alone. This estimate is from "The Black Book of Communism" by several leftist authors who were pro-socialist. Others estimate way higher and some lower. Another one I like a lot is "Death by Government" by RJ Rummel. Peterson's point about Marx/Engle's key underlying message: "implementing a Dictatorship of the Proletariat via violent means" - how can anyone possibly think that that is a good/moral/beneficial ideal or plan for mankind? Or that it would NOT end very badly? Notes: 1. The dates I have read the book below are all approximate (give or take a year or two) when I am sure I read the whole book. But I have for sure referred back to it many, many times over the last 50 years or so, for particular parts that I wanted/needed to look up. 2. The edition I chose for this review was random. There are sooooo many, I don't think it really matters. I have at least three or four editions in my library, one of which I bought in E. Berlin in 1977 in a communist bookshop, published by "International Publishers" in the "Little Marx Library" edition. It's right next to the "On The Theory of Marxism" book by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin in the "Little Lenin Library" edition I got there then too that is now on my bookshelf.
