Along with Denis Johnson's Jesus' Son, this collection of short stories was the best I've read in at least the last couple of years. There are two ways I tend to read short fiction — one being reading only one or two stories a day and spacing the book out over a longer period of time — and the another being to just rip through it in a day or two: depending on the length of the book of course. In this case it was the latter. Simply put — I was hooked. Even though I know very little about West Virginia and couldn't relate to the rural way of life depicted in these stories, it really didn't matter. If anything it just made me love them more —getting to read about folk that generally don't get much of a look in, and are a world away from the city dwellers of L.A. or New York for example. Twelve stories featured here, and they were for me at the very least really good. Three or four of them I thought were damn near perfection when it comes to the short story, and I've already read them again. It really was quite sad reading up on Breece D'J Pancake: who I hadn't even heard of this time last month, after reading a really interesting forward by the late American essayist and short-story writer James Alan McPherson, who knew Pancake personally — and yes, like others have mentioned: McPherson even says so here, that Pancake's writing style was in a large part derived from Hemingway. He describes him as very much a lover of the outdoors: fishing, hunting, hiking, but through heavy drinking he became a melancholy man that was in great need of contact with other people. "You may keep the books or anything Breece gave you — he loved to give but never learned to receive. He never felt worthy of a gift — being tough on himself. His code of living was taught to him by his parents — be it Greek, Roman or whatever, it's just plain old honesty. God called him home because he saw too much dishonesty and evil in this world and he couldn't cope" — letter from Mrs. Helen Pancake. Had Breece not taken his own life aged just 26 then who knows what he could have gone on to achieve as a writer. Just going by this book alone — this kid had bucket loads of talent.
