This was good, but not an easy read. It's a lot more than the love story of Leigh (daughter of the head of Barron Studios and set to take over someday, and Matthew, former streetwise orphan and Vietnam War hero and bartender with screenplay writer aspirations and a shot at movie stardom. A lot of dark themes, including incest. Also, some characters needed more depth to them, more background info, including the h, Leigh's mother, who was apparently cold as ice with Leigh's father, Joshua (and no one can blame her for that) but hot stuff with other men. And Joshua Barron, studio head and movie mogul was in reality a SICK man who was obsessive/possessive of his daughter to the point of incest, which he cleverly stopped when she started getting her period. (I picked up on that meaning: wouldn't want to risk starting a child/grandchild, would we???) There are a lot of sleazy characters here (true of Hollywood in real life, sad to say), along with Joshua. There's Leigh's half-sister Marissa, a talented actress who destroys her life with her jealousy, vindictiveness, promiscuity and drug addiction, her equally messed up on-and-off boyfriend, Jeff, friend-turned-enemy to the H, Matthew, as well as the mobster behind the scenes, and the actor with a criminal past. They all get their comeuppance, but not enough for all the havoc they wreak. There were too many flaws in the story, which take away from it but still don't lessen your interest. Leigh's reaction to finding out the truth about what her father did to her (she'd repressed it for years) as well as all his machinations to keep her and Matthew apart are much less volatile than they should have been, notwithstanding Joshua's health crisis. Also, both she and Matthew contribute enough to their troubles by not really understanding each other, not trusting enough, not willing to compromise or work harder, too quick to think the worst, giving up too easily. Too much wasted time. Also, the OM in the story was that rarity, a good guy without being a wimpy simp, as so often happens. I found it sad that, after offering Leigh his both his love and marriage, Kalil was relegated to the friend zone, (even becoming Mathew's friend) and seemed content to stay there, with his unrequited love. Considering how charming, handsome and wealthy he was, that was a complete waste! He should have found a real love and been happy. And the character of Tina (one of my favorites) should have told her husband about the horrible thing that happened to her before they met. I would have loved to see him play White Knight and beat the crap out of that piece of crap guy (despite his mob ties). But I had to settle for the garbage heap to get the punishment he deserved in another way. A flawed book, but still a good one, that keeps you turning pages without skipping.
