Jude Watson does an excellent job of continuing the Jedi Apprentice series, this time telling a psudeo-mystery with plenty of adventure to it. What makes this book work so well is the Obi-Wan storyline. Following his character journey the last three books has been delightful, and seeing him have to operate without his master is really well executed. He is the driving force in uncovering the mystery of the Queen's health, and while it is a very simple and obvious mystery, it works well for the target reading demographic while adults can also enjoy it. It also seems very competent as well. While some authors might go for a very simple story overall, Watson decides to write a political storyline with some surprising depth! The planet Gala is having it's first ever election with three main candidates: the current Prince, a people's populist, and a career bureaucrat. Shockingly, Watson gives the pros and cons of each one of their stories, and actually ends the book in a way that I think is not only realistic but also much more complex than other authors would go for. The Qui-Gon storyline is just ok here. His search for Elan is fine, and the Elan side of the story is a bit interesting, but not enough is done with it...and Qui-Gon himself doesn't get any interesting thoughts here. He has a hint of a great theme about his Legacy going on in the first chapter of the book, but it is quickly abandoned and not addressed until the final chapter. This is minimally acceptable thematically, but Watson (and the series in general) has done better. Had this been further addressed better in his chapters, Watson would have earned a few more points. This is the third book in a row where Obi-Wan has been captured at one point and imprisoned. It makes sense that he's young and naive and makes mistakes, but I think it will get old fast if done again soon. The book does have an excellent climatic sequence that ties up the storyline well, and boy does Watson move it quick. At 130 pages, this book can easily be read in 1-2 sittings. I was also surprised at the level of vocabulary in this book. Watson uses a few advanced words that make this worth quite the read for younger readers. Overall, I really enjoyed this book. It's not on the level of Books 1 or 3, but it's a solid entry on its own. This is exactly the type of storytelling I'm enjoyin in the kids books and am eager to continue on next month. 8.5 out of 10!
