As research for a novel I'm writing, I'm reading detective fiction and ripping off everything of value. My story takes place in L.A. of the early '90s, but I'm traveling to all eras and hiring all types of sleuth as tour guide. Published in 1966, One Fearful Yellow Eye is the eighth Travis McGee mystery by John D. MacDonald. Most of the book takes place away from Bahia Mar in Fort Lauderdale as McGee arrives in Chicago to help an ex-lover named Gloria "Glory" Doyle Reis locate the estate of her widowed surgeon husband, which he mysteriously liquidated prior to his death. As with much of Elmore Leonard's output, I wouldn't call this a great novel. Like Leonard, MacDonald is a master who offers readers the chance to hang out with a great friend. -- Chicago in November provides a strong contrast to McGee's tropical haunts in Fort Lauderdale. Glory's home on the lake offers a very different type of beach than McGee is accustomed to. I was quite relieved that L.A. caught a break and an author of MacDonald's perception focused his radar on Chicago. Statistically it is probably the one city in the world where the most people have been killed in arguments over professional athletes. The middle of the city, where nine bridges cross a large sewage canal called the Chicago River, is beginning to look as if Martians had designed it. For untold years the city has limped along under what might well be the most arrogant, ruthless, and total political control in the country. In a kind of constant hysterical spasm of self-distaste, the city uglifies itself further each year by chopping away more trees and paving more areas for all those thousands of drivers who seem to have learned their art at Daytona. -- There's so much telling. The first 20% of the book is Glory telling Travis about her late husband, his children, his profession, his personal relationships and laying all the exposition for the events to come. Imagine the first 25 minutes of Star Wars being Obi-Wan Kenobi telling Luke all about the Empire and Darth Vader. Not even a Jawa wanders through. McGee is doing what he does best, collecting information before swinging into action, but it's a lot to wade through. I can't believe that people stand around their kitchens talking as much as Glory does. -- The other woman introduced in the first quarter of the book is Glory's twenty-five year old stepdaughter Heidi Geis Trumbill, an ice princess divorcee and artist who is acid to McGee's water base. I loved the way MacDonald made the two a study in a couple who are not each other's "type" and can't stand each other. Then they start to tolerate each other. Then they start to think about one another. By the end of the story, they can't think of being apart from each other. McGee is neither a fan of her attitude or her art and challenges her to prove she's an artist rather than a decorator by sketching a lamp. "Oh, you mean draw you a cow that looks like a cow?" she said with a poisonous and knowing smile. "Go ahead. Funny, but everybody I can think of right off the top of the head could sure God draw a fat realistic cow if they ever happened to want to. Hans Hoffman, Kline, Marca-Relli, Guston, Solomon, Rivers, Picasso, Kandinsky, Motherwell, Pollock. And you know it, baby. If you can't stand the heat, stay out of the kitchen. You dabblers bug me. You want the applause without all the thousands of hours of labor learning how to draw, how to make brush strokes, learning all the things that give painting some bite and bones even when you don't use any part of it. Go ahead, draw the lamp. Quick sketch. Prove I'm a jackass." She trotted over, took the pencil and made some quick lines, then stuck her tongue tip out of the corner of her mouth and drew a more careful line, then she got up and threw the pencil at the paper. It went bouncing after a chair. "Shit!" she said. "So I fake it. Everybody does. And I get away with it." "Suddenly I think I like you a little better, Mrs. Trumbill." Her smile was wan and strained. "I'm underwhelmed, Mr. McGee. People don't talk to me like that often." "Drenches out the glands, they say." She studied me. "I suppose it's an approach, actually. You get nasty to a girl and it shocks her so she gets hung up. Nice try." I gave her my most amiable grin. "Miss Pussycat, I have the feeling if some jolly experimental giant crammed us both buck naked into a one-man sleeping bag, we'd apologize to each other, get back to back, and try to get a little sleep." "And that too is an absolutely transparent pass, damn you." "Try me. You turn on my lights not at all, Miss Heidi." "I damned well could if I should ever develop a taste for huge dull muscular men, but I'm afraid I put all that behind me when I reached sixteen. Can't we please finish whatever it is you came for and break this off?" -- MacDonald's formula for these mysteries: a friend or friend-of-a-friend comes to McGee for help. Suggestions are made of nefarious or powerful interests trying to crush them. McGee gathers information for a long time. No other author (though I've read that Dick Francis does this very well) weaves intricate financial crime into their plots like MacDonald. A Florida real estate developer would be proud. McGee gets distracted by a woman also involved in the mystery. McGee finally goes to talk to the wrong character and shows them he knows too much. This character then tries to murder McGee, always in a remote location, usually knocking him unconscious first. -- Terrific climax and villains. MacDonald ultimately uses the current events of the day to propel his story forward very well. I just would've liked more action throughout the story. The massive amounts of telling got long in the tooth for me.
