I really like reading about 1930s America, modern history, and interesting individuals. I also like coming of age stories, the supernatural, and obscure/unknown books, so this novel sounded like something I’d really like. And to be honest, I enjoyed it. I especially liked the middle portion of the book, after I accepted this story as a fantasy or dream where the laws of the universe and simple logic do not apply (at all). Yes, the main characters in this book are primarily historical figures, and the broader context is rooted in a real place during a real time period, but the situations, technology, and even human societies around them are distorted, imagined, and muddy. I appreciated the emotional undercurrent and sadness embedded in this story which was really about a boy facing the frightful and impending possibility of his own early death in the approaching war. To me, this sadness is what drove the book and made the story compelling, even with all of its pseudo science fiction and witty humor. This unsettling sentiment of the story is intensified and juxtaposed by the protagonist’s youthfulness and energy. Although he has unique visions of strange and abstract dimensions that he is able to use to do just about anything, the author makes this boy rather ordinary and irrepressible, which makes the reader especially anxious for him and saddened by the possibility of an unusually violent death (as the fatalities of soldiers and civilians during the Iwo Jima and Okinawa campaigns were). However, it’s in this ending and potential fatality that made me not rate the book as high as I would have. The ending is strange and perplexing. I will not share it here in order to not give it away. But I do want to address it in my review, as it makes the reader question how this author views people in general. By the finale of the story, there is this subtle implication that we Americans have a secret, hidden, special, blonde-haired/blue eyed, and perpetually 19 or 20 year old boy who is silently working for our country and pulling some pretty profound strings behind the scenes. We can find comfort not in this young man’s character or capacity to love humanity, but in his highly evolved mind and almost divine charisma. What is odd, is that this is not presented to the reader with any sense of irony or question. Further, the author even addresses the concept of eugenics, stating pretty directly that this boy is meant to evolve humankind forward and allow his offspring to populate the world with likeminded blonde haired and blue eyed boys. To support this, let me share a direct quote: “In time, we shall put to rigorous tests Dr. Mendel’s laws, vague as they are when it comes to seriously applied eugenics. Can you yourself have children? Yes, and I would encourage you to disseminate yourself as widely as possible.” pg. 251. With this encouragement it’s not surprising then that the author presents Charles Lindbergh as an upstanding pacifist and implies that antisemitism would not permeate or influence 20th century German history without there being a First World War. It’s the continuous emphasis of the protagonist’s youth, blonde hair, and unimaginable intelligence with magical mental capacities, that makes me uneasy. So many millions of people suffered during World War II. So many diverse peoples’ lives were either taken or put at significant risk. To make a narrative so steeped in broad history and humanity that doesn’t acknowledge the universal innocence and magic of each individual and anonymous human soul on Earth (just as human beings are, without magical evolution or blue eyes), makes me think the author might unintentionally idealize only certain types of people with particular physical characteristics. With that being said, I did enjoy the book and the very universal human emotions expressed in it. I liked all of the historical references, vivid descriptions of scenery, and overall anti-war message. I just wish there was a little bit more of the anti-war part, as well as more descriptions of the protagonist’s ordinary existence. Part of the book’s grip on me, was its ability to make me continually want the boy to return to his ordinary childhood. I wanted him to go back and listen to Artie Shaw, eat real hamburgers in the afternoon outside, get far away from his adult girlfriend, and play baseball. I loved the author’s little references to the boy’s childhood in the 1930s, such as comparing a loud noise in one scene to Jean Krupa’s drumming. It helps demonstrate how war impacts generations of young people. It emphasizes just how devastatingly young many victims of war are, and how infuriating it is that humanity allows modern wars to continue. To me, this is the most important part of the story.
