11: The desert is indescribable. Reality rushes into it, rapid light. The gaze melts. Yet this morning. Very young, I was already crying over humanity. With every new year I could see it dissolving in hope and in violence. Very young, I would take my mother’s Meteor and drive into the desert. There I spent entire days, nights, dawns. Driving fast and then slowly, spinning out the light in its mauve and small lines which like veins mapped a great tree of life in my eyes. 11: Very young I had no future like the shack on the corner which one day was set on fire by some guys who ‘came from far away,’ said my mother who had served them drinks. Only one of them was armed, she had sworn to me. Only one among them. All the others were blond. My mother always talked about men as if they had seen the day in a book. She would say no more and go back to her television set. I could see her profile and the reflection of the little silver comb she always wore in her hair and to which I attributed magical powers. Her apron was yellow with little flowers. I never saw her wearing a dress. 20: In the desert there is the pursuit of breaks clouds sometimes make. Sometimes they are like little lead pellets the sun shoots toward the horizon to signify tomorrow’s coming future. I am well acquainted with lead, copper, cartridges and all weapons. I know weapons. Any desert girl learns at a very young age how to hold a weapon and to drive a car. Any young girl learns that what glitters under the sun can also hurt or excite feeling so utterly that shadow itself turns to crimson. 32: Here I am, motionless in the room, watching what is going on in the street. Nothing. Only reality. Oh to take my leave! Some day I will exit reality, the scandal of it. Beauty is before reality. 38: I would stop at that motel run by a friend of my mothers. I would tell of my tiredness and need to sleep. She would offer me a room. I would go back to the Meteor for my bag. In the glove compartment the revolver would be hot. I would take out my composition book and the pen. All morning, I would write. The air-conditioner would be noisy. All around me, reality: the see-through curtain, the color of the walls, a superfluous watercolor, a television set, my body still in front of the mirror. I would have the impression of an ultimate understand- ing of the night, of the desert and of the succession of intimate chances that come up in us like a law of reality. My hand would be slow. Humanity would be unable to repeat itself. I would exist alert in the questioning. 51: It was a December morning, of a spectral whiteness which eroded objects. She was thinking slowness while with her gaze she abstracted the book’s equilibrium. And it fell over in the slow motion of silence arousing the throbbing desire that never quit her. Horizontally, the book resembled a tombstone: a name, a title and the covers brightness. The universe was a risk. She was a minimal presence, a misted space in front of the window. A marker perhaps between this book and its becoming in another language. This remained precisely to be seen. 56: To apply oneself to understanding, to overlook nothing despite the wanton flow of words. Arouse event. Yes, a dialogue. Force Melanie into conversation. Sit her down at poolside and make her talk. Put color in her hair, features on her face. Yes, a sumptuous dialogue, an unreasonable expense of words and expressions, a suite, built around an idea, which would drift to the point where Maude Laures would have the time to quiedy tour the Motel, to penetrate the mother s and Lorna’s room. A dialogue that would allow her, with Melanie carried away by words, to travel by her side in the Meteor, to open the glove compartment, to touch the revolver, to leaf through the maintenance notebook. 67: Every object reflects a harsh light, an evidence of light which exhausts the gaze. And so most of the people who use the pool are soon transformed into pillars of salt, fixed in time, eyes closed, head tilted to eternity, arms and legs heavy producing around the body the impression of an animal species. 81: She must be fifty years old. Her blue eyes spy life all around which like at every dusk lingers in mauve forever [...] One can also think that Laure Angstelle lives in a time-frame that suspends reality, that sometimes reverses it into the dream the same way this can happen with words when, making use of them, one believes one is entering the unspoken of the world and that from there one can, with memory liberated, give desire forms unthought-of till now, capable of subducting us from blindness. 89: Kathy Kerouac’s voice was in itself a presence, a sound sequence of space and time which like perfume wafted through the rooms, the hallways, the apartment. The entire Motel was permeated with her grave and melodic voice, a voice which, when no attention was payed to the words, could bring to mind a motet. Every vibration of the vocal chords gave the impression of a sound originated in multiple mouths. No matter what the situation, the voice adapted itself and what was urgent, was, what was comical became so and what could threaten would take shape behind the voices veil. ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ Kathy Kerouac knew the power of her voice. It was, she said, her ‘golden thing,’ an amulet protecting her against all disorders of the spirit. Her voice was a charm that could stop violence and transform crudeness into courtesy, foolishness into finesse. So Kathy Kerouac was under the impression that nothing was ever altogether dangerous, the feeling that no word spoken could soil her world. ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ Given that her voice had such an effect on living beings, Kathy Kerouac did not always pay attention to what she said. Because for her the merit of words was in producing that resonance which deep in the throat had her tuning the most beautiful instruments, hearing the most faraway harmonies. She would choose her words for the length of the vowels, the mimic of the lips that could, if the breath, if the tongue sought to, reproduce the maddest laments and imitate, this being the case, her sense of worry. 133: — I can reproach you for what is in your book. — By what right? — Reading you gives me every right. — But as a translator you have none. You've chosen the difficult task of reading backwards in your language what in mine flows from source. — But when I read you, I read you in your language. — How can you understand me if you read me in one language and simultaneously transpose into another what cannot adequately find its place in it? How am I to believe for a single moment that the landscapes in you won’t erase those in me? — Because true landscapes loosen the tongue in us, flow over the edge of our thought-frame. They settle into us. 134: - I think there is always a first time, a first time when it must be acknowledged that words can reduce reality to its smallest unit: matter of fact.’ Do you remember those words? 141: Light is tricky and as well harsh. Its progress can be observed upon skins but one can also lose the sense of reality when it traverses consciousness, brutal, unremitting, distancing points of reference and capable too of fixing them in eternity. Light subdues the gaze, dismisses the gaze, thanks it. No one escapes dismissal. ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ In the desert light bruises reality, shreds the fine fabric of colors every which way, suppresses shapes. We are unprotected against light for it is always when we are filled with wonder that light assails and abstracts from our gaze the infinitely precious relationship we entertain with reality. Thus at the very moment we believe ourselves in full possession of the real, there it goes exploding under our eyes, falling out on our shoulders, yoke of jade. 154: Maude Laures put her lenses in, got ready in front of the mirror. She suddenly had the feeling she was soon going to be nothing but a resonance instrument. She saw herself by turns lyre, theorbo, viola. The mauve decomposed, was recomposed, palimpsest, in her eyes, an air. ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ She opened the drawer, took out a white shirt, got dressed, looked at a bit of reality through the window, confused to revolt and revolver in her head, went back to the mirror, put on some lipstick, then went and sat in front of the silent television set. Lit a little cigar.
