“You are a very remarkable person, Miss Woodruff. I feel deeply ashamed not to have perceived it earlier.” She said, “Yes, I am a remarkable person.” But she said it without pride; without sarcasm; with no more than a bitter simplicity” (Fowles 269). One of the most formidable books I've read in my youth, this was truly spellbinding and gorgeous. I was first exposed to John Fowles' masterpiece while I was an undergraduate student. I read other 19th century novels by the Bronte Sisters, Jane Austen, and early 20th century novelists such as DH Lawrence and EM Forster in which I felt like John Fowles riffed on in writing "The French Lieutenant's Woman". With each chapter beginning with references to social Darwinism, the nature of fossils, and a postmodern approach that makes Fowles god as his narrative unfolds- the biggest and most pleasurable takeaway is the heart of the novel is the love story (or one sided obsession) that paleontologist Charles Smithson has for the elusive Sarah Woodruff. Set in Lyme Regis towards the latter half of the 19th century, Sarah is seen as a mysterious specter who often waits for her lover to return at the cliff walls on the sea. She was a former governess with a past that's been created and speculated by others who project their sexual repressions towards her: "Sarah was intelligent, but her real intelligence belonged to a rare kind; one that would certainly pass undetected in any of our modern tests of the faculty. It was not in the least analytical or problem solving, and it is no doubt symptomatic that the one subject that had cost her agonies to master was mathematics. Nor did it manifest itself in the form of any particular vivacity or wit, even in her happier days. It was rather an uncanny—uncanny in one who had never been to London, never mixed in the world—ability to classify other people’s worth: to understand them. She had some sort of psychological equivalent of the experienced horse dealer’s skill—the ability to know almost at the first glance the good horse from the bad one; or as if, jumping a century, she was born with a computer in her heart. I say her heart, since the values she computed” (Fowles 61). Charles, engaged to the vapid Earnestina, becomes attracted to Sarah's willingness to flout society's traditions, and he puts his carefully sealed world at risk to be with her. Sarah's employer is the vengeful Mrs. Poultney, and Sarah is putting herself at risk. There is also a subplot Fowles has written that represents the modern 20th century relationship: it’s through the actions of servants Sam and Mary that serve thematically as openness and the freedom to make choices for themselves. Like Sarah, they’re both scorned by their employers. The book is a masterful, glorious and evocative riff on the Victorian and 19th century novel. It's lush, and haunting and often reminds me of Jane Austen's "Persuasion" since that's also set in Lyme. Like Anne Elliott, Sarah is looking for her love- or is it freedom? Fowles writes a novel that is a postmodern, playful riff on the Victorian novel. He writes the narrative unfolding as a 20th century voyeur that is making fun of Victorian social mores and its hypocrisies: "The novelist is still a god, since he creates (and not even the most aleatory avant-garde modern novel has managed to extirpate its author completely); what has changed is that we are no longer the gods of the Victorian image, omniscient and decreeing; but in the new theological image, with freedom our first principle, not authority. I have disgracefully broken the illusion? No. My characters still exist, and in a reality no less, or no more, real than the one I have just broken. Fiction is woven into all, as a Greek observed some two and a half thousand years ago. I find this new reality (or unreality) more” (Fowles 106). One of my favorite lines is how Fowles makes fun of Earnestina: "Ernestina was to outlive all her generation. She was born in 1846. And she died on the day that Hitler invaded Poland" (35). I've watched the immortal film adaptation directed by Karel Reisz and starring Meryl Streep and Jeremy Irons, both on the brink of international superstardom numerous times. While not exactly the book- it's a Harold Pinter script that playfully pays tribute to Fowles' work, with a stirring score by Carl Davis. Also, it's Madame Streep's first leading role complete with a sylphlike British accent and beautiful costumes. Both are irresistible, and the book's one of those legendary classics that sits with you. For film adaptations I felt that come close to this- "All this and Heaven Too" (1940) stars Bette Davis as a repressed governess during the same time period. Charles Boyer co stars as the man she loves. Even Davis’ eternal Now Voyager complete with a vengeful mother has sinilarities. Of course, for me the film closest to "The French Lieutenant's Woman" in spirit is the immortal classic "The Piano"- directed by Jane Campion and starring Holly Hunter and Anna Paquin in their Oscar winning performances. When Fowles writes such language such as this that describes Sarah, you feel that because Meryl Streep is so identified with the part, you might as well be describing the actress at work: “Most women of her period felt the same; so did most men; and it is no wonder that duty has become such a key concept in our understanding of the Victorian age—or for that matter, such a wet blanket in our own: “But I can guess who it is. It must be poor Tragedy.” “Tragedy?” “A nickname. One of her nicknames.” “And what are the others?” “The fishermen have a gross name for her" (16). Meryl Streep has said herself that in playing Sarah, “I didn’t feel I was living it,” Streep said on the Graham Norton Show. “You always want to do something better after the fact. I’m giving myself an out, but part of it was, the structure of it was sort of artificial because I was the actress playing the French Lieutenant’s Woman. At the same time I was an American actress playing a British woman.” According to this Guardian article- she seemed too hard on herself because the character is complicated. I disagree- I think like Sarah herself, Marvelous Meryl Streep is equally sublime. They both can't do any wrong. The Guardian Article: Meryl Streep on "The French Lieutenant's Woman": https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016...
