I was browsing through my Kindle and stumbled upon this book (which I’d had for quite some time but, for some reason, never got around to reading). As far as Catherine Coulter books go, this one is actually very good. The hero, Alex, isn’t too much of a dickhead—which is saying something for a bodice ripper. Yes, there’s an almost-rape scene (unfortunately, so so common in older romances), and he’s very much the quintessential alpha male. But compared to others in the genre, he’s relatively tolerable. The plot? Absolutely bonkers. Giana is sent to Rome by her mother, Aurora, supposedly to learn “certain facts of life.” Giana is an heiress being pursued by a fortune-hunter, and Aurora, in an attempt to open her daughter’s eyes, asks a family friend to show her how suffocating married life can be... and what life is like for “fallen women.” Vague instructions, to say the least. The result? Giana is dragged to a brothel and spends two months interacting with clients and watching the “carnal acts” (thank you, Mommy Dearest!). The grand finale? She's forced into a virgin auction—because of course—and bought by none other than Alex (whom she met once at the brothel, in disguise). Her uncle was supposed to “rescue” her by winning the auction, but Alex beat him to it. She’s nearly assaulted, but the uncle steps in just in time. Needless to say, Giana develops serious trust issues, and we get to watch her battle those for the rest of the book. That said, I really enjoyed the historical details sprinkled throughout. My usual gripe with Coulter’s books is how American all her characters sound, even when they’re supposed to be English. IMO, she should just stick to American characters—it’s what she does best. Also, the scene transitions are jarring. Coulter tends to cut from one moment to another with no warning, which makes the pacing feel choppy. Still, Evening Star is a pretty good read. You just have to accept Coulter’s style and be in the right headspace for the darker themes and trigger warnings. If you’re a fan of old-school, high-drama historicals with a side of madness, this might be your thing. Rating: 3.75/5 – bonkers but entertaining, with just enough heart to balance the chaos.
