The casino where the first James Bond adventure begins is called “Casino Royale” for a very simple reason — because it is located in Royale-les-Eaux, a fading resort town near Dieppe on the coast of northern France. It is a surprisingly déclassé locale, one might think, for a James Bond novel – not the sunny beaches of Monaco, but rather the grey mists of the windswept Norman shoreline. Yet that touch of the noir -ish gives an added degree of authenticity to Casino Royale , the 1953 novel with which Ian Fleming launched the career of the world’s most famous secret agent. Fleming worked in British Naval Intelligence during the Second World War, and therefore he knew a thing or two about the world of espionage. As the war ended, giving way to a Cold War between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, there was heightened interest among the reading public in Western countries regarding what their intelligence agencies were doing to protect democracy. Fleming, in short, had the good fortune of releasing his James Bond novels into a world of readers who were eager to learn what they could about the secret world of spies – particularly if that information could be relayed via the medium of a sexy and action-packed novel. Casino Royale , as the first of the James Bond novels, introduces the reader to a number of the storytelling archetypes that will become de rigueur in one Bond story after another. After an in medias res opening chapter that takes place at the novel’s title casino, Fleming takes us back to British Secret Intelligence headquarters in London, where “M” (code name for the director of MI-6) receives a dossier regarding a proposed plan to neutralize one “Le Chiffre” (“The Number”), a Frenchman who is a Soviet spy, influencing trade-union activities in Alsace-Lorraine. As Le Chiffre is a compulsive gambler, who has been spending Soviet espionage funds on both his gambling habit and an array of organized-crime activities, the plan presented by Station S of the British Secret Service is as follows: send Bond to Royale, and have him ruin Le Chiffre by defeating him in a high-stakes gambling match. His embezzlement from the U.S.S.R. having thus been made clear to Soviet authorities, Le Chiffre will then be eliminated by Soviet SMERSH agents, saving the British the trouble. SMERSH (СМЕРШ), by the way, was a real-life Soviet counterintelligence agency; it was established by Stalin, and it stood for Смерть шпио́нам ( Smert' shpiónam , “Death to Spies”). My response to Section S's master plan for neutralizing Le Chiffre was: Really? British Intelligence has been the world’s finest espionage service since Sir Francis Walsingham was protecting Queen Elizabeth the First from a wide array of would-be assassins, and this is the best plan that they can come up with? Give an undercover operative a sizable bankroll of pounds sterling, and have him out-gamble a gambler? It seems evident that this weak plot element of Casino Royale is introduced so that Fleming can later share with us his considerable knowledge of the fine points of high-stakes casino gambling. Bond learns, upon accepting the assignment, that he will be assisted by René Mathis, a top agent for France’s Deuxième Bureau. That news pleases him. He further learns that he will also be assisted by a woman named Vesper Lynn from his own country’s intelligence service. He is distinctly not pleased by that news: “And then there was this pest of a girl. He sighed. Women were for recreation. On a job, they got in the way and fogged things up with sex and hurt feelings and all the emotional baggage they carried around. One had to look out for them and take care of them.” At a later point in the novel, when a woman agent seems to have been kidnapped, Bond indulges in more misogynist musings: “These blithering women who thought they could do a man’s work. Why the hell couldn’t they stay at home and mind their pots and pans and stick to their frocks and gossip and leave men’s work to the men?” Well, “Good God, 007!” – as “M” has been known to say when he is impatient with his ace secret agent. And yet I can’t help thinking that there may be something of a “meta” element to Bond’s seemingly bottomless misogyny – as I am reminded when, in the second chapter of Casino Royale , the reader meets M’s administrative assistant, Miss Moneypenny. “Miss Moneypenny,” the book’s narrator states, “would have been desirable but for eyes which were cool and direct and quizzical.” It is passages like that make me wonder whether, in presenting the oh-so-sexist mind of James Bond, Fleming just might be having us on. During his time in British Naval Intelligence, Fleming would have known many agents like Moneypenny – smart, courageous, able women who risked and in many cases gave their lives for Great Britain and democracy. It is as if Fleming is saying, subtly, that any man who would look at Moneypenny only in terms of her potential desirability, who would fail to appreciate her intelligence and her gift for observation – or, in other words, any man who would think about women the way James Bond does – is a bloody fool for thinking that way. Bond may not like working with a woman colleague, but he does like the S section’s scheme for gambling Le Chiffre into a traitor’s grave: “Above all, he liked it that everything was one’s own fault. There was only oneself to praise or blame. Luck was a servant and not a master. Luck had to be accepted with a shrug or taken advantage of up to the hilt. But it had to be understood and recognized for what it was and not confused with a faulty appreciation of the odds, for, at gambling, the deadly sin is to mistake bad play for bad luck.” Bond likes the scheme because of his history of good luck with cards and with women: “[H]e was honest enough to admit that he had never yet been made to suffer by cards, or by women. One day, and he accepted the fact, he would be brought to his knees by love or by luck. When that happened, he knew that he too would be branded with the deadly question mark he recognized so often in others, the promise to pay before you have lost: the acceptance of fallibility.” At the casino, Bond meets Felix Leiter, a CIA agent from Texas, and likes him at once: “Bond reflected that good Americans were fine people and that most of them seemed to come from Texas.” Readers of the series already know that Leiter will play a vitally important role in many of the novels – one that reflects the “special relationship” between the governments, and the intelligence services, of Great Britain and the United States of America. Part of why people who are interested in reading Fleming’s James Bond novels might want to start with Casino Royale is because of the narrator’s s description of Bond as Bond looks at his reflection in the mirror while getting ready for the gambling match with Le Chiffre: His grey-blue eyes looked calmly back with a hint of ironical inquiry, and the short lock of hair which would never stay in place slowly subsided to form a thick comma above his right eyebrow. With the thin vertical scar down his right cheek, the general effect was faintly piratical. Not much of Hoagy Carmichael there, thought Bond…. Readers can decide for themselves whether this description best matches Sean Connery, David Niven, George Lazenby, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton, Pierce Brosnan, Daniel Craig, or some other actor. One surprise from Casino Royale is how much Fleming focuses on what Bond eats and drinks. After meeting Leiter, Bond orders a drink – one that I suppose is shaken-not-stirred. “Three measures of Gordon’s, one of vodka, half a measure of Kina Lillet. Shake it very well until it’s ice-cold, then add a large thin slice of lemon-peel.” Later, over dinner with Vesper, Bond orders a Taittinger Blanc de Blanc Cru 1943 – “probably the finest champagne in the world,” as he tells Vesper – and then feels obligated to explain what he finds to be a pretentious statement: “You must forgive me,” he said. “I take a ridiculous pleasure in what I eat and drink. It comes partly from being a bachelor, but mostly from taking a lot of trouble over details. It’s very persnickety and old-maid-ish, really, but then when I’m working I generally have to eat my meals alone, and it makes them more interesting when one takes trouble.” And Casino Royale does have its surprises in terms of how Fleming delineates Bond’s character. When Vesper tells Bond that her officemates were jealous of her for getting to work with “a Double O,” Bond’s response is interesting. Suddenly the arrogance and the alpha-male posturing is all gone: Bond frowned. “It’s not difficult to get a Double O number if you’re prepared to kill people,” he said. “That’s all the meaning it has. It’s nothing to be particularly proud of. I’ve got the corpses of a Japanese cipher expert in New York and a Norwegian double agent in Stockholm to thank for being a Double O. Probably quite decent people. They just got caught up in the gale of the world…. It’s a confusing business, but if it’s one’s profession, one does as one’s told.” Gambling aficionados will enjoy the ups and downs of Bond’s baccarat game with Le Chiffre. There is much information regarding the intricacies of the game – even if I still think that Section S’s plan has to be one of the silliest in the history of espionage. There is also a grueling torture scene – one that is faithfully reproduced in the Daniel Craig film adaptation of Casino Royale . Many male readers will probably cringe their way through this scene, even whilst knowing that, as this is only the first of what will be many James Bond books, Bond’s got to get out of this ordeal somehow . A thought-provoking chapter titled “The Nature of Evil” shows Bond, who is then recovering from the injuries that he suffered at the hands of Le Chiffre, actually saying that he wants to resign! To Mathis, as he had earlier for Vesper, Bond recounts the story of the two men he killed to earn his “Double O” designation, and recalls having felt like the hero who had killed some villains. “But,” he adds, “when the hero Le Chiffre starts to kill the villain Bond and the villain Bond knows he isn’t a villain at all, you see the other side of the medal. The villains and the heroes get all mixed up….History is moving pretty quickly these days, and the heroes and villains keep on changing parts.” It is left to Mathis to remind Bond that there is a difference between democracies like France and Great Britain on the one hand, and dictatorships like the U.S.S.R. on the other hand – even if the distinction may not always seem clear when one is elbows-deep in the dirty work of espionage. Mathis reminds Bond of the importance of trying to maintain a moral conscience, even under the most difficult of circumstances, and adds a healthy bit of advice: “Surround yourself with human beings, my dear James. They are easier to fight for than principles.” I was not expecting to encounter something so thoughtful in the midst of the sex and sensationalism of a James Bond story. A long, seemingly idyllic interlude of erotic romance with Vesper follows – interlaced with the sense that something is wrong, that there is trouble in paradise. “People are islands,” Vesper says to Bond at one point, adding that “They don’t really touch. However close they are, they’re really quite separate – even if they’ve been married for 50 years.” The alert reader will have noticed long before this point that Fleming has diligently scattered many clues foreshadowing that Bond’s romance with Vesper will not end happily. Casino Royale started it all. Fleming wrote 14 Bond books; other novelists, licensed by Fleming’s estate, have written 36 more. There have been 27 Bond films to date, with the character being played by seven different actors. The films alone have generated over 7 billion dollars in box-office receipts. It is fascinating to reflect that it all began, in a literary sense, over a game of cards in a dreary little town on the northern coast of France.
