This book is the sequel to Oath Of Swords, which is the first book in the series. Although you can read War God's Own on its own, it's far better to read it after Oath of Swords, as you then will understand how the two main characters (Bahzell and Brandark) have ended up where they are. War God's Own is just as entertaining as Oath of Swords; I honestly don't know which of the two books I prefer. Of the two, Oath of Swords is funnier, but War God's Own is a little more complicated. Bahzell is now a Champion of Tomanak, the War God (having signed on after being nagged into it) and he's about to start having to deal with the reality of what this means. In Book One, Bahzell and Brandark were pretty much operating as free agents; now Bahzell has Responsibilities, and he's part of the Order of Tomanak, which comes as a bit of a nasty shock to him, and also to the Order. In fact, the only person who seems to be at all happy with the situation is Tomanak himself... So Bahzell has to deal with his new colleagues' reaction to having a hradani (Weber's sort of orc-equivalent, which is what Bahzell and Brandark are) Champion foisted on them by their deity, and he also has to deal with his own misgivings about being a part of a big organisation and his responsibilities and privileges in it. Once the initial bumps are dealt with, Bahzell and Co have to return to the hradani city states to deal with one of the Dark Gods who has set up a secret temple there, and this occupies the rest of the book. As side issues, we see a bit of unofficial diplomacy and trade negotiations; the hradani are poor and backward compared to the other Races of Man, but Bahzell's father (prince of one of the city-states) has a vision for the future and the drive and intelligence to make it work. How is this going to affect, or be affected by, Bahzell's sudden and unaccountable acquisition of Religion, especially since hradani in general (having been comprehensively used and betrayed by the gods in the past) have no use for gods either Light or Dark...
