I found the concept of this book an interesting approach using the dichotomy of Holmes’s investigative methods for truth with logic and the search of the mysteries of God based on faith. Kendrick, both the author and a pastor, has developed an interesting concept (although a little presumptive at times) stresses that "when we introduce the concept of mystery into our theological work, this does not mean that we cease employing our faculties in a thoroughly critical way. On the contrary it alerts us to the necessity at this point to employ our critical capacities to their utmost." Thus acknowledging that Sherlock Holmes and this reasonable approach to religion should be more appropriate than the believer who accepts faith without question. Kendrick suggests that a detective performs "rituals" and likens the typical closure of a detective story to a kind of final Judgement Day where the mystery is revealed and the guilty separated from the innocent. Thus he believes people read detective stories for the same reason they adopt religious doctrine...to crave internal order and cosmic understanding. "When a religion has lost it's hold upon men's hearts, they must have some other outlet for the sense of guilt...such as the detective novel." C. Day Lewis God's truth dwells within the detective story realm, which exhibits the worst of human nature yet in the figure of the detective we search for truth and whatever healing possible in the wrack of human hopes. The mystery of god has no other place but to dwell in both bright and sad mystery of ourselves. God has created us and knows us and thus will discover what we have done. "You may think a crime horrible because you could never commit it. I think it horrible because I could commit it. Perhaps by recognizing that our enemies are already inside us, silently harboring in our hearts. Simply a realistic assessment of our true natures we are not angelic beings we view ourselves to be , the detective reveals us for who we really are." Book lessons: 1) That our vision is sound; it is just that we have to train our hearts and minds to notice what we see. 2) That religion is found not only in the spectacular but in the simple, the ordinary, the plain and everyday, and that all is aglow with the mystery of awe. 3) That science and spirituality may dwell together in appreciation and wonder of the expanding mystery that the more we know, the more we learn. 4) That sometimes it is when God seems farthest away that the invitation to search, explore, and open ourselves to the divine becomes a new and creative beginning. 5) That nothing is little, that our lives are more significant than we can know, and that it is often through our pain and guilt that we encounter the hidden God 6) That the Book of Life contains not just judgment and justice, but mercy and forgiveness beyond measure.
