The Words, Jean-Paul Sartre's autobiographical work on childhood remembrance, is split into two parts - Reading & writing, and, looking back from the point of view of an almost sixty-year-old Sartre, moves on many levels. Told with a philosophical romanticism for the past, Sartre opens up about his first acquaintance with books, and about his first desire to become a writer, which, having been partly raised by a grandfather who was surrounded by a world books comes as little surprise. After first writing about his grandparents and their families, his story moved on to his parents, how they met, and of losing his father at a very young age. Little Jean was then seen as the centre of attention during his first ten years, and thus developed a selfishness, something which the older Sartre didn't try to hide from when writing this book. The young Sartre might not come across as wholey likeable, but at least the older Sartre was being honest, and not making himself out to be the model child. He even ended up being expelled from school for writing a bad dictation. Jean-Paul was a hermit in the company of other children, with his grandfather being the most influential person in his development, and he only fell in love with writing superficially and theatrically to begin with, simply to impress his watchers. But it's evidently clear that from a certain age he lived for books, and writers were seen as his best friends. His hyper-developed sensitivity to angst and boredom, even led a nine-year-old Sartre (yes just nine!) to start pondering on the existential holes in people's lives. And the rest, as they say, is history. So as well as being a childhood memoir, The Words also explores parts of Sartre’s craftemenship in existentialist philosophy, and is generally seen as Sartre closing his literary career. This book is an impressive display of the deeply literary nature of Sartre, is written in way that is intelligent, spontaneous, sometimes difficult, sometimes playful, but most importantly, always honest.
