The Best Revenge by Stella Cameron is a 1998 copyright, with 428 pages. (paperback) I was really excited about this book when I first started reading it. I couldn't put it down. Then I got irritated with it, but after a few chapters more I was back to turning pages as fast as I could. In the end I would say I wish I could give it 3.5 stars, because I couldn't decide between liked and really liked. Rae Faith has had a hard life. Circumstances forced her to take her infant niece and flee the only home she ever knew. After moving around a great deal, Rae finally settles in a small Georgia town with Ginny, her niece. ( she passes Ginny off as her own daughter) Rae gets married to a man she isn't really in love with, but she cares a great deal for him and he provides her with the peace she and Ginny need. Things are great for about four years, then John, a salesman that travels frequently, doesn't return home. In fact, he is three weeks late and Rae doesn't know how to go about contacting him. To make matters worse, a stranger has shown in up in Decline, Georgia. This man, Dallas Calhoun, has some information about her husband that turns Rae's world upside down. Rae decides to find out just what is going on with her husband and travels to Glory, Georgia under the pretense of writing a book. After spending one night in Glory, Dallas already knows she's in town. Sparks fly between the two, while both are unable to trust the other. Other members of The Calhoun family become pretty nervous about Rae when it becomes common knowledge that she's been asking questions and doing research about Glory. Georgia. When Rae and Dallas meet, I took an instant dislike to Dallas. I was also unhappy with Rae's reaction to him. About a hundred pages in Rae does something that just didn't seem true to her character.This was when I got a little annoyed. The book plays out like a nighttime soap opera. The Calhoun family is full of spoiled, wealthy, selfish, oversexed women all with their own agendas. ( mainly money and status) There are southern belle stereotypes to the max. The folks of Glory, Georgia are all indebted to the Calhouns in one way or another and all want a piece of the pie, as well as trying to cover up all their secrets and nurse their petty competitions, and jealousies, some dating all the way back to high school, for heaven's sake. The first two hundred pages or so deals more with these people more than with the mystery of what happened to Rae's husband and what he figured in with the Calhouns. But, then strange things start to happen to Rae and Dallas begins to fear for her safety. There were a few shocking revelations toward the end, some of which I suspected, others I didn't see coming. After I finished the book I thought some of the melodrama could have been toned down, and I felt that the romance between Rae and Dallas never really had enough tension or chemistry. I warmed up to Dallas a little at one time, but then he went back to being a jerk and I never felt he treated Rae right. She may have had her secrets, but she did the best she could under the circumstances, except when it came to Dallas. Many modern day romance readers will probably be put off by the sex scenes which borders on "forced seduction".( If it had been a historical setting it might have been more forgivable, but it was hard for me to swallow these people behaving the way they did in the late nineties. I for one, grew up reading "Bodice Rippers, so it doesn't offend me like it may younger women) All the same, if you are a soap opera fan you will probably really like this book. I like a good old fashioned soap once in awhile myself. One big thing I did like about the book was it reminded me at times of Southern Gothic mysteries, which I love. But, it didn't maintain that atmosphere. It became more of a Peyton Place. The writing was fine here, it was just a little dated, and the suspense, for me was a little predictable. Over all I would give this books a C+. Show more
