When I first requested this book from Edelweiss the title didn't seem familiar. At first I thought it was a new book outside the Rizzoli and Isles series. When I got settled down to read this book, I was surprised to find that I had read it before. Originally title "Peggy Sue Got Murdered" and published some time back, this reissue is now available in digital format and has been updated a little. If you never read this one- don't expect Rizzoli and Isles. I still think this one is a must for Tess Gerritsen fans. Below is my original review. Remember the book has been updated just a bit. M.J's name has been changed to Kat in the new version. Peggy Sue Got Murdered is a blast from the past. Published way back in 1994, this title and the cover of the paperback I have, makes this book look and sound like a cozy mystery. However, it is a serious mystery/romantic suspense novel by Tess Gerritsen, yes, THAT Tess Gerristen. The author best known for the wildly popular Rizzoli and Isles novels. M.J is a medical examiner putting her life back together after a divorce from her politically ambitious husband. When a Jane Doe comes in with track marks on her arms, the obvious conclusion would be a drug overdose. But, when another body comes in and the toxicology report is read, it seems the drug that killed these women was not a street drug, but an experimental drug being tested. One of the Jane Doe's had a matchbook in her possession that had a phone number written on it. M.J. calls the number on the off chance the person may be able to ID her Jane Doe. Adam is stunned by the phone call. He drives to the medical examiner's office fearing the worse. But, when he sees the body, he is relieved he doesn't know the girl. Adam is a very wealthy man, working for a pharmaceutical company. He is a widower with a missing step daughter. When the drug in question turns out to be from Adam's lab, M.J. doesn't know if she can trust Adam or not, despite the attraction she has for him. The more M.J. digs into the deaths, the clearer it becomes that someone wants her to stop. I picked this book up because it was an older title by a now really popular author. The cover of this book may be collectable. The book is a romantic suspense novel. The plot is very interesting and M.J. is a likeable character from the 'other side of the tracks'. She's a tough cookie, but hides a soft and fragile side behind the veneer. This is a quick read and an enjoyable mystery with a little romance on the side. This one is a B.
