If you've been around here since I started reading this book, you know I was expecting something kinda trashy, kinda campy, like the movie The Passion of Ayn Rand (starring Helen Mirren!). Y'know, lurid sex, some frothing at the mouth, some mink, some diamonds, some trains, all that. Alas, My Years With Ayn Rand is slow and thoughtful—sober and sympathetic rather than exploitative, relatively mature and introspective rather than angry. Written by Nathaniel Branden, who for many years was Rand's partner in philosophy, business, and the bedroom, My Years tells of his long relationship with the author, from meeting her while he was in college, to founding the Objectivist movement with her, to beginning an affair (while both were married to other people), and then the inevitable downfall and disaster. While roughly half the book is a chilling account of a cult's interior workings, the other half is meandering, embarrassing, and self-congratulatory. Branden himself is one of only two people who comes off well, the other being his adoring second wife. His sex life is dwelt upon, since it is of great interest to him, but I for one do not need to know as much as he's willing to tell. (It would be one thing if he went the whole way into salacious detail; at least that would be shocking, voyeuristic fun, but for the most part he maintains the illusion of good taste, so he gets to talk as much as he wants about it while feeling respectable.) He also spends a great deal of time psychoanalyzing everyone around him in long, minutely written passages that contribute very little to our understanding of the narrative, but make him look smart. The central character, Ayn Rand herself, is such a forceful presence that when she isn't before us, the book slows down and falls apart. A small, angry woman, Rand was one of the most prominent thinkers of the twentieth century, and while I despise her philosophy and her books, I appreciate her as a fascinating character, and Branden draws her very well. Her selfish passions, her rationality, her rationalization—she's so complex and contradictory and strange that, even though this is Branden's autobiography, I wish he talked about himself less and her more. The best parts of the book center on Ayn Rand and the rise of Objectivism. Under Rand's autocratic rule, Objectivism was less a political movement and more a paranoid cult, with members willing to excommunicate each other for the smallest offenses (such as failing to agree with Rand on everything). But of course it didn't start that way, and Branden's account of the movement's slow turn from reason and philosophy into control and manipulation is quietly horrifying, then loudly horrifying, then almost farcical, as Rand turns against Branden and everything falls apart. In the end, though, My Years With Ayn Rand is too rambling and psychobabblish to be recommended. I never thought I'd say this about anything, but it might have benefited from hearing more about Ayn Rand's sex life.
