My 4th Parks, and I think I start to know his system: take a troubled main character, let him (for it is always a man) end up in a complex situation especially in his love life, and show how he gets more and more into trouble; describe all this as if you’re in the head of the character, with constantly intersecting and thus very chaotic observations and reflections. It goes without saying that this system really digs deep into the human psyche, and especially exposes how shaky and vulnerable our existence is. In this novel, Daniel Savage has just been promoted a judge at one of the highest legal authorities in the UK and feels at the top of his existence: he exudes natural authority, can distinguish flawlessly right from wrong in legal matters and because he is the first coloured man in the judiciary, he seems to have reached a position of immunity. But that state of grace immediately is undermined because Savage is haunted by his aldulterous life (his already battered marriage is shattered by his many former sweet hearts), and his relative self-confidence makes him constantly say and do things he should better not. Some dramatic events make things go from bad to worse for him, but unlike in the previous Parks novels 'Europe' and 'Destiny' it does not end on a positive note. On the contrary, the outcome of the story is a bit awkward and ultimately remains open. And another difference: Parks records the events not from Savage's own head, but as a third narrator. And that makes the reading certainly not easier: the sentences are jumping in all directions, each related to a different aspect of Savage's life. Parks also devotes considerable attention to the different juridical cases Savage presides over in court, sometimes with so many details that the thread is lost. The Parks system here has reached its limits. Yet with 'Judge Savage" Parks once again has written a clever and elaborate novel, which ingeniously combines very diverse themes such as guilt and personal responsibility, the shakiness of our existence, the difference between appearance and reality, and the increasing inability to really judge things. It still is nice to stroll through Parks’ world, even though this is not his best work.
