This book was recommended to me – and I thought it would be worth reading, being an ‘Edgar Award Winner.’ I was pretty disappointed. I thought the plotting was poor, the characterizations were very weak, that the writing had no ‘Flow’ – and even writing ‘style’ seemed to change/vary along the way. The writer introduced 30 or so characters in the first 30 or so pages, which I thought was a bit much for her to expect readers to keep track of. And throughout the book for the most part, there were no physical descriptions given for these characters, which for me makes it tougher to track who/what they are. I like to have a mental ‘image.’ And the characterizations were flat – little personality to speak of… the character with the most ‘personality’ was a dog named ‘Bingle’ – and maybe the serial killer, but it’s kind of tough to relate to such an over-the-top freak as depicted here. Nothing really happens for the first 100 pages or so – we’re on a ‘project’ in the woods, and although it does allow the reader to get better acquainted with some of the characters – it reads like a huge, and boring, ‘expository lump’ for nearly the first third of the book. But then we have some actual ‘story’ going – some action, which goes on for about the next 75 pages or so. Then we go into a kind of snore-fest to page 340-some – a section of characters agonizing, speculating, regretting, and general navel-gazing. And some weird geography… The ‘project’ section mentioned above takes place in what’s described as the ‘Southern Sierra Nevada Mountains’ – and by description, the protagonist & Co. reside in a fictional place called ‘Las Piernas,’ which seemed to be not far away. Then at one interval, the characters are at ‘The Beach’ – which seems to be nearby Las Piernas – salt air, etc…. But hey – the Sierras are 150 miles from the Pacific Ocean!!! But we move on and then there is more ‘action’ for about 6 pages. The remainder of the book is 20-some pages of ‘wrap-up’ and explanations, etc. I finished the book because I was curious to see where the author would go with it. And found that the ending was also pretty weak – and very ‘convenient’ in some ways. I’m kind of surprised that this effort won an Edgar. I’d be very interested to know who constituted the ‘Voting Panel’ that year. I think the writing was marginal, the plotting was weak, and the editing was virtually incompetent.
