I have a very, very strange relationship with Mr. Charles Dickens. Before I knew anything about his private life, I would read one of his books and love it. The next book I read, I would dislike. You know the dislike that makes you bang your head against the desk. The dislike of nails on a blackboard. For instance, I love Great Expectations , but I can't stand A Tale of Two Cities . Despite, my relationship with Dickens's longer novels, most of his short fiction, especially his ghost stories, I have always enjoyed. I still enjoy them, even though at least in terms of his private life, Dickens sounds like a bit of putz (I think that is the word I want). He thought Little Red Riding Hood was the perfect girl. (I always thought she was bit slow. It's a talking wolf. They don't talk. You should be running, you twit). This collection includes 12 of Dickens best known ghost stories. I'm not sure that all of them all the "best". It does include "A Christmas Carol", the most famous of them all. Let's start with that one before it becomes the elephant and the gorilla lurking in the background. "A Christmas Carol" has to be the most overdone, over reference, over used Dickens story ever. The most recent movie version of the tale called it "the greatest Christmas story ever". This confused me. Shouldn't one Christmas story, the one about Christ, be the greatest Christmas story ever? After all that's where we get the name from. :shakes head: "A Christmas Carol", however, is a wonderful story. It has wonderful, beautiful detail. And Vicky, you're right. Dickens is hilarious. My favorite line is "Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels, but he had never believed it until now". To be fair to Dickens, he does a wonderful job with women in the story as well. It is true that we never know the names of Bob's wife or Scrooge's niece, but they have spirited (and are just in their criticism). Additionally, who doesn't like Mrs Fezziwig? Dickens works in much about the human condition, industrial evils, and the like, but there is wonderful joy in the novel, and the teller of the story is really a wonderful character as well. A very likable character as well. It's true that the story is overdone. How many film versions exist after all? You have the Muppets, Disney, Sim, Scott, the Lifetime adaptions (gag), Stewart, and others I am no doubt forgetting. And then there are the short stories and tv shows. What reading (or in my case rereading) the story does is remind of you two things. How good the story is and how good (or bad) some of the film versions are. The best film versions keep all the detail. Sim and Stewart stick closely to the novella, taking large chunks of dialogue. For instance, in the Patrick Stewart version Bob picks up the poker to attack the reformed Scrooge. Bob thinks, at first, Scrooge needs to be put in a padded room. Even though I have read and seen and heard the story countless times, it still reads fresh. The rest of the stories in the volume, come from Christmas Editions or The Pickwick Papers for the most part. "The Goblins who Stole a Sexton" is a forerunner of "A Christmas Carol" and makes an interesting comparison. Outside of "Carol" my favorite tales are "The Queer Chair", "The Baron of Grogzwig", "The Trial for Murder", and "The Signalman". "The Queer Chair" is one of the funniest ghost stories ever written. It truly is. The narrator sounds extactly like the man from "Carol". "The Baron of Grogzwig" is funny because it comments on marriage and suicide. It is rather interesting that it is a story that deals with suicide in a humor filled vein. The more cynical part of me wonders how much Dickens saw himself in the Baron. Both "Trial" and "Signalman" are good tradition ghost stories. "Signalman" has at least inspired one television version (an episode of Poltergeist: The Legacy ). Their inclusion brings the ghost story rightly back to the spooky and shows that Dickens could master humor and terror.
