This book is incredibly difficult to trudge through, but incredibly rewarding to the reader that does so. Schlesinger has a few annoying habits for the reader that expected to read this book and have history explained to him. 1. Schlesinger expects you to already have the background knowledge relevant to the study. He often makes mention of political debacles without explaining the actual content— from the Wilmot Proviso to Andrew Johnson’s inaugural address, he feels free to make snide comments that reference presumably well known facts, all the while leaving the reader in the dark as to its plain meaning. 2. In addition to this, he clearly expects the reader to remember anything he’s mentioned before— characters that make cameo appearances earlier will be referenced as though they are familiar old friends with zero context provided, and political movements with particular emphases will be mentioned only in a shorthand way after the initial introduction, so you had better remember the difference between whigs, locofocos, free soilers, and any number of factions that claim a small corner of any major political party. But on the other hand, Schlesinger is one of very few authors that truly opens the world of political history up to the reader. Making my way through this book, I was amazed at just how much more knowledgeable I was becoming in the political climate of this era, not just in a way that made me able to recite facts, but in that I understood the motivations of these disparate peoples, and what made them choose to either ally with or oppose one another. Trying to teach the Age of Jackson to a cadre of 8th graders last year was difficult— I couldn’t put my finger on what it was that made Jackson such a popular figure in north, south, and west. But now, after intense study with Schlesinger, I can see the relation between northern labor, southern farmers, Jeffersonian conservatives, and proto-anarchist reformers. If a grinding, serious engagement in the American political world of the 1820s-50s is what you are looking for, then this might be the best possible book to pick up.
