The moment you start reading you know you're in the hands of a writer. There is an assuredness not just about the use of language but of a consciousness of tone and space. By 'space', I mean the awareness of a space about the narrator (in the first person) that enfolds their consciousness, as though we were looking at his immediate world from his eyes and mind. It's a bubble of consciousness (for want of a better analogy, like ectoplasm that expands with awareness of vicinity, growing and shrinking into pools about the house and garden, here now in the hall, there now in the garden about the deer, framed against the fringe of woods encrusted with snow), like an amorphous spotlight searching about in the dark. It's a very specific awareness that chimes exactly with one's own. This is the awareness of space I mean. A probing, expanding and shrinking consciousness. It's a gift, conveying the very generality of the experience in the specificity of the simple flow and pattern of thought (and by a pattern, something random, not uniform, but a pattern nonetheless, like piecing random jigsaw pieces together to reveal a part of the picture). This is an ageing man's novel, and it feels good - to start with. The first person is no accident of the modern trend, but a specific appeal to posterity and senescent familiarity. It has that mild carping at the exponential little betrayals of the body and mind that growing older brings, an accreting curmudgeonliness that is one's flat-out right, buggar anyone else's silent judgementalism about your growing grumpiness, an older man's right more sane than to bear arms. And he does, about the garden in the snow of winter, scaring off the errant does who have little, even arrogantly defiant regard for one's euonymus. I indulge in his indulgences of such minor irritations of ageing like a favourite pair of slippers, wishing only that I could still smoke a pipe, buggar this confounded medical correctness. Come that age, you've earned these rights. 'The day was a hostile dare I must take, with a commensurate hostility' (Penguin Modern Classics, 2006, p.50). This is brilliant, gorgeous writing that merges right inside the mind's eye with a fraternal familiarity, a series of third thoughts constantly musing on second thoughts. I feel right at home, instantly. Some writers have this ability, like Pratchett and Banks and Woolf, and you love being inside those comfortable slippers once again, the metaphorical fireplace ablaze and warm with a kin consideration of mood, mind, games and ventures, encompassing both the vexations and limits of man and age. Ben counters his physical disintegration and incipient senility with small works (scaring off the deer with the borrowed shotgun, scooping up snow, a portfolio visit to his old work haunt, a pot or two of golf) and the sneaked-in pleasures of a prostitute, his wife Gloria still working, or on distant conferences. His descriptions of sex are as callow as his first adolescent fumblings, but it still embarrasses me. It's strange, I can look at porn with a flat equanimity, its lack of eroticism an aesthetic if not moral crime, but any hint of sex on the box or in the book and I turn away until its over. It somehow never works, and I still don't know why. Perhaps, as exposure over the decades has erased all inquisitiveness, it is laid out in all its messy humiliation, the body not what it was, the lack of gentle caring. Whatever. Not a metaphysical branch of inquiry that really interests. Ben's metaphysics are the ponderings of the 'many worlds' theory of branching universes, the modern scientific counter to the faded gods and fate, Fortune and Neptune replaced by an idiot's finger on a button. It is post-Sino-American war, conducted by missile, and the economy has crashed, escalating world poverty and making him realise he made it just in time, before the ignominious catastrophe. Written in '97, it was pre-sub-prime and Covid, a war the likelier event. We are wiser now. And poorer. It seems things will never revert to their avaricious pre-teens state, a Golden Age of irresponsibility so flagrantly arrogant you wonder where human intelligence was hiding all that time (mostly under selfish greed). Ben is past the post, holed up in twelve acres of north Massachusetts woodland in a luxury few of us will ever be allowed to achieve. But the circumstances of his senescent decline await us all. Then you realise that Gloria has gone, and the tone immediately shifts: pitiable pathos instead of sly-humoured bathos. The change is startling. Loneliness is a quality of life absurd, considering the sheer number of possible like matches. This is not Herzog, with his incessant intellectual posing in reams of objecting letters, nor Plato's seer in a cave, but you, as you will be soon, as you partly are now (without the house and twelve acres). This is your miserable fate in an overcrowded world, the permanent undercurrent of financial anxiety and the worrying attrition of current events turning the IBS and failing prostate into cold jelly joined by increasingly dodgy pipework, unable to sleep but for prescriptions that you have to remind them every month are still necessary (when it is they who have determined you need them for the rest of your life). The ignominy of it all. Our sympathies are our own. No wonder we all want to go back to a better world - even though it wasn't, really. But the new world post-Sino-American war is one of pervasive threat. The economy pinched (how rarely it isn't), government and services not what they used to be (what's new?), local protection rackets from a new tribe of the displaced constantly threaten the periphery of Ben's landed enclave. All the disenfranchised opportunists have leeched out of the rotten woodwork and crawled into upright positions, brutal verbally and physically, using the bones of their former victims to threaten their new, unafraid of the 'haves', since no threat of police can threaten them. We complain about police states, because they protect established power and materialism instead of people, the community, but the fulcrum in the scales of their justice is a delicately poised thing. Without them, it's back to the old West or peering into the Dark Ages, every fief for itself. And so Updike's wistful, cranky, reflective autobiographical fiction describes the 'last' lonely days of a man not yet old, but battling with ageing's vicissitudes, and we wonder where the story will go, as time's arrow lengthens towards its diachronic endpoint: will this be a tragic arc, or a comic, or likely, as most of our paths, the tragicomic - or comi-tragic? Will there be a resolution of recognition and redemption, or will he decline in lonely but relatively luxurious solitude, grasping at every extended human hand of disguised kindness, fending off depression while noticing every act of decency? For, surely, this is what we seek, as the march slows and lengthens. But the intrusions of threat - the thuggish youths camping in his woods, the new protection racket, the weakness of government and law, the radiation zones, even the visiting spacecraft in the skies - shadow the work not with their exaggerated misgivings (there are enough in this world of over-population and redneck reactionism), but with their largely pedestrian quality. The threat thrums far too often within the long explorations of Nature and garden and woods, the growing emphasis on sexual response and memory, the pervading sense of encroaching senility, which make up the most part of the narrative. Why Updike chose to set this in a fictitious post-Sino-American War, instead of in the aggressive talons of the imperial eagle, is not beyond me, just unnecessary. These threats stand as exaggerated metaphors against our usual modern psychoses, of corrupt purblind government, of terrorism propping up first-world militarism, of the increasing encroachment of legal loopholes trashing civil liberties, and so on, ad infinitum. In 50 years, the plight of African and Indian poverty has remained unaddressed except by charity, while the first world grows relatively richer, yet where the gulf between the wealthy and the poor is hardly addressed by any social welfare, in real terms, on the ground, week by week. Health care is better than it was, evidenced by the medical response to the pandemic, but most peoples' lives are fraught with financial insecurity. Ben, having made his packet before the bubble exploded, is using his wits to retain the piles and lands he had fought for through decades of twelve-hour days, as the disenfranchised encroach. Do we fear for him? Of course we do. The inevitable loss through one shanti construction in his woods to a burgeoning shanti town is the obvious outcome, and then, whence all decency? But it makes for unpleasant reading - and makes it's point about the rampant social inequalities. The problem is, the novel never really develops anything, in terms of plot, but the unwanted tenants and their squalid, pugnacious threatening. There is no narrative arc, it rambles on until you lose interest, and wish it were more like Couples, which was rich in character and social observation. This is a wittering, twittering ramble, vaguely dystopian without any real connection to the outside world, but the immediate flora and fauna. And perhaps that is the point of it, the increasing self-isolation from an increasingly distasteful world, a grudging plaint about the impoverished state, the lassitude of no longer belonging, despite the rural comfort. Likewise, Updike gets lost in his immediate enclave and his physical deterioration, but he also gets lost in an overly-floral language of unwieldy, complicated, 'baroquely ornate' (p.268) imagery and metaphor that make what he's saying diffuse and the mind lose interest. He also dwells too much on the unseemly detail of sexual encounter and his plunging recto-urinary health, giving the thing a lurid leering old man's obsessional foetidness in his ailing visceral preoccupation. I'm sure the book became increasingly rank of stale sweat, and worse. Most unpleasant. This is, fortunately, countered by some exquisitely colourful description of nature and its persistent fecundity. It started out a 9/10 and ended up a 5/10. One reason why it took ages to finish. I finished it out of respect, and didn't need to, for I missed nothing revelatory. I was seeking wisdom, and I did not find it. But reluctantly had to find out where the arrow landed. Not far from the bow. This was erroneously classified as science fiction, but was really an autobiographical drama - despite his denial as such in the endnotes of ‘these crabbed, confessional, divagatory pages’ (p.338) - without the drama. So be it. So-so it was.
