Music for Chamelions is Truman Capote at his most entertaining. In his preface, Capote talks about the technical challenges that he was facing with his writing. He felt that he was overwriting, and also wanted to be able to use skills he had learned as a reporter, a script writer, a fiction writer, to create an effect where the writing captured as much of true life as possible. He set himself the task of writing conversations that he had, until he developed a style, and went on to write the non-fiction novel 'Handcarved Coffins' and the short stories and interviews that are included in this book. A lot of this work has Capote as a character; some of it purports to be true, but with Capote that statement is an allegation at best. 'Handcarved Coffins' for example, was supposed to be based on a true crime, however, subsequent reviewers have been unable to find a specific case that matches the facts. If you really want to know what is true with Capote, you need to be an archeologist, digging for the facts - they're there for sure, but transformed and colourized to shape the meaning. I agree with Capote that this book contains some of his best work - from the Southern humour of 'Hospitality' where a family hosts a total stranger who was down on her luck, and let her stay until they married her off, to 'Mr Jones' that details a one in a million coincidence. The short stories are followed by 'Handcarved Coffins' (good but I thought it lost steam), and then the portraits - of Marilyn Monroe, of his cleaning lady, Mary, of Bobby Beausoleil (member of the Manson gang), of an adventure with Pearl Bailey, of an encounter with an old friend while loafing in the sun in New Orleans. These studies all have Capote as a character and his reactions provide a lens through which we see his subject. He wrote with humour, sometimes with love, and always with an overarching awareness that life can be tough, life can be cruel. In his writing, Capote said yes to the universe as it was, not as he wanted it to be. In his personal life, he was not quite so tough, as his addictions and early death suggest. In between, those two tensions, Capote found compassion, and this book exemplifies (I think) the best of Capote's output.
