As soon as I had read the first page, I knew that I had read “Almost Transparent Blue” at least once many years ago. Even though the weighty & lengthy TBR shelf chides me, I read it through on a long train ride. And I am glad I did. I know like and appreciate this more more than I did before. This is Murakami-san’s first novel written in his youth about even younger youths. Is it autobiographical? I don’t know and don’t recall anyone ever saying so definitively. The main character shares his personal name “Ryu” and certain places and situations reflect locations that the author was exposed to in these and earlier years. You could call the novel “decadent”. You could also call it “self-indulgent” (“Ryu” and his friends are very much so). And despite it not having a traditional plot, I think that the layout of the novel and its progression was worked out either during the writing of the novel or during his editing (if any). Because with this second (third possibly?) reading I was able to see more of a pattern to it. But it feels like a stream-of-consciousness account of several days in the life of “Ryu”. How consecutive these days are or are not is difficult to discern. Was it written as a form or rebellion against the status quo? Probably. In the 70s in Japan, as well as the US, the counter-culture that took root at the end of the 60s was still in full swing. The author himself participated in similar things as what goes on in the book. No matter how much we in the US think that society and family conspire to control how we behave and interact (I am taking the hard view here), it is nothing compared to those pressures in Japan and many other Asian countries. The phrase, “the nail that sticks up will be hammered down” is a true insight into how conformity has been the overwhelming force in Japanese society for hundreds of years. A small island with a large population and few natural resources, they exist in population concentrations that we seldom encounter. Thus, cooperation and conformity are almost a necessity (again I exaggerate). Under such “rules” there is always a backlash. And in Japan that backlash has and I think always will be spectacular. Many of my friends in Japan are non-traditional. Some more so than others, of course and none as wild as those in the novel. But, they have a spark in them that connects back to the rebellion that is in these characters. Asian cultures are often much more tolerant of the misdeeds of their children up until their twenties. But when they reach a certain age, then they are expected to transition into the role of good workers, citizens, and members of society. I’ve seen people who have done exactly that and others who reversed course and took themselves further out of play. At the end of this novel, we are left to wonder what will happen to most of the players. But one, and perhaps the most surprising one, peels away and is not heard from again. Have they made their leap into conformity? We are never sure. But it is implied. (Note there is another character who tells “Ryu” that this is almost exactly her own plan. Once she is bored with all of this (i.e. the drugs, sex, and rock n’ roll) she will settle down and get married.) This is a stupendous first book by an author who went on to pen other works that have also been critically (and popularly) acclaimed. It can easily turn many people off, but it is different, strong, and entertaining. Four (4) star minimum – maybe “4.5”.
