This novel takes place in the late fifties and early sixties, when Americans were leading comfortable lives and the jazz music of Miles Davis and Charlie Parker was gaining popularity. Communism was the dreaded enemy of the time and anxiety over Russian weaponry and secret agents fueled fear that America might be losing the Cold War. In this heady mix, John F. Kennedy, a young, charming and rich presidential hopeful, was in the midst of a campaign for the highest office in the land, although there were fears among many about what a Catholic presidency would mean for the country. Such is the backdrop of Sebastian Faulk’s story about two men and a woman struggling to find satisfying lives and personal happiness. All three have been affected by the experience of past wars, experience which continues to haunt their present lives. Charles van der Linden is a British diplomat posted to Washington, a man who is a recognized expert in American politics and who some believe has close ties to the entourage surrounding Kennedy. Charles is in trouble not only with his health but with his life. His investments are worth barely a third of what they were three years ago and he has borrowed money and changed brokers twice, but to no avail. His finances remain precarious and he is quickly descending into a financial black hole from which he may never recover. Although he has three children, he wishes he had none. They are expensive, wearisome and complicate his life. In his position as a high flying diplomat, he lives a life with swanky parties, subsidized education for his children and frequent travel to exotic and interesting locales. But airplane flights terrify him and he cannot board a plane without downing three sedatives and half a bottle of scotch. Charlie’s drinking is completely out of control and he hardly eats solid food anymore, his hangovers of the past replaced with unending days of gastric upheaval. He once had a life that interested him, but the world has disappointed him and he is now bored and disillusioned. He feels there is no point in his work, nothing he does could not be done by someone else and he has no outlet for the deep rage that lies inside him that storms and rattles him every day of his life. If it wasn’t for his wife Mary, there would be nothing left for him to live for and he would finish it all. He is quite simply on the brink of a mental and physical breakdown. Mary is a diplomat’s gift, always the supportive wife who looks just right, can mingle with the other wives, gives wonderful parties and even converses with the most intolerable of their friends. She makes all the decisions about the children, the house and how they live. All Charlie has to do is keep his career on track, a responsibility he no longer is able to bear. Mary’s view of the world is completely different from Charlie’s. She is a woman who loves living and is devoted to her children, her parents and her husband. She knows Charlie is drinking heavily but she is quietly holding things together. Although she is his wife, these days she is acting more like a mother to him. Things change after the children leave for boarding school and Frank Renzo a newspaper reporter attends a party at Charlie and Mary’s Washington townhouse. Frank has been sent to Washington by his paper to do a piece on how people are viewing the upcoming election. When he meets Mary he feels a connection, so much so he fabricates an accident and goes back to the house once the party is over. Frank and Charlie spend the rest of the evening drinking while Mary tends Frank’s injured hand. Frank reminds Charlie they met long ago when both of them were in Indochina, but Charlie remembers nothing of that meeting. Frank has been working to get back in the good graces of his editor after two incidents which have set back his career. His reporting during the McCarty years put him in the crosshairs of Hoover and the FBI and his editor received a warning. Things got worse when the reports he sent back from Mississippi on the racist murder of fourteen year old Emmett Till and the subsequent trial of two white men accused of his murder were out of sync with those done by other reporters and he was in trouble once again. He is outraged at people who make it impossible for those in his profession to report accurately what they see and hear without fear of reprisals. After paying his penance by reporting on low profile issues, he is hoping to restart his career by reporting on the upcoming election. When Mary is on a visit to New York, Frank who lives in Greenwich Village offers to show her the sights. The two wander around the city, spending their time in a very different way than Mary would if she was with Charlie. They share a more bohemian experience, sampling life and food in the Bowery, Bleecker Street and the Village, going places Mary would never go by herself. Although Mary seems an unlikely candidate for infidelity, she and Frank fall into a passionate affair and Mary must ultimately make a choice between leaving her alcoholic husband or living the passionate life she has experienced only once before with her former lover David who was killed in the war. Mary battles internally with the need to support her husband, her fierce love for her children and her intense physical desire for Frank. During the affair she has periods where she feels shame, believing she is not the kind of woman who would do what she is doing. But she also realizes this is her last chance for true happiness. Faulks, well known for his beautiful writing is not one to indulge in a romantic love story. But this novel is much more than that. Its characters are well drawn and their inner turmoil wrenchingly dramatized. Faulks uses his descriptive powers to bring the reader to the mucky trenches of the war, the off-beat smoky jazz haunts and the sights and sounds of New York City. He continues these detailed descriptions, bringing to life Mary’s nerve racking trip to Moscow with its seedy, dirty, time worn hotel rooms, complete with rust stained tubs, unadorned lightbulbs and hidden listening devices secreted but barely hidden behind the cracked covers of old light switches. The scenes of Mary’s dying mother and the time spent with her grieving father in London are especially well done and clearly the strongest in the book. At that time, Mary and her father’s exhaustion after days of staying up with Elizabeth is keenly felt and their quiet conversation after her death is poignantly rendered, easily bringing to mind a reader’s personal experience with a similar event. Faulks reminds us of the lasting aftermath of war, how it continues to affect people after the last guns sound, never finished with those who participated in the carnage. It haunts their dreams, forces them to question their motives and explores how they felt both during and after the horrible act of killing another human being. He also explores the commonly experienced conundrum of individual choice. Does one make choices based on one’s own needs or the needs of those who depend on you; an evocation of the age old dilemma of love versus duty. There is an inherent sadness about this novel, a seeping melancholy that pervades its pages and hints at further sadness to come. Happiness is presented as a temporary experience, celebrated when it occurs before time pulls back to the burdens, obligations and encumbrances of everyday life. Faulks is a celebrated and gifted story teller who continues to successfully provide the reader with fine writing. This novel is certainly no exception.
