Village in Sierra Leone, West Africa Michael Killigan, a twentysomething Peace Corps volunteer stationed in a village in Sierra Leone, West Africa, goes missing during a time of turbulent political unrest. The search is on. Michael's father, a kingpin bankruptcy lawyer in Indianapolis, uses his money and influence to ensure all possible measures are taken by the government and related agencies to track down his son. Meanwhile, Boone, Michael's best friend, travels to Sierra Leone to join the quest. White Man's Grave , (a term coined by British colonialists to describe Sierra Leone as a country infested with deadly malaria-carrying mosquitoes) is a much-overlooked classic originally published in 1994, a novel I've read multiple times. Richard Dooling has written an extraordinary work portraying the clash of two vastly different cultures: suburban Indianapolis, USA , and the West African bush. However, the American author cleverly highlights the similarities between tribal magic and the practices of our modern science and legal systems. As one anthropologist puts it, “Villagers hire bad medicine men, or hale nyamubla , to harm an enemy with witchcraft or bad medicine the same way an American would, say, hire a lawyer to sue somebody.” The humor overflows when Richard Dooling details the various ways Boone Westfall, American born and bred, goes about “trying to find your way around Sierra Leone with a map of Indiana.” The comedy (and also the searing drama) snaps, crackles, and propulsively pops in many other ways. Here's a sampling: WARLORD ON THE WARPATH Michael Killigan's dad aspired to become the best bankruptcy lawyer in the country. “It would be a few years before Randall could scorch the earth in enough Chicago bankruptcy courts to make his name synonymous with commercial savagery in the Seventh Circuit, but he was working on it.” Randall Killigan lives and breathes the bankruptcy code, wielding enough knowledge to outmaneuver anyone who dares to oppose him. In his lavish office, surrounded by his legal team, which includes several women, Randall mutes the speakerphone when a lawyer presents a plan he's attempting to impose on Killigan's client. Randall fumes, “You pathetic village idiot. You can use your goddamed plan of reorganization as insulation in your shithouse, boy. I am going to cut your fucking head off and mount it on a pike in the middle of your front lawn, understand?” Randall is unapologetic about his coarse language, caring little if any of his assistants, particularly the women, take offense. Similarly, he promptly dismisses any accusations of chauvinism and sex discrimination from others in his firm, confident that he would easily prevail if they ever dared to sue him in court. ARTISTE WANNABE Boone Westfall studied literature and art in college. Now that he's a graduate, how is he going to make a living? Boone thinks he'll set up his art studio back home in his parents' basement. His father, the owner of an insurance company, tells Boone, “No,” and that, like his three older brothers, he can pay rent on his own apartment by working a job at the company. Once at the insurance office, brother Pete outlines Boone's duties in handling claims, or more accurately, denying claims. Pete gives Boone a couple of examples: denying a homeowner's claim (a responsible person doesn't let his house burn to the ground) and denying a cancer patient's claim for a bone transplant (a parent or grandparent surely had cancer, thus a preexisting condition, thus no coverage). Ruthlessness and deception, anyone? After a year on the job, Boone, the artist, has little reason to stick around and packs off to meet up with his friend Michael in Paris. WEST AFRICAN BAD MAGIC IN INDIANA Randall Killigan receives a mysterious package from Sierra Leone containing a foul smelling black egg-shaped something or other the size of a small football with a nasty red spout wrapped in ghastly rags. Thinking it might have some connection with his missing son, Randall puts it on a shelf in his bedroom closet next to his gun collection. Three nights thereafter it happens: Randall wakes up in the middle of the night. “He saw or dreamed that he saw a bat in his own bedroom. A huge bat. He saw it by the muddy glow from the night light in the corner, just enough visibility to make him wonder if he was of sound mind and vision. At first, he concluded that he was hallucinating, because the thing was so big, with a three-or four-foot wingspan, big enough to darken the bedroom bay windows. He almost felt his ear cup itself and grow toward the fluttering image, straining to hear the whisper of leather wings. Then it almost deafened him with a loud thwock! that sounded like a piece of wood hitting a sounding board. Then thwock again – terrifyingly close to him and so loud he could feel sound rushing around his face like a current.” The nightmare intensifies. Randall crawls across the room to his closet and grabs a tennis racket and then turns on the ceiling lights. “The bat shot directly overhead, so close he could see the massive span of its fingered wings, its furry torso, its shrieking face, which he glimpsed in one vivid instant, before blinking in terror. It had the head of a dog, or even a small horse, with a hideous, swollen snout, and lips bristling with warts or tumors. The eyes were large, innocent pools of blackness, staring in wonder, almost as if the creature did not quite believe in Randall either.” A few more deadly swoops and the bat disappears. Randall's wife, Marjorie, wakes only to find a terrified Randall in his underwear holding his tennis racket. Take a look at the below photo and you can imagine the intensity of Randall's encounter with this bat, a bat he eventually is told by a bat expert is none other than a giant West African Fruit Bat. However, Randall Killigan, forever the rational lawyer, fails to make the connection between his vision and the mysterious bundle. The way Randall goes about dealing with his horrific experience is one of the true highlights of the novel. GOOBER IN THE AFRICAN BUSH Again, Boone proves himself the prototypical arrogant, narrow-minded Westerner once he arrives in Sierra Leone. Any guesses on his finding his friend, Michael Killigan, or doing anybody any good with his presence among people whose culture and outlook on life are drastically different than his own? White Man's Grave speaks to many of the multiple challenges we face here in 2023. Enlighten up; read this novel. American novelist Richard Dooling, born 1954
