This book was seriously impressive. Hiro Protagonist (the name alone is so deliciously self-aware) is a hacker and a pizza delivery driver in real life and some version of a prince / hero fighter in the virtual. For in this futuristic Los Angeles (still 21st century though), the VR is at least as real and part of human life as RR (regular reality). Especially ever since the economy crashed. Oh and there is no law anymore. In fact, LA is no longer part of the USA at all since the "government" started selling territory to private organizations. Thus, there are quasi-sovereign gated communities and enclaves known as FOQNEs (Franchise-Organized Quasi-National Entities). One such FOQNE is the Italo-American Mafia that Hiro works for. One really interesting development in this weird future America was what had become of the Library of Congress after merging with what used to be the CIA. *lol* It is therefore no surprise that Hiro meets Italian mobsters as much as former love-interests, who code specific elements of the VR, and a special courier, all while uncovering a scheme to "infect" society with a special form of virus that could up-end the world as he knows it. In an essay in 1999, Stephenson explained that the title of the novel is the term for a particular software failure mode on the early Macintosh computer. So you know what calamity to expect. Especially considering how reliant everyone is on tech and VR here (yes, even more than nowadays). Anyway, it's not just something that will make the lights go out, it can have very dangerous or even lethal effects on a person's body in RR. I LOVED the blend of futuristic tech, a dystopian world, Sumerion mythology (Tower of Babel) and more. It seems the author is very good at and interested in blending history with linguistics, politics, philosophy and - here - computer science. I mean, this book was published in 1992 and he coined the word Metaverse . Take THAT, Zuckerberg! Seriously, everyone was quirky and the world almost disorientingly weird, but I enjoyed every second I got to spend with the characters - be it uncle Enzo or the discoveries made thanks to the library or Lagos. We even get quite some impressive fighting when Hiro, helped by uncle Enzo and his goons, boards Rife's raft/yacht to free YT and stop Rife's nefarious plans . Not to mention the boss fight (there is no other way to describe it) between Raven and uncle Enzo at the airport . That was some breathstopping action! In short: this is pretty much a perfect book no matter from which angle you look at it. And it obviously influenced A LOT of other authors who subsequently created very similar stories. Funnily enough, I was reading this while learning of Apple's new product, "visionPro", which in turn triggered me to think of the awesome possibilities on the excited side and the potential negative implications on the dystopian side. Which made for an even more special feel while reading this book. *lol*
