omg i might never buy another IBM product again...truely terrifying and appalling. This book actually made me physically ill. The thought that the Nazi extermination machine was powered by one of the most influential men of that era, not only in the US but abroad, by a man who not just communicated and recieved a medal from Hilter but also supported the Nazi (German ppl)regime and knew what was going on to the Jewish people, played both sides of the ocean (American being his number 1 customer and Nazi Germany his number 2) for the love of money and profit is truely sickening to me. The only thing that made this book a difficult and somewhat slow read was that it is full to briming with technical speak. I understand the need for this, so that the reader can fully understand the technology, but it bogs the book down a tad. Also it is very evident how he thinks of IBM and Tom Watson, he uses very descriptive and what I feel is naturally biased descriptions of him and the evils of Nazism. Again completely understandable..Nazism was evil, but it, in some cases, obviously shows that Black is not a outside neutral writer, but someone who is already biased in a certain dirction. Of course he is writing about an event that is extremely emotional and for most rational people an event that most of us are biased about. The holocaust is one of the worst proofs of our own inhumanity to others. Not that his attitude takes away from the veracity of his claims, but sometimes I felt like he was driven more by his emotions. But again, I felt similarly sickened by Tom Watson's actions, I would have been hard pressed to write a completely neutral expose. One of the aspects of this book that I particularly liked was that Black intersperses his narrative and vilification of IBM, or in truth Tom Watson, with stories of single men who at the peril of their lives saved hundreds of thousands of people using the same punch card technology. Thereby showing us the great good that could and in some cases did come from the use of this technology, but which because of Tom Watsons greed were instead mainly used to steal the worldly goods, persecute and ulitmately eradicate 6 million men, women and children.
