I read this book and wrote this review in February before everything went to hell in a hand basket...then forgot to post it. Listen. Look. Okay. This book is something else. The person who wrote it is something else. It falls under the umbrella of "things that would not be published today." Which, if I'm being honest, has quickly become my favorite non-genre. This will not be everybody's cup of tea. Actually, it's not meant to be a cup of tea at all, but a scalding elixir that does not go down easily, but, if you can stomach it, may prove to have restorative powers. Please know my affinity for this book does not stem from some desire to be seen as an edgy reader. I know what it’s like to be misled by that type. I knew girls who praised Lolita to the point I thought it was going to be some grand love story…only to read it and find out it’s about pedophilia. So let me make it clear: I would be remiss if I didn't mention that rape is mentioned. I DO NOT WANT ANYONE TO EXPERIENCE ANY EMOTIONAL DISTRESSS BECAUSE THEY READ THIS REVIEW AND THEN DECIDED TO READ THIS BOOK WITHOUT KNOWING WHAT THEY WERE GETTING INTO. That said, there are no graphic depictions of rape. If you can compartmentalize your feelings about certain elements (which I’m not saying you should) this is a very interesting, uncut, unabashedly blunt book. This book is a piece of work. As is the author. You could call him an ex-con, a former rapist, a moderately mental man, or all of the above. You could call him highly intelligent, perceptive, self and socially aware, revolutionary, or all of the above. Some will regard him as close minded, others as someone whose third eye is wide open. Controversial character or real talker, he wrote a hell of a book. A memoir made up of essays he wrote while locked-up. Cleaver became both analytic in thought and fertile in expression while incarcerated. He was able to evolve from who he was into a person who utilized his natural perceptivity into a purpose. To be sure, this metamorphosis was not thanks to the prison system itself, or any program provided to him via prison, but IN SPITE of the prison system through SELF-education—both exteriorly and internally. (Tookie’s memoir came to mind while reading this, though I’d say Cleaver is a wittier writer.) He spent most of his allotted free time writing with little to no interest in television time or going out on the yard. He wanted to not only write as much as he could, but read as much has he could. However, prison proved an impedance on that. The books he wanted were often not permitted. [SIDE BAR: I have a friend who is currently incarcerated in a federal prison, and he and I have had this conversation. He told me that they could not have any “urban” books. Which we both took to mean books based in the black experience or where the main characters are black. On the flipside, he said he’s seen both Fifty Shades of Grey and old timey westerns (I’ll refrain from calling them what they were called) be allowed despite them having graphic depictions of sex and violence. To the sex point: He’s seen Zane be turned down. To the violence point: No series about black street gang members is making it in, but have a white male protagonist with a ten-gallon hat and some spur clad boots who blows the faces off a couple dozen people in the length of a novel and it’s “safe reading.” So he’s in there reading Jackie Collins like a sixty-year-old white woman. I have also been able to send him MY books. A few years ago I wrote a series about a Los Angeles madam who runs a high-end male escort agency, and the young men who work for her. There’s prostitution, sex, and drug usage all described at length. Not to mention what I thought would be the biggest caveat, me being indie, meaning the books coming straight from me instead of a publisher/retailer/recognized book club like the rules of this institution specifically stated. I sent them. He got them. Now. What if I wanted to send him THIS book? I have to wonder.] So the same literary standards exist in jails and prisons as did six decades ago. Of course, I’m sure this is all dependent on the particular institution and, in some instances, who is skimming through the mail that day. I know of others who have read such titles while incarcerated. My point is it still happens. [During Banned Book Week when I was reading different lists I saw just how many black-written books are banned or have been banned from correctional facilities. Many of the titles are considered Must Reads or Classics by most.] Perhaps even more bothersome than the prohibiting of black fiction…is the prohibiting of black nonfiction. That, to me, seems like a clear sign that black-on-black education is frowned upon. That black empowerment is frowned upon. That blackness is frowned upon. For what other reason would certain classic works of nonfiction have been banned in prison/jails throughout the years? If you visit most jail/prison websites it will list things like “graphic sex, graphic violence, promotion of criminal activities, ideas on how to escape” as the themes that will get a book sent back. Not “urbanity.” And yet…return to sender they go. Another topic Cleaver touches on that has yet to be remedied in 2020, and has actually been a mainstream topic of conversation recently, is the flippant title white America assigns to art made by Black people. Title. As in not plural. No wide breadth of distinction or room for subcategorizing. Cleaver writes about how it was called N***o* music. Movies. Athletes. Clothing. Etc. I can’t help but to think how now—with a smidgen more decorum but no less careless condescend—it’s…wait for it…urban. Again with the urban. Urban radio on the airways. Urban contemporary at the Grammys. But let a white person half-heartedly appropriate it, and it suddenly becomes pop. Or one of the 89 subgenres of rock. Or high fashion. Or whatever. I mean…if ethnic adjectives are good for the goose why aren’t they good for the gander? Why isn’t country/folk called Caucasian contemporary? Wait, what did you say? White people didn’t start folk music? Shut your doggone mouth ‘fore I woop ya with a Waylon record! Allow me to parlay into my next bullet point… I loved Cleaver’s writings about the white heroes white people cling to. The “paper tiger” hero, James Bond, offering the whites a triumphant image of themselves, is what many whites want desperately to hear reaffirmed: I am still the white man, lord of the land, licensed to kill, and the world is still and empire at my feet. James Bond feeds on that secret little anxiety. This is one of the truest quotes I’ve ever read. If you’re white and reading this, think about your fathers, or brothers, or neighbors, or boys you went to school with. Does this not ring true? Hell, maybe it rings true about you. I don’t know. On the flipside, Cleaver talks about white youth repudiating their heritage and taking poc as their heroes. Of course, the youth he’s talking about is the youth of the sixties. From the 1960s to 2020s there have been a great many white kids that have taken POC as their heroes (whether it be ball players, rappers, etc.) But I’m not sure they all see them as people. I’m not sure if tasked with the decision to either side with the missteps of their own or the teachings of their idols what they’d do. I’m not sure they take these heroes, in their heart, out of adolescence and into adulthood with them. I know he felt hope at seeing white kids have black heroes, but I’m not sure in sixty years that’s really lead anywhere especially positive. I’m not sure. Cleaver has words and thoguhts for many people. But who was the very most villainous in his eyes? The white woman. And…well…I can’t prick my fur up and pretend I don’t know what he’s talking about. The white woman is the co-star on the mental reel that haunts the white man. The white woman who is known to have had relations with black men has seen the white man’s jugular at its most prominent. I promise. If there was no white woman, would white men feel as vitriolic about black men? I can’t say for sure, but it’s food for thought. There is a Led Zeppelin lyric that goes “Yours is the cloth, mine is the hand that sews time. His is the force that lies within.” It has nothing to do with this subject, but this subject makes me think about it . Aside from that angle...the white woman has known how to weaponize herself throughout history. From fictionalizing her fear with breathy theatrics and dry eyes, to yelling wolf while playing the lamb; the white woman has given reason to the white man who never needed a reason and who does not operate off of reason. There is some irony, though, in the fact that he fell in love with his white female lawyer. I’m not sure that was really love, though. I think it was two-game runners getting off on running game. But that’s just my take. Cleaver was in jail when Malcom X was assassinated. Like many, Malcom was more than important to him. Unlike many, he separated the minutia that multiplies with notoriety from the man. He spoke of the importance of Malcom not being that he was Muslim, or who he became aligned with, but what/who he was advocating for and the truth he was speaking. After Cleaver was released, he went on to be one of the most well-known members of the Black Panthers. He was a revolutionary. He was a leader. He was a public speaker. He was the husband of Kathleen Cleaver for a period of time. But…then…eventually…he became a conservative republican on crack (literally, not euphemistically). Eventually someone could have very legitimately asked him what he asked the old man in his essay “The Parable of the Eunuchs and Lazarus.” I think it’s very plausible for someone who has become recently in-fired to fall susceptible to wanting something to subscribe to. I think it’s also very plausible for someone who’s just came into a little power or clout to become easily confused on what to do with it. That goes for every creed, race, and gender throughout history. Many with a following are a follower of something themselves, and many times that has gotten in the way of their own leadership abilities. Reversely, back against the wall and head on the ropes, many people’s firm cores desolidify. I don’t know if this is what happened to Cleaver in the end. I don’t even know if it’s my place to speculate. What I do know is Nipsey—who read Cleaver and inspired me to—did not fall victim to what I described in the prior paragraph. He was not confused on what to do with his power. His core did not desolidify. He was better. In conclusion, regardless of his many flaws, Eldridge Cleaver was one hell of a wordsmith.
