Here is another VERY well constructed mystery! I have to eat my words again-I had NO idea whom the villians were! But first things first: the store owner Mr Lytell used to be a nosy gossip, but in this book, he is a VERY unlikeable, ornery character! Arrggghh! Out riding one day, Trixie and Honey find a wallet with a hundred dollar bill in it, and a few credit cards, but no photo ID. They turn it over to Mr Lytell who is very rude to the pair. Soon after, the daughter of the person who lost the wallet shows up and is quite upset and says that her father, a millionare who owns several grocery stores, has gone missing! The chief suspect is a crooked business partner. She needs to hire a private detective to find him (it was here that I thought Trix and Honey would offer their services, but I guess they aren't that presumptious). Mr Lytell loans the young lady named Laura Ramsey $2k, and holds her brand new sports car as collateral You can tell the car is a stunner because it costs a whole $12k brand new! Haha! (Just for a point of reference, this was written in 1980. I don't know how much new cars are now, but in 1997 I bought my only new car-it costs $17k CAD (So let's say $13.5k USD) and it was a Honda Civic-not a sleek sports model! Anyway, a big-shot detective visits and seems to snub Trixie and Honey (Gasp! He must be a fake-he doesn't take two teenage girls seriously! The horror! Hehe!). He does warn them of a possible detective that may have been hired by the disreputable business partner however. That reminds me, Trixie has noticed a green car watching them several times (which of course everyone scoffs at! Now, I was kidding about the detective taking her seriously, but come on, the rest of the Bob-Whites REALLY should know better by now!) Between her being teased, and Jim giving his attention to this bright, young, 20-year old college coed who sits at their pond sunbathing a putting on suntan oil, (and, no-I'm not joking), Trix is a bit jealous and miffed. So much so that she decides to not take the case at all. Besides which, she wants to investigate Mart's odd behaviour (which involves him falling for a get-rich scheme and losing $10, but that's kind of peripheral to the main story) Ok, so what's the denouement? This is what really surprised me (even though I know I read this before, it was back in 2006, and I barely remember it)-you see, Trix disliked Laura Ramsey (the rich daughter), but I thought it was just because she was a pretty college coed and Jim seemed to be smitten (which I can understand-Trix is 14, Jim is 17 and this girl is 20. When I was 17, I liked a girl who went to my congregation and my school. But there was also a 14 year old girl in my congregation, and a 20 year old who went to a nearby congregation. I can tell you that if it wasn't for the 17 year old that I liked, I would have had my head turned a lot quicker by the 20 year old than the 14 year old! But on the other side of the coin, it is pretty much established at this point that Jim is smitten with Trixie and vice versa. Trixie should have just asked Jim about his interest in the girl instead of sulking and fretting, but I know that when I was that age, I would have behaved like Trix did instead of sensibly confronting Jim and asking where she stood) Ok, I digress-the denouement is that the girl WAS a crook and so was the so-called PI! They were in it together to con Mr Lytell out of money! Another thing-I thought that Jim would have said later that he too suspected her and that was why he was around her so much, but no! He said, he was just trying to be nice. Uhh....yeah. (I guess he was, but that DOES seem kind of lame) So overall, this was a VERY nice story that I really got into. I don't know what is wrong with my brain-I didn't recall who was the crook at all! In fact, the only thing I remember was that the last time I read the book was in 2006. I know this because I just saw "She's the Man" in the movies, and the actress Laura Ramsey was in it. I thought she was pretty and I liked the coincidence of the girl in the book being called Laura Ramsey! (And she was also supposed to be a hot girl) It's been sad that I recall THAT and not the storyline itself! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
