Review Black Beauty by Anna Sewell is a beautiful story meant for older children or very young adults. It was written in the 19th century by a woman who passed away shortly after its publication. I enjoyed the story and have given it a 3 of 5 stars, which is still very good in my book. A few interesting things: 1. The point of view in the book is from Black Beauty, the horse. 2. It takes place in London nearly 150 years ago. 3. It's still a cherished story for both pleasure reading and education purposes. I received it as a gift when I was about 8 or 9, as I had asked for several "classics" for Christmas. When I saw the cover, I thought it looked pretty. But not enough to read it. It sat on my shelf for probably two years until one day, I said "let's just give it a chance." I was afraid it would be too boring... I've always preferred complex plots and strong characters. I wasn't sure this would really work for me. I was wrong! Seeing how people mistreated and misunderstood animals was a big benefit of the book. It opens your eyes to things from another perspective, and if it helps just a little to develop a bond between younger adults / children and animals, then it's served its purpose. It's one of those books everyone should read... but not as a forced school assignment. It should be something parents want to share with their kids around 7 or 8... teaching them about how to be respectful and kind to all creatures. And then take them horseback riding to see what it's actually like. That's what I did when I finished it... went with a small group of friends to a riding academy / farm a few towns over and learned about horses for one summer. I kinda miss riding... maybe I should try it again. Off topic again... what is up with me today on these reviews! :) FYI - Wrote this review ~2017 from memory as I want to have a review for everything I remember reading. If I messed it up, let me know! LOL :) About Me For those new to me or my reviews... here's the scoop: I read A LOT. I write A LOT. And now I blog A LOT. First the book review goes on Goodreads, and then I send it on over to my WordPress blog at https://thisismytruthnow.com , where you'll also find TV & Film reviews, the revealing and introspective 365 Daily Challenge and lots of blogging about places I've visited all over the world. And you can find all my social media profiles to get the details on the who/what/when/where and my pictures. Leave a comment and let me know what you think. Vote in the poll and ratings. Thanks for stopping by. Note : All written content is my original creation and copyrighted to me, but the graphics and images were linked from other sites and belong to them. Many thanks to their original creators. [polldaddy poll=9729544] [polldaddy poll=9719251]
