As our story opens “Crouching in the overgrown shrubs, the stocky, ginger-haired man consulted his watch for the fifth time in the past half hour. Where was she? . . . Then he heard it— the slap of sandals against the brick sidewalk . . . he gripped the butt of the gun in his pocket . . . with glee . . . darting out in the open he fired. The victim looked down and saw the spreading stain darkening her shirt. . . She leaped off the steps, kicked off her sandals and struck the squirt gun from his hand with a roundhouse kick.”. Thus we are introduced to Alexandra Campbell and Daniel Grinelle. Alexandra is a young widow working to rebuild her life after the sudden death of her husband.. Daniel is Alexandra’s former therapist and current boyfriend. In addition to dealing with her husband’s unexpected departure from her life, Alex is also trying to come to terms with the estrangement from her parents for several years due to their curious efforts to push their daughter away from them. All of this has left Alex as something of an emotional wreck and on a psychiatrist couch trying to deal with her abandonment issues. Enter one Brighamina Poulson. A widow, mother of 9, avid Kansas City Royals fan and partner with Alex in RootSearch, Inc ., a genealogy firm. “Briggie,” is a distant cousin of Alex’s dead husband. She is also the person responsible for introducing Alex to the LDS church and is the person directly responsible for Alex’s current profession as a genealogist. Due to her new found interest in genealogy Alex is determined to uncover the mystery surrounding her much loved grandfather and get to the bottom of the reasons why her parents deserted her and why there is so much secrecy surrounding her paternal grandfather. Alex and Briggie, along with Alex’s “special friend” Daniel and Daniel’s dad are able with their collective talents and wisdom to solve the complex mystery surrounding Alex’s family. One of the valuable things one can glean from this enjoyable piece of fiction is some insight into some of the tools available to persons digging into their family histories. It is the answers to the genealogy that ultimately solve the mysteries in this story.
