The illustrations were bold and eye-catching. I really liked how all of the colors on the adjoining pages matched. I liked the story of the Sun being jealous that the People liked the moon more than her, that they sang songs for him. There were details that I enjoyed learning, like rivers were called Long Man. It was odd how the people had lines on their bodies, down their arms and across their wrists and forearms and elbows. Also, their clothing was so unrealistic with all those patterns and colors. They didn't wear clothes with those designs, but I did like them despite being inaccurate. The little men in the woods were cute, with their long hair and beards growing down to cover their bodies. The tale took a turn as Dancing Drum turned into a snake and was supposed to bite Grandmother Sun. I appreciated that the first time he tried she left the house too fast, and the second he was blinded by her brilliant light. I didn't expect this story. The tales are never what I expected based off the name. I thought this was going to be a tale about their drums, not the sun. It was cool when he took the six fastest stickball players from the village to being back the Daughter of the Sun after he accidentally killed her. Their culture was cool to learn about, that dead people go to the Darkening-land and that she would be dancing with the ghosts in Tsusgina'i. I liked the detail that the Daughter of the Sun danced heel-toe, heel-toe. That let on to their way of dancing. The scene of her dancing with the three skeletons around a pale fire with the big white moon was cool, cuz I'm into ghosts and things like that. For some reason the close-up image of the hand holding the stick reaching out to her foot struck me as funny. Each warrior was supposed to poke her with the stick, so she was being poked 7 times before she would pass out so they could carry her back. In every story where someone is told not to do something, they always do it, so that predictability is old. I could understand why Dancing Drum opened the basket, because she said she couldn't breathe and he didn't want her to die. It was odd that she suddenly turned into a cardinal when it had never been mentioned that she was a bird. I liked the explanation for why souls can't be returned from the Land of the Spirits. Because he opened the basket and let the Daughter of the Sun out like the Shaman told him not to do, no more spirits could come back. I liked the illustration with the 4 Indians with their faces painted white and holding rattles. One had a turtle shell rattles. Another had what looked like maracas suited to a Latin culture and not the Cherokee. It's cool that they wore necklaces of deer and panther teeth. And they put on their best fringed buckskin to sing to the sun, and beat their drums and shake their rattles. I liked the image of Dancing Drum down on one leg playing his drum. I thought it was odd how she said he filled the hollow log with water and dampened the groundhog skin. She hadn't told us the top of the drum was made of groundhog skin and I wondered how he filled it with water when surely the top of the drum was already sewn on tightly. It was sweet tho that he played a special song for the sun and she stopped crying and smiled down on her Children of the Mountain. He fixed his mistake and made everything right again for his people. Like with all of the legends you don't want to delve too deeply and think too hard about anything. I know it's a made-up tale to account for things, but it does take away from the story. Like how easy it was to travel to the sky. Even in snake form that doesn't account for him being able to make it. And that the sun lived in a house. The biggest thing that stood out to me was that the sun had a daughter that was a cardinal. I immediately started thinking of why that was, if they thought cardinals were the color of the sun or something like that that showed a connection to the two. But it was completely random and not another word was said about it. And now I'm wondering what kind of cardinal she was, like the mother of all of them or just one little cardinal of many, because she died and that seems like a big deal but nothing was mentioned of the effect she had on the world. It would have been better had she never turned into the bird and just remained a woman. The bird threw me for a loop and I couldn't find a place for her in the story. I liked that there was a real image of the Smokey Mountains with misty clouds hangings over them. It's such a cool sight. I certainly wasn't expecting the wealth of information that came after this story was over. I would have never expected that with such a small little book especially with the childlike and simple illustrations. And I didn't expect so much writing. It's not simple writing that's for sure. I had never heard that their villages were surrounded by palisades, and they had 3 rows of poles. They used mats of cattail, branches and corn husks to the outside of their homes for protection in the winter. They painted their faces for celebrations and the color white represented happiness. I was blown away by the picture of the girl from the Oconaluftee Indian village because that's in Cherokee, NC and I've been there. No one in Cherokee has ever worn deerskin before so I've never seen that. I've only seen them in the European clothing they adapted into their own culture. I've never seen them in the garb they wore from pre-European contact. In the winter they wore rabbit fur capes or shawls over one shoulder. I never knew they wore fur masks, especially when they hunted. Trust was such a surprise to see a woodchuck face without the eyes so they could wear them as a mask. It was interesting to hear that many work in the oil, tourism, timber, farming or art industries. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
