I wasn’t sure how to start this review but within the first few pages of my next read I found this quote: ‘You never want to get away from home as much as you do when you’re fifteen years old.’ After spending two years in hiding, Anne Frank was fifteen when she died, presumably of typhus, in Bergen-Belsen. Knowing this while reading the diary added to its impact. One of my granddaughters read the diary and said she knew I would like it. I was dubious at first because its contents are so well known both in print and on the big screen. I felt I knew enough but, by coincidence, my buddy reader @Marge Moen also included it on a list of our next potential buddy reads. The decision was made for me. Although it was a lifetime ago, I can still remember the intensity of being a teenager. Anne Frank’s teenage intensity is well described on the page; her desires, frustrations toward her parents, redefining herself whilst constricted by space, her challenges and fantasies. There was also day-to-day stuff, including blocked toilets. She did not hold back or restrict herself to the hardships of the eight in hiding but also included details of the brave and kind people who harboured and cared for them. Her notes on the hopeful efforts by the Allies to put an end to the war were interesting. Anne Frank was a good writer. She wanted to be a journalist. The heights she could have achieved with her writing, had she survived, can only be imagined. Other takeaways: After confirmation of her death, Anne Frank’s father, the only one of the eight to survive the Holocaust, was encouraged to publish it. He is reported to say he only fully got to know his daughter from reading her words. Anne’s father and uncle fought for Germany in WWI. The diary survived claims it was a hoax. The translations into many languages were criticised for somehow affecting the text and that the numerous iterations on stage and screen took some liberties. Anne’s experiences, as described by her, cannot be diluted by all that. Anne’s sixteen-year-old love interest, Peter van Pels (he and his parents were given the pseudonym van Daan), died in the Mauthausen camp three days before it was liberated. My granddaughter voiced concern that Anne was expected to share a room with a middle-aged man, a dentist known to her family. ‘Why did anyone think that was a good idea?’ my granddaughter said. Nelson Mandela read the diary while incarcerated, and encouraged others to do the same because of its strength and message of hope. Anne Frank’s diary will leave a lasting impression on me.
