To say this book attracted critical attention is putting it mildly. Surely, readers should not have been surprised. From the little I have read of Updike, there seems to be some common ingredients in his work. Such as an odious male protagonist, self-absorbed, sex obsessed with a dim view of women, and the world. Marriage and adultery also seem to be ever present in his work, some religion is thrown in too. "……ferocious female nagging is the price men pay for our much-lamented prerogatives, the power and the mobility and the penis" Sixty six year old Ben is our man, it’s 2020 and post WWIII – a nuclear war between the USA and China. This trifling matter is hardly explored by Updike. Sure, there are consequences from the war, such as – the collapse of the central government in the US, little or no public services, no taxes a shattered police force for example. But the purpose of this plotless story quickly becomes apparent. It’s about Ben’s musings about his life, his observations of what’s happening around him, and his meditations about scientific matters – such as spacetime, the end of the universe and much more. There were times I questioned Ben’s sanity. For example, at one stage he wondered if he killed his second wife, due to her absence – you would be forgiven for thinking, he should know. He has an affair with a live-in prostitute, he even has intimate encounters with a fourteen-year-old girl. This, from a grandfather of eleven. The book has a certain rhythm I found comforting. Each section commences with Ben’s highly detailed observations of his wife’s garden. I usually don’t like such things (gardening and over-detailed descriptions), but I was transfixed. It must be Updike’s writing. The garden descriptions were usually followed by his activities for the day, such as paying protection money to dodgy dudes, playing golf with mates, examining the thread of his underwear, looking at, and describing his erect penis and the like. The end of each section usually involved his detailed thoughts about scientific matters – such as the universe, quantum physics and time. I found this interesting. I loved this. I’m not a fan of Ben, his faults are abundant. His thoughts are sometimes incoherent. However, can you imagine if our thoughts over one day were to be recorded? I would imagine, they would be equally ‘all over the shop.’ I know mine would be – would yours? Prostate cancer makes a guest appearance. Updike nailed the details about the treatment and sequalae of this disease, particularly the impotence, incontinence, and long-term fatigue. Take it from me it was accurate. I wonder if Updike was a PCa brother? There is a scene where a doe was shot by a professional hunter’s arrow. All because the poor animal was nibbling the plants in Ben’s wife’s garden. It was abjectly heartbreaking and really hit me hard. "She bedded down and gave me this one long look like I was coming to her assistance, and then lay down her pretty little head on the leaves. I didn’t have to use a second arrow" Updike really describes the seedier side of the male psyche very well indeed. I don’t know what I’ve just experienced. Updike was a star. 5 Stars
