Just finished this book and... not sure how I feel about it. On the one hand, it was a pretty slow read and it took me a lot of will power to finish it. However, Keane does incorporate some beautiful imagery of both the city and (mostly) country life. It was an alright read and had both some really interesting studies of society while also having a rather unsettling portrayal of certain characters. I enjoyed the books critique of the frivolous and shallow lives of the upper-class. All of the characters are deliberately unlikeable, especially with their eternal artificiality towards everyone and everything. I did really enjoy Sylvester's character; he was so interesting in his dichotomy between his outward artificiality verses his inward appreciation for beauty and his true feelings, the latter he mostly tried to repress and hide from being tainted by others knowing of his true passions. His observations of the other characters and situations were also startlingly clear in his understanding of their artificiality, troubles, or loneliness- which you wouldn't expect from his character. What troubled me most about the book was the portrayal of homosexuality through Jane and Jessica's characters. It seemed to me as a very negative portrayal of lesbian relationships- where Jane and Jessica were completely toxic, manipulative, and shallow in their love for each other. However, perhaps it could be affirming by showing their relationship as never having a chance because of the stigma at the time- that perhaps Jane's infatuation with George and yearning to be free of the 'evil' Jessica is because at the time only heterosexual relationships allowed social stability and were regarded as 'normal.' Piggy's act then at the end of the novel a sad reality of society's unwillingness to acknowledge homosexuality in an accepted and ideal conception of life/relationship. Personally, I'm still trying to decide whether Keane's portrayal of homosexuality was purely negative or if she meant it to be a more dynamic read- but Im curious to read others' interpretations of it. Which then brings me to Piggy, a character I felt so bad for she was hard to read. Her whole life consisted of her being pushed to the side or used by others who were perceived as more 'fabulous' than her, which she then responded by abasing herself to become a servant to the every whim of who she wished she could be (Joan, then George). While I wanted Piggy to get a good ending, I liked how Keane ended it more realistically- that she can show the tragic side of living your life for others instead of living and finding love for yourself. Interesting read in that you need to think a lot about what Keane is actually trying to say.
