I disapprove of all machines. Filthy, dangerous, what they do is remove us from our true lives, speed us loose from what we would be content to be—walking animals upon the slow and beautiful earth. But we are cursed with presumption, and never rest from creating false new worlds. This book ended up on my list after Stephen King mentioned it on his favorite novels of all time. Writers love writing about writers (Jack Torrance from The Shining , Bill from It , etc), as such, it isn't a terrible surprise that yet another author write about an author. I feel like this is the low effort strategy, but Thomas Williams takes it another level. The protagonist of The Hair of Harold Roux , Aaron Benham, is an author himself, writing a novel of the same name that covers a parallel story of a guy named Harold Roux, who is something of a writer himself. It's writers all the way down. The narrative frequently jumps between the main story and the book-in-the-book. There are basically no transitions, so you have to pay close attention to the names and details to keep things straight. If it's Aaron and his Honda motorcycle, you're at the top level. If it mentions Allard and his Indian motorcycle, then you're in Aaron's book. Then there's a random side story of the old lady who can't talk. Aaron's life is rather dull and his novel appears to be a sort of escape for him, a dream life he wishes he was living. The title's namesake actually plays a rather small role in the story. Most of the book-in-the-book surrounds Allard and his relationships with everybody. I found the Allard-Naomi-Mary relationship to be most relatable and interesting. Other than that, most of the plot is rather uninteresting, and most of the reading effort is spent trying to untangle the different levels of the novel, which, in the end, does not seem worth the squeeze. The novel is well written and at times, poetic in its prose. This makes me suspect that the literary level is just too high for my simplistic tastes, and that this was written by an author, about an author, for authors.
