Theodor Seuss Geisel was an American writer, cartoonist and animator, best known to us for his children’s books. More than sixty of them were published under his pen name of “Dr. Seuss” , some of them the most popular children’s books of all time. They have sold over 600 million copies and been translated into more than 20 languages. “Dr. Seuss” was indeed a phenomenon. Although he devoted most of his life to writing children’s books, “Dr. Seuss” had no children of his own, saying, “You have ‘em; I’ll entertain ‘em.” He certainly did that. Children everywhere pounce on these little books with their rhymes and humour. As shared or bedtime reading they are a popular choice for American children. As a way of teaching reading they seem rather limited, although great for fun, and reinforcement in reading. My only experience of “Dr. Seuss” ’s books was listening to reluctant readers enjoying reading a few pages from “Green Eggs and Ham” to me occasionally, if it was their choice. It was time to read one from cover to cover, and I chose I am Not Going to Get Up Today! for its challenging title, which is bound to appeal. Although “Dr. Seuss” usually illustrated his books himself, this one is illustrated by James Stevenson, in a similar cartoonish style, using line drawings filled in with bright water-colours. “Please let me be. Please go away. I am NOT going to get up today!” This first page indicates the template for the entire book. A little boy lays in bed in the morning, happily oblivious to all attempts to get him up out of bed. His mum tries to get him up with a tempting breakfast tray, then his sister and brother try, and as we follow the story through, the attempts to get him out of bed become increasingly more ludicrous and surreal, with braying donkeys, honking geese and even marching bands. “Let them try to wake me. Let them scream and yowl and yelp. They can yelp from now till Christmas but it isn’t going to help.” The little boy imagines all the children all over the world who might be getting up, and this enables the reader to look at some attractive illustrations, as do the humorous scenarios. However, the book is aimed squarely at American children, with mentions of the very difficult to spell “Memphis, Tennessee ... Massachusetts and Connecticut and Maine” . Elsewhere we have the possibly unfamiliar United States Marines, and a very American cop. The story-line is amusing, and children will love the repetitiveness, cheeky humour and bright illustrations. The ratio of pictures to text is tempting too; there’s not too much to “read”. I did feel that the book was a little too long though. It might have had more appeal as a shorter book to be read over again! The joke was extended just that little bit too far. The ending too, was a bit of a damp squib, “I guess he really means it. So you can have the egg.” In fact I assumed my library book must have a page missing! On the other hand, the book’s title will guarantee an audience, and the familiar style and humour of this idiosyncratic author will continue to appeal to little children of about 4 to 8 years old. I can imagine children worldwide hugging themselves with delight as they think of the stubborn little boy in this book.
