But how many times is a person allowed to die? First published in 1979, After the First Death can be seen as a spiritual precursor to his later novel, Heroes - both are concerned with the same themes: devotion to a cause, courage, fear and guilt, the cost of sacrifice. Both books present them in different ways - Heroes approaches them through the eyes of Francis Cassavant, an 18 year old soldier who has just returned home from World War 2, while After the First Death focuses on a group of terrorists who hijack a bus full of children heading for a summer camp and take them hostage. Similarly to Cormier's earlier work, The Chocolate War features several points of view: it begins with a narration from Ben Marchand, a teenager who was drawn into the hostage situation as a third party, and for whom the experience has changed everything, most notably the relationship with his father. As Ben tells his story from a hospital bed, the novel shows how the hijacking happened from the point of view of Miro - the youngest member of the terrorist group, a sixteen year old teenager. The bus is Miro's first mission - the group's leader, Artkin, promised Miro the killing of the bus's driver, the ultimate act of proving himself worthy. The bus driver, Kate, is herself a sixteen year old teenager who was just standing in for her uncle just for this one day. Frightened to the bottom of her soul, Kate knows that her time is short and quickly running out, but is desperate to remain alive - hopeless in desolation. The horrors of After the First Death emerge slowly from these alternating narratives, but they gain traction quickly, spiraling down to an unavoidable tragedy. What is notable is the fact that the book does not take an easy way out and demonize the terrorists - both Miro and Artkin are completely convinced that their actions are benefiting their homeland - a place that Miro has never seen - and to protect and fight for it they're willing to kill and sacrifice their own lives. Miro is both a frightening ideologue in his devotion to the cause, but at the age of sixteen is also a confused teenager - someone whose feelings and desires emerge at unexpected times. Miro's personal philosophy is one of never owning anything for himself - and to live and act only for his homeland, an ideal place of striking beauty which suffered much harm, destruction and exploitation at foreign hands. Miro has no knowledge of what American children need to remain calm, and he needs Kate to keep them in that state - and she, a young teen just like him, tries to understand his feelings and motives to try and win his confidence, or at least make him see her as a human being. Each of the decisions that the characters have to take is incredibly difficult, and the consequences are deadly. The title of the novel takes several meanings throughout the text, and the ending is particularly sad and shocking, with a twist that I didn't see coming. Like other Cormier novels that I've read, After the First Death is a powerful book, difficult in its bleakness - but one I can't not recommend. Just bear that in mind when you'll read his works - there are no easy ways out and easy answers to hard questions, just like in life.
