A curious little book by the Brazilian writer Marcio Souza who has a certain renown as one of the leading literary figures of the Amazon. This was his first novel published back in the 1970s; my Abacus edition, translated wonderfully by Thomas Colchie, dates from 1982. What's it all about? Essentially it's a picaresque adventure - the story of one Luis Galvez, a native of Cadiz seeking his fortune in South America during the rubber boom of the late 1890s. Souza adopts the “Flashman” conceit, claiming that he discovered these unpublished memoirs in manuscript form in a second-hand bookstall in Paris and took it upon himself to edit and publish the narrative. The result is a novel that is so packed with action and amorous adventure that it feels much longer than its 190-odd pages. Galvez is a ladies’ man in the best picaresque tradition – suave and amoral, he doesn’t take himself too seriously, looks at the world with a jaundiced eye, and has the happy knack of being in the right place at the right time. When the story opens in July 1898 in the Amazonian city of Belem, he is merrily banging a married Creole lady when the husband rudely interrupts. Galvez hurls himself pell-mell out of the bedroom window - and lands right on top of Senor Luiz Trucco, Bolivian diplomat, then in the process of being mugged by three desperadoes! Soon enough, Galvez finds himself drawn into an international intrigue, thanks to the charms of the mysterious, impetuous Cira Chermont. Bolivia and the United States have unholy designs on the remote rubber-rich jungles of Acre; the Brazilians for their part are determined to foil any territorial conspiracy hatched by the imperialists. And so Galvez is co-opted into a labyrinthine plot, involving stolen documents and diplomatic scheming. Having disrupted the opening night of Aida , performed by a visiting French operatic troupe, he finds himself having to hustle out of Belem under cover of dark, ending up as a stowaway on a boat full of Catholic nuns that is floating down the Amazon. Souza’s prose is arch and amusing, but his form is also highly unorthodox, consisting of short staccato paragraphs, each of which is its own chapter complete with headings like “Latifoliate Forest Primeval”, “Surprise!”, “Of Love and Latex”, and “Phileas Fogg”. There are literally several hundred of these, which can be distracting. Then there are the editorial intrusions, whenever Souza feels that the Galvez manuscript is veering off too far into untruth and needs a corrective! Either way, it all makes for a rather complex reading experience, and I am inclined to believe that this is one of those books where the reader would gain much from a second reading. That river journey down the Amazon from Belem to Manaus was, for me, the most enjoyable section of the novel. Souza at his best can be as filthy and funny as Smollett. His hero runs into the aptly named Sir Henry Lust, an English naturalist who is convinced that the Teatro Amazonas was built by a race of aliens and who has an eye-popping collection of native Indian genitalia pickled in formaldehyde. Galvez also has a fine eye for boomtown excess, dissecting the foibles of the the nouveau riche class, made suddenly and insanely wealthy by the burgeoning rubber trade. Eventually he finds himself at the head of an armed party heading towards the Acrean capital of Puerto Alonso – his subsequent rise and fall as the titular “Emperor of the Amazon” takes up the latter half of the story. All in all, an entertaining frolic set in a time and place that is little known to the rest of the world. Thanks are due to the writer and even more so to the acumen and enterprise of the translator, who (according to an old NYT piece ) was also the agent of Marcio Souza. The book world owes much to people like him.
