One of the sadder, darker volumes of the series, The Four Swans is also slightly more feminine than the previous books. Late in the novel, Ross Poldark sees four swans, one injured, and meditates on them as the four women in his life. (Lest it put you off the series, please note that he is not given to such romantic brooding normally, being prone to Brood™ about other things.) So, in this volume, we get more of Elizabeth Warleggan's perspective, more about Caroline Enys's perceptions, and more about Demelza Poldark's inner workings. Morwenna Whitworth is the final swan, but she is detached for the whole novel--from the reader, from her world, from herself. As she is in a highly abusive marriage and is ill for much of the book, it makes literary sense. Yet, she's still one of my favorite characters of the series and it's hard to be distanced from her in the second book she appears in. Politics make up a heavy portion of The Four Swans . The creaky political system of the late 18th century, grumbling itself awake with fear of the French Revolution, is displayed in Graham's traditional style of long, boozy, fireside conversations between landowning men (not even all of them can vote). We get a front row seat into how the landed gentry responded to the revolution itself, but also to the questions it raised. England was beginning to wake up to its social problems and try to solve them without losing their class systems. While I may have skimmed some of these portions--political history is only slightly more interesting than military history, the driest of dry to me--it is interesting to see how the powerful classes (through Graham's imagination) dealt with issues of their day. What I would have liked to see more is what anyone but landowning males thought about things, but then, it's not like they had the chance to be well-informed. Some of the more excellent scenes in The Four Swans include the Warleggans' confrontation about the parentage of Valentine; Ross counseling Dwight and Caroline on their marriage; and the machinations of the Whitworth home, which are gripping to read in a perverse way. I had some issues with the portrayal of Rowella Chynoweth, but The Four Swans was published 21 years after Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita and I do wonder if there was some sort of influence there. I have not read Lolita yet, but the relationship between Rowella and Osborne Whitworth reminded me of what little I know about the one between Dolores Haze and Humbert Humbert, though Rowella likely shows much more agency than Dolores. I've seen other reviewers compare the early relationship of Ross and Demelza to the one in Lolita , however. I don't know. Both are somewhat problematic. In the case of Ross and Demelza, things resolve well for both parties. For Whitworth and Rowella, it's clear that though he thinks himself the manipulator, she is actually manipulating him. Yet, we don't get into Rowella's mind much, nor are we ever given an explanation for why she is so prurient, when she and Morwenna had identical childhoods (Morwenna barely had sex explained to her before she was forced into marrying an insatiable rapist). Whitworth speculates, but he is not to be trusted, so this was a missed opportunity for Graham to characterize Rowella. The Hugh/Demelza plotline is just not my favorite, either. I'm simply unsatisfied with Demelza's rationale for her infidelity. I suppose Graham wanted to work up some conflict in the Poldark home, and perhaps make Demelza less of a saint, but I think that could have been done with the issues her brothers face, possibly by making her stand up for them. Regardless, I'm glad that episode is mostly over. At least I know what's coming in the next installment...putting Morwenna and Drake on the cover is a bit of a giveaway, but I'm a shameless #Drorwenna shipper and I'm not complaining. Content warnings: graphic description of a man being publicly hanged; grooming, pedophilia, and infidelity (not super graphic but highly discomfiting because #OssieIsTheWhitWORST).
