I suppose I picked this book because it had something to do with the architecture of Nicholas Hawksmoor, whose churches are scattered around London and have a very particular style: massive and unadorned. I had also read Mr Ackroyd is a great expert in London. The book turned out to be a crime novel, a fictional account very loosely based on Hawksmoor who is transformed here into one Nicholas Dyer, assistant to Sir Christopher Wren and troubled worshipper of the occult. He is at odds with the new era of 'Reason' ushered in by the times after the Plague and the Great Fire had basically exhausted the people's appetite for horror. He believes, and his belief is well supported by his surroundings, in a demonic theology predating Christian times and where the world is really more in shadow than light to put it blandly. There is a parallel story set in the 80's with a series of murders occuring at each one of the churches designed by Dyer/Hawksmoor. The man in charge of the investigation is called...Hawksmoor. And this is just the most basic of the endless mirroring scenes between the past and the present times. Except for some vivid descriptions of homelessness and moody noctunal scenes,mthis book rings a lot more vivid in the passages written in old English that correspond to the parts of the story with Mr. Dyer as the protagonist. But once you get tired of the endless litany of old street names and revolting low life scenes, the bones of the book are bare and the prose is clogged by bombast. For a worshipper of Darkness Mr. Dyer seems very attached to this world and its thrills. For a modern inspector, Hawkmoor is the epitome of ineffiency as he descends into madness because ...we don't really know why. May be he is possessed. I found the book hard to finish, boring, repetirive and humorless. I won't give up the ending but i won't recommend reading it either unless you are really into mood and some witty turns of phrase. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
