I bought this back in 1999 when it first came out, read it, and attended one of David's lectures on the book tour for this, and laughed uproariously (because he's a very funny man, and a witty/ironic/contrarian speaker). Since then, I've reread it multiple times, cited it in my own publications, and recommended it to others to read at least a thousand times. I consider this to be one of the most important books of the past 50 years to examine our society and culture, the quirky dynamics that are driving its new shape. In The Transparent Society, David extracts key issues and trends, then delicately and persuasively weaves together illustrations and examples into a solid warp and weft, laces onto the substructure projections of logically extracted futures, and ends with a complete fabric, almost untearable. It's riveting to watch how he connects the concepts and builds his arguments. I would recommend reading this book as a work for teaching rhetoric and argumentation almost as much as for the actual content of the book. The arguments he makes, especially those around the dynamics of transparency and privacy in the information era, are contentious and provocative, practically begging you to argue against them. I'm remembering again that this book is TWENTY YEARS OLD NOW, and almost entirely as relevant and powerful today as it was when it was written. And accurate. This is eerily, scarily accurate. This is both wonderful and sad, given how far the world has diverged from the paths David recommended to keep us safe and healthy as individuals and a society. There are a very few gaps in the weave where others have, over decades, sussed out key issues with his argument and conclusions. The key one seems to be not precisely utopian thinking, but a tendency to want to work towards a world in which fairness and equity actually exist, where people actually can be safe. What would it take to get there? And how could we survive the transition? Those questions are only partly addressed. I'd love to see that happen in a future work.
