This is a well written historical fiction set in the late 1800's, early 1900s. The power station at Niagara Falls is being constructed and at the same time the Pan-American Exposition is occuring. President McKinley is assassinated towards the end of the book. The 'City of Light' is Buffalo where electricity is being brought into the buildings and homes to replace gas lamps and release the city of the pall of darkness the gas clouds leave hanging over it. Automobiles are a rare occurence but will be replacing the horse drawn carriage soon. Loiusa Barrett is headmistress of Buffalo's most prestigious school, the Macaulay School for girls. She grew up with a father who was a geologist and took his daughter on his field trips, so she was accustomed to communicating as an equal with all sorts of individuals, of every class and rank and gender. She brought an attitude and foresight of women's ability to do anything and accomplish more than parlor games with her to the position she held. Her goal for her girls was to teach them to advance beyond the strictures of the time and not allow those strictures to hold their dreams in check. She expanded the curriculum to include the necessary courses to give them a well-rounded view of the world from the confines of a safe girls' school and was successful as the graduates went on to become doctors and involved in other helping professions. Her life revolved around a secret she had no idea was so well known. She had met President Cleveland in total innocence, bore a child as a result of his lecherous assignation. She was unaware that the men in power of Buffalo had earmarked her as the girl they wanted the President to dally with and when she was in need of a secret confinement, helped 'look the other way' for her so she could secretly orchestrate it. For ten years she played the role of godmother to the child she bore, both adoptive parents unaware of her true involvement in the life of the child she brought to them. The father was the developer and builder of the Niagara Falls power station and as his dreams grew to encompass the idea of creating electricity for the people, his investors who were the men in power of Buffalo, started plotting against him and using Louisa and her secret. The events that unfold are heartbreaking, yet satisfying.
