DNF'd after 70%. If you're planning on reading The Wicked One you've probably read the other ones in this series and if you're like me, you've anticipated this book about Lucien, the oldest of the de Monteforte brothers, Duke of Blackheath. If anything, the previous books in this series have suffered from male protagonists ('H's) that were all a bit whiny. Garreth because he was so useless, Charles because he wasn't perfect and Andrew because he thought he was going mad. After all that angst I had high hopes for the manipulative and cunning Lucien, "one of the deadliest man in England". And the author had to ruin him and his story. First, of course, Lucien also has an irrational fear that he doesn't talk about. In the book, that is used to explain some autocratic behaviour of his. But why? Lucien's backstory already sufficiently explained why he became the man he is (or at least, the man you'd thought he were after reading the previous books): He lost both his parents traumatically in a short period of time, he had to shoulder the duties and responsibilities of a duke at a very young age as a result, and he felt responsible for and very protective of his younger siblings. His manipulations, as reprehensible as they were especially in the third book (Andrew's), were done out of love and a misguided sense of duty to ensure their happiness. In this book, he's suddenly lost all his cunning ability and just falls victim to a revenge plot by his siblings to get him married to Eva, who despises him, and he just accepts it without a fight - not because he's fallen in love with her but because it is convenient that she's already pregnant with his child and he needs an heir anyway. He fully plans to give her her own estate and doesn't want to live with her as long as she agrees to have sex with him whenever he wants. But as soon as they are married he bends over backwards to accomodate her, trusts her with his most secret fears and his biggest wish is to make the marriage work. Since this is basically the plot of a significant number of romance novels I'd let it slide regardless but the big difference is that he still hasn't fallen in love with her or anything. His feelings as far as the reader knows are unchanged from the "as long as I can bed you on occasion I don't care"-attitude from a few pages earlier. Her biggest attraction to him seems to be that she might kill him in his sleep. Which brings me to: Second, the heroine. It is Eva de la Mouriére, femme fatale, beautiful, clever, capable. She would be the perfect counterpart to Lucien (as he was supposed to be) - if she didn't have this irrational hatred of men. Her internal monologue is just a constant litany about how men can't be trusted, she interprets any and all behaviour of men in the most terrible ways possible, and even when she sees the obviously happy marriages of Lucien's brothers she pities their wives because they'll be even more devastated when the brothers finally reveal their true vile natures. It is completely over the top, out of proportion to what supposedly caused her to become this way, it's almost like a misogynist's caricature of some man-hating shrew. And that is before she behaves in a way that is just plain stupid and reckless. Naturally, it is portrayed as being all Lucien's fault but I'm so over plainly childish behaviour by heroines being treated as completely justified, I just couldn't continue reading after this. Explanation of Lucien's apparently unforgivable mistake: Lucien, who because of some recurring nightmare believes he'll die soon made a provision in his will that if Eva leaves the country with their child after his death she'll lose the estate he's given her. She interprets that as him limiting her choices and taking her freedom despite him promising he wouldn't do that. That he changed his will before they even got to spend some time together or that a male child would be the heir to the dukedome which needs to be taken care of or that she still could decide to leave the country, just without the income from the estate or that it would only come into effect if Lucien died before the child has grown up, which if you don't believe in prophetic dreams is highly unlikely - none of that matters. This could have been a much better book with more plausible characters. If Lucien eg had been manipulated and being taken advantage of after becoming the duke as a ten year-old boy that would have explained his Marchiavellian behaviour as an adult much better than simply losing his parents and it also would have explained his need to protect a potential heir to the dukedom, no hidden fears necessary. Eva could've had a low opinion of men because her job involved manipulating men and maybe she could've been disillusioned because of her previous marriage, no need to make her into a misandrist. They could have tried to manipulate each other, it could have been a fight of wills, of two very dominant personalities trying to get along. Instead we get two angst ridden characters whose motivations and actions only make sense if they know that they are protagonists in a romance novel and are therefore supposed to somehow achieve a happily ever after.
