If you suspect that you are not adequately scared of infectious diseases, I can heartily recommend this book to you. The Hot Zone opens with a description of what the Marburg virus (a member of the Ebola family) does to your body; and I can say, with confidence, that it is one of the most disgusting things I have ever read. After telling the story of a small outbreak in Kenya (which could be traced to Kitum Cave in the shadow of Mount Elgon), the narrative shifts to Reston, Virginia, where research monkeys began to die of a strange disease in 1989. The army identified it as Ebola, or something very much like Ebola, and went into action to put down the monkeys and disinfect the area. The emergency turned out to be something of a false alarm, since this virus—now called the Reston virus, closely related to Ebola—appeared harmless to humans. However, the Reston virus is still frightening, if only as a sign of what is possible. For it has a mortality as high as Ebola in monkeys (over 90%) and it can be transmitted through the air. The disease spread throughout the entire research compound, even though the monkeys were housed in different rooms, in individual cages. Obviously, if such a virus arose in humans, we would be in for a rough time. The book ends with a description of Preston’s own voyage to Kitum Cave, the source of one outbreak. He gives a vivid account of the many different species of animals that inhabit the cave, any one of which could have been the virus’s original host. (Since then, we have detected the Marburg virus in bat guano.) The more general point is that the animal world is full of germs, some of them potentially devastating. AIDS crossed over into humans in the same region, a disease that has claimed many millions of lives. What else is out there waiting for us? This book is written as a thriller—fast, easy, exhilarating—and so it does lack some depth and analysis that I had hoped to find. But Preston’s warning about Ebola proved prescient: the disease did return, and perhaps it will again.
