"...he was the most hideous thing that you prayed you might never see." Raymond's most notorious book, where legend has it his publisher was physically sick whilst reading it...costing him his contract, hence the fact this fourth instalment of the Factory series was originally published by Scribners, rather than the previous Alison Press / Secker and Warburg. Not just the publisher, Raymond himself would state in his memoirs that this book changed him somehow, that nothing was the same again...which is exactly the state of every single character in this book. However, it would be wrong to approach this book with either fear or excitement - without having read the previous three novels, I believe the impact would be lessened, and would likely just seem excessive, without the understanding of who the Detective Sergeant was and where he had come from. Not even he can explain why this case affects him in the way it does, but the chain of events it places him on are as brutal as anything I have ever read (with the possible exception of Selby Jr's 'The Room' which is the level we are working on). This is because of how it gets under the readers skin, it's not a literary equivalent of a torture-porn movie, there will undoubtedly be books with far worse descriptions of violence, it's when you step back and look at the whole - where the characters came from, what they were doing and how the murders that open the book came to happen. It's a world that is all too real, a horrendous inditement on our society that would both allow and condone the characters who populate this story. And what an opening. I read a review that stated the opening 50-odd pages were the most horrendous ever written...and why on earth would anyone want to read them? The third person mind of a killer as he goes about his work, explaining every detail, every reason, every sense. This third person viewpoint is almost like a first person account however, in that it's effectively the detached mind of the psychopath, looking at his own work from a distance. He knows he's insane, and is completely comfortable with that. It's a hard read, but absolutely unputdownable. And that is why people like me want to read this book...because it works on a level far deeper than the surface. This may be the second time on Goodreads I've read this book, but I have lost count how many times I've read it since coming across Raymond in the early 90's. There is also a CD of Raymond reading extracts behind a soundscape from the band Gallon Drunk. I've listened to this many times...if you have read this you should track it down...but only once you've read the book itself, in full.
