Hello Mallory Mallory Pike has been asked to join the BSC since Stacey moved back to NY. She can not wait to tell the club about how she took care of 6 of her brothers and sisters while her brother Nicky had to go to the hospital from an injury playing volleyball with his friend Buddy. There’s a new student in Mal’s sixth-grade class (Jessica Ramsey) and (here we go with this nonsense) she’s black. Right away you can see the prejudice (the teachers don’t ask her to say anything about herself, there’s a boy that shoots rubber bands at her head, and the white girls make racist comments about her being from Africa and say she doesn’t belong there). Mal even acts like she’s star-struck “Oh look it’s a black person!” but decides she wants her as a best friend (only let’s note because all the other girls already are paired up). This is going to be a LONG book! Things don’t go well at Mal’s first meeting. She dresses wrong, she gets blamed for Nicky’s accident, and she’s told she’s going to have to take a test the next day. She also finds out a black family moved into Stacey’s old house and wonders if it’s Jessica. On the way to take the test, Mal decides to walk by Jessica’s house. Jessica introduces her to her 8-year-old sister (Rebecca) and her 1-year-old brother Squirt (John Phillip Ramsey). They find out they both love books and horse stories. They’re both the oldest. They both wear glasses and will both need braces. They promise to trade their favorite books and Jess promises next time to see her (her) toe shoes. (She’s a ballet dancer). The test is horrible and they ask her a bunch of stuff they themselves probably didn’t know \(At what age does a baby cut his first teeth, which ones, what’s a tourniquet? What’s the difference between creeping and crawling, draw the human digestive system) Is she initiating to be in a sitting club or applying to medical school? They get a call that Mrs. Perkins delivered and it’s a girl (Laura). The BSC tells Mal they’ll give her the results after her sitting job with Claudia with the Perkins. Needless to say, she makes a lot of mistakes on the sitting job because Claudia makes her nervous. (I’m just realizing this is Gabby and Myriah on the cover. I always thought it was Claire and Margo). Even though she fails the test, they tell her they’ll give her another one. But Mallory tells them they can stick their test where the sun doesn’t shine and leaves. At school, Jessi and Mal vent to each other back and forth about not belonging. Then they decide to start their own babysitting club (Kid’s Incorporated). They make fliers and calls and they’re caught is they’ll give two sisters for the price of one. Mrs. Pike gives them their first job. Dawn sees them while sitting the Barrette’s and she tells Kristy (who isn’t happy). KI gets another job for the Ramseys. Then Kristy calls and tries to get in Mal’s head (saying KI will fail)but it doesn’t work. While sitting at the Ramsey’s it becomes even more clear to Mal how racist people in Stoneybrooke really are. But then Charlotte comes by to play with Becca and an invite for her family to dinner. The BSC realize their mistake when they start getting overbooked and invite Mal and Jessi to join the club after sitting with one of them on one job. Jessi sits with Dawn (we don’t get to hear how her job went but we know she gets in) Mal only had 1 mistake when letting the repair people in and Jamie falls off the swing, but Claudia is understanding and she makes it. My Thoughts: It’s interesting that when I read this series a long (long) time ago initially I didn’t notice something that’s really starting to annoy me. And that is as a black person the lack of blacks in these fictional communities and how they treat the 1 black family the author feels obligated to throw in. Probably as a sense of the necessity that there has to be one token black girl (or boy). They point out the racist people but then try to put a band-aid on it by showing a couple of families that *do* accept the black character. And even though I know that’s the way of the world that a lot of whites don’t accept us just like in the book, why just for once can’t the book just treat Jessica as just another Stoneybrooke Middle School Student and just leave the racist aspect of it ALONE! I rather it wasn’t even touched. It even went as far as trying to make it seem like the issue of the BSC not accepting Mallory and how racist Stoneybrooke is to the Ramseys look like it’s on the same level. IT ISNT! But while the BSC were jerks for most of the book, I did like that they said anyone who didn’t accept Jessi could no longer be a client. Rating: 5
