Recently rescued/purchased at the local library summer book sale. Starting tonight? I did indeed start last night and was reluctant to put it down. The author gives lots of history and background and there's plenty of quoting from the letters of many people. There's a lot about Jefferson and his friendship/alliance with Meriweather Lewis. Not much about Clark so far, but Lewis has indicated to TJ that there needed to be a co-leader and Clark has been introduced as a former well-thought-of colleague of Lewis'. I assume Lewis understood that there might be a need for redundancy in the leadership area. Lewis was for the most part a great planner and organizer, especially considering that much of the route was terra incognito. The ultimate fate(suicide) of poor Lewis was already known to me. He suffered from depression. I can relate. Last night: Just when I was getting exasperated with all the quoting from letters, the author veered away into more straightforward story-telling. Much better, though a certain amount of quotage is helpful and inevitable. And ... the Discovery Lads are finally on their way up the wide Missouri after overcoming boatloads(har har) of obstacles, not least of which is the tendency of various expedition members to run off and get drunk regularly. From what I've read chronic (male)drunkenness was a bigger problem in the 19th century than it is today. The lads have progressed up river pretty well with only one fatality so far. If memory serves it will turn out to be the only one - miraculously. The interactions with the locals are varied, but the common theme is that they're not that interested in words, colored beads and useless medallions, so much as powder, balls and whiskey. Smallpox is a terrible scourge. Winter camp will be coming soon. It's winter in North Dakota - BRRRR! and a few new members have been added to the Corps of Discovery, including 15-year old and pregnant Sacajawea. She delivers in camp and another soul is added to the roster of trekkers. As thee trekkers approach the Rockies they are facing various obstacles. In one day Lewis is confronted by a Grizzly bear, some unruly buffalo bulls and a rattlesnake. Meanwhile the Corps has some difficulty now in following the "true" Missouri's course. Somehow they manage to do it, though they will eventually learn of shortcuts to the Columbia and will explore some of those on the way back. Jefferson's instructions were explicit about following the Missouri to its source, so Lewis tried to stick to that course on the way west. And now the Corps of Discovery in the Rocky Mountains and being aided by the Shoshone Indians, the native tribe of Sacagawea's origins. Her reunion with a brother and a friend are touching and indicate how the expedition seemed to be aided by good fortune along the way. This despite all the physical trials they endured. Lewis was the ideal leader and considering everything to this point he's done a helluva job. It did help to be lucky(like Bilbo!), though. On to the Pacific! So, the lads have made it to the stormy and foggy mouth of the Columbia, where they spend the winter. No snow to deal with and no other white men are mentioned. So far no ships either. There are the challenges of getting enough to eat, day-to-day boredom, and sickness. Plenty of syphilis, apparently. The local elk population must have declined precipitously from the hunting pressure, and quite a few dogs were consumed as well. The white men showed very little interest in fishing for their food, though they liked the fish they bought from the natives. Reminds of the behavior of the Norse settlers in Greenland and Labrador. Something about fishing that was unmanly... or something. Tonight they will begin the trek back, which will include side trips to explore shortcuts they couldn't/didn't take on the way out. Almost done now as I'm skip-skimming through Lewis' unfortunate post expedition life, brief as it was. Though the man's personality and assets served him well for the most part as the leader of the Corps of Discovery, the complicated demands(love[or lack thereof], career, publishing) back home in the USA apparently were too much for Lewis' psyche. I haven't reached that sad ending yet but I will tonight. In terms of book evaluation, it seems to me that it would have been a better to sum up the post expedition years in a much shorter space than the author takes. Interesting as it all may be to a true historian, it's nothing but anti-climax and sadness. - p.s. the guy(Lewis) just drank too much - another depressed boozer it would seem. Finished last night with the sad ending of a remarkable life. Seems like Meriwether Lewis wasn't able to handle life-after-celebrity. He went to pieces pretty quickly in St. Louis after he returned as a territorial governor. Feuding with a beaureaucrat(sp???) didn't help. It's tough to win such battles. The circumstances of his death evoke comparisons with the end of Vincent Van Gogh's life. - 4.25* rounds down to 4*.
