These are incredible stories, unlike anything else I have read (and at this point I've read *alot* of short stores). This is fantasy or science fiction at its most compelling; the stories put me in mind of China Mieville or J G Ballard. All are set in current time but the reality of the characters is altered in one key way - dead people can stay on earth but have to spend some uncontrollable time in a personal hell; basketball players play ball in the exosuit of now-dead stars; aliens that look like big cats follow people who are in trouble; a prison is made from the almost-dead bodies of convicts. Lethem uses a "finite artificial world" to explore themes of metaphor, accountability, escapism. These stories excited me; I couldn't wait to read the next one, which is honestly pretty rare in a book of short stories. In "Light and the Sufferer" large, black, cat-like aliens follow drug users, and no one knows why. They cannot be killed. In fact they are drug users themselves, which is an ironic twist - the assumption is always that our encounters with alien life forms will be based on desire for domination, that the contact will mean something, that the aliens will want something profound or something valuable for survival, not drugs that are slowly killing their human users. Bizarrely society calls these creatures "Sufferers" and seems to think they follow people to help them, even though there is no basis for this. Because the Sufferers only follow addicts, their presence is a flag to the police and other users; some look at them as death angels. Lethem has stated in an interview that the narrator, other characters and the reader worry over their relevance; the story reflects on itself as science fiction and assumptions made about that genre, posing a metafictional question about the point of including aliens in a story about a hopeless drug dealer and his brother's desire to save him. The story asks whether there is anything that can prevent a train that's off the track from derailing; Light seems to be on a path of self-destruction; can his brother save him? Can something as fantastic as an alien save him? Readers have noted that Lethem will literalize a metaphor to explore its meaning. In "The Happy Man" Tom moves back and forth between his real life with his wife and son and hell; when he is in hell, he's basically a zombie in his real life. The hell he travels to is personal (his own private hell) - he is literally going to a hell that plays out like a video game; in this hell he's a character that can make decisions, and horrors play out based on these decisions. The story begs the question: if there is such a thing as hell where we go when we die, what will it be like? Will it be the same for everyone? Or, worse, will that hell be personal, the worst possible hell for each of us based on how best to punish us for our mistakes in life? Tom escapes real life, leaving behind his wife and son who have to deal with the reality of being alive in a world filled with evil. In "Sleepy People" society has fallen apart; people are aimless, crime is increasing, society is breaking down. How much of this is because of our tendency to sleepwalk through our lives, focused narrowly on our own problems rather than seeing more broadly what is happening around us? The sleepy man, like Tom, also escapes this reality through sleeping.
