with the departure of stacey, the bsc needs a new member to take some of their surplus of jobs. they ask mallory pike to join but force her to take a ridiculous test (they ask her to draw the human digestive system from memory, for instance) and fail her for not being perfect. meanwhile there is a new girl in mallory's class, jessi ramsey, who is black (which is a big deal because there's no one else in mallory's class who's black because connecticut is the worst). like mallory, jessi is a horse girl, so she and mallory become bffs and start a rival baby-sitting club. highlights: -mallory writes a story called "rainy days and froggy nights" -- holy moly, I want to read that! -jessi tells a ton of jokes, including the penguin joke . -in general, having a younger person who is not yet a bsc member narrate is a refreshing change of pace. the introduction chapter is way more interesting than usual, considering mallory is not totally positive about how things run and just hypothesizes about a lot of things. -mallory and jessi call their rival baby-sitting club " kids incorporated "--seriously, had ann not heard of that show? -this kristy quote about kids incorporated: "well, who'll hire them? they're too young. they won't get any jobs... and mallory doesn't know the first thing about tourniquets." -claudia says mallory's drawing of the "divestive" system is terrible (LOL claud moment) -claudia thinks mallory said you should give colicky babies soy sauce for their digestion, but mallory said soy formula (another LOL claud moment) nitpicks/continuity problems: -all pikes including mallory are described as having chestnut brown hair. on the cover art mallory has red hair. huh? also, I know the other pikes have brown hair, but mallory is almost always described as having red hair in subsequent books. -jessi says she used to baby-sit for her cousin kara who is two. she later says that becca didn't used to baby-sit and just hung out with her cousins (implying that these are the cousins who are about her age), and one of them is kara. oops. -very dumb nitpick, but ann says cracker jacks and it's actually cracker jack (not pluralized). -jessi wears reading glasses? is this ever mentioned again? lowlights: -jessi is described as "coffee colored" in a classic idiotic white person describing a person of color's complexion moment. -the members of the bsc are almost unforgiveably awful to mallory in this book, and it's not fun to read. also at the end when they agree to have jessi join the bsc too, she asks if they're sure because people in stonybrook might not want her to baby-sit their kids because she's black and everyone in stonybrook is a racist piece of shit. the baby-sitters actually consider this before finally deciding that they wouldn't want to baby-sit for a family that wouldn't want jessi as a baby-sitter only because she's black. the fact that they even have to consider that is kind of offensive to me. -reading about everyone in stonybrook's subtle and overt racism towards the ramsey family is not fun. the girls in her class that mallory sits with at lunch make jokes about how jessi is from africa and her real name is mobobwee. seriously painful. -that said, the racism plotline could be handled better. in Good-bye Stacey, Good-bye ann writes about Iggie's House . in that book, the main character tries to play the white savior to the black family that moves into her neighborhood, and the kids in the family are pissed off about it. it's actually really interesting and complex, and it doesn't buy into the white people are either good (perfect, not-racist, saviors to poc) or evil (overtly racist, burning crosses on lawns, etc) bullshit. this book wasn't really like that; it wasn't the worst I've read but it definitely treated the white people of stonybrook as good=savior//evil=overtly racist. no claudia outfits outfits: -mallory: "I finally decided on my red jumper that said Mallory across the front, a short-sleeved white blouse, and white tights with little red hearts all over them...I put on my penny loafers." -mary anne: "on the day of my first meeting, she was wearing a baggy yellow sweater with a silver squiggle pin near the collar, a short skirt made out of sweat-shirt material, yellow tights, and ballet slippers." snacks in claudia's room: -tootsie pops in a pillowcase under her bed -gummi worms in her hollowed-out book -giant box of cracker jack (n.s.)
