2.5 stars "Mother of Pearl" is set in a small town within the South during the 1950's. Petal, Mississippi has plenty of drama as the story goes on. Namely, a woman has suffered a crippling stroke giving birth to her son; the child's father hides his identity but sends money for support. White teen-agers who fall in love turn out to be half siblings; when the girl gets pregnant and dies in childbirth, a black man raises the child; a lesbian whose brother is a priest, and a cranky lady who falls in love with an undertaker; a half ''Injin'' woman resides by the river, reading minds and casting spells. Melinda Haynes's language left much to be desired because it is as vigorous as the Southern twang in the 1950s. Haynes tells the stories of Valuable Korner, a fatherless girl named after a real estate sign; Even Grade, an orphan, now grown, who was named for a road; and Joleb Green, whose name comes from a father he does not yet know. At one point, I could not keep track at the number of characters that Haynes introduced within the story. There is so much drama and so many people involved in the dispute that I found it difficult to follow along sometimes. Haynes strives to bring a whole, rambunctious world into the book about the 1950s while trying to write in a 1950s style. Her language went over my head at times. For example, she animates a tattered road sign that's ''a too-old puzzle now for anybody to remember,'' ''lifted up by some mulish gust'' and odd angles of nature's radiance: ''Underneath the water at night the sand looked like ground-up bits of silver. Bluish-brown pieces of silver shining like sunken music.'' In the end, although I enjoyed a lot of Haynes' depiction of Petal, Miss., I did not love this book by any means. I found myself dragging through it but after reading a few other GR reviews, decided to push through and finish the book. There was so much added "fluff" in between each dramatic situation, that I had just about hit my breaking point to drop the book before a scene would arise that caught my attention. If you have patience, I would recommend this book. However, if you're looking for a quick read, hold off. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
