Book 7 in the Barsetshire series, “Before Lunch” published in 1939, Thirkell has many returning characters in each succeeding story. The new characters are the Middletons and the Stonors. Mr. Jack Middleton and his wife Catherine are renting Lavering Farm and the White House is leased by Jack's widow sister, Lillian Stonor and her two older step children. Once again, and in all her books there are unhappy married women bearing their husbands, and here there are at least two such women here. Always a mix up in the love line which makes for fun. Jack Middleton is well known in his profession but at a loss for everything else, he depends on his wife Catherine whose needs are rarely met. An interesting friendship of a younger man makes her sigh about her older husband. Lillian Stonor visits her brother with her two older step children. Lillian like after them, Denis is always ill, the fresh country improves his constitution: Daphne is the opposite of Denis, strong and healthy. A meeting about lands nearby and the building of a business has other Barsetshire citizens. Story in short- Jack and Catherine Middleton invite Jack's sister Lillian with her two grown step children to stay together. ➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖➖ Characters from the series- The Deans and the Tebbens from "August Folly" Mrs. Louise Palmer from “August Folly” Roddy Wicklow who ends up marrying Alice Barton. Lord Pomfret whose heir, Mr. Gillie Foster, married Roddy's sister, Sally. They have a son. Lord Pomfret's only son died in WW 1. He had heard of Daphne and Denis' father who was in their son's regiment. Betty Dean is thought to be interested in C. W. Bond. The Leslies' from "Wild Strawberries" are part of the meeting as well as Lord Stoke. ❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌ ❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌ spoiler alert Daphne becomes engaged to an older man she thinks is really kind but she loves Cedric Bond intensely. She was sad when she saw Betty Dean’s engagement ring thinking that Cedric is to marry Betty. When Mr. Cameron sees Daphne crying he somehow proposes, thinking he loves her though it is apparent that he likes Daphne’s stepmother, Lillian more but does not realize this yet. Daphne says yes in a sad way like a soldier’s daughter would put up a strong front, thinking Cedric is lost. Cedric knows Betty from their trips to the USA, but in reality they are only friends and Betty is engaged to an American that is friends with Cedric. So when it is cleared up that Betty is not to marry Cedric and after hearing all about this, Cedric and Daphne become engaged. Cameron has been unsettled since he propsed to Daphne, wanting really it to be Lillian, but what to do? When he finds out that Daphne has a picture of Cedric under her pillow, he faces the truth of Cedric and Daphne being quite happy! Lord Bonds likes both Daphne and Denis, so he is happy about the engagement and keeps quiet until the next day when his wife will be told, but how will she take it? Lady Bond a strong figure finally decides that Daphne who speaks up and is not weak, is an alright choice for her son. When Cameron propses to Lillian who says yes but what about Denis, who lives with her? Lord Bonds has already made that possible for Denis will go to London and produce his ballet with Lord Bond’s capital. Denis and Catherine part but the touch of the hand is telling. Catherine to her dreary life with a self centered husband who sometimes thinks of her needs.
