My school assigned An Imperfect God as mandatory summer reading, but I found the tome to be valuable. Wiencek explores the life of George Washington with a special emphasis on enslavement. He explains the complicated internal struggle Washington faced when dealing with slavery, and he discussed how this influenced Washington’s public decisions on the matter. Wiencek also explored many of the locations that Washington spent time in. For instance, Wiencek visited Mount Vernon, Colonial Williamsburg, Tudor Place, and more. It is refreshing to see Wiencek exploring places that preserve this history but continue to exist today. Wiencek quotes numerous passages from various historical documents and contextualizes them, showing how they relate to the story of Washington’s life. Personally, I did not know a great deal about our first president before I read this book, but Wiencek managed to explain the events of Washington’s life in a clear and compelling way. So, I learned a great deal about all sorts of things Washington did, even though this book primarily discusses enslavement. One thing that struck me about An Imperfect God is that even in a field that has been heavily explored by dozens upon dozens of serious historians, Wiencek was able to discover and highlight crucial sources that had previously been underreported or ignored altogether. Wiencek found a primary source discussing Washington’s role in a slave raffle and provided seemingly new information about the dating of John Augustine’s will, which is important to the debate around whether or not Washington fathered an enslaved African. There is one key reason why An Imperfect God gets 4 stars and not 5: The book was a bit of a slog. Admittedly, I had to rush through the tome in a short period, but I still found it quite difficult to get through. The pages are long and some chapters are enormous. There are few clear stopping points in this dense history book. During the 55 page chapter titled “A Scheme in Williamsburg”, it felt to me that Wiencek was prolonging the tale of a few events when they could have been easily shortened and conveyed with more clarity. There were a few times when I simply wanted to put this book down and take a nap. That hurts its rating. However, I am still glad that I read this novel. George Washington was a fascinating man who embodies many of the paradoxes of early (and arguably present) America: He fought for a nation based on principles of freedom and liberty, but held hundreds of humans in bondage. He came to support a gradual emancipation in principle, but did not use his power and prestige to call for one. Washington invented and heard a million justifications for enslavement in his life, but ultimately freed those whom he had enslaved. An Imperfect God thoroughly examines all these complicated paradoxes, and that ensures that it is worth a read.
