This second Mitch Rapp novel has got serious, annoying problems. 3rd Option – I did not like this 3rd book in the series. Anna, who has become Mitch's love interest, is an idiot and gets herself taken by the bad guys. Mitch wants to quit and marry her. This whole idea of Mitch in a real romance does not work for me. Bad guy Sen. Hank Clark gets away in the end. Flynn tries to connect all the people in previous books, like a dumb romance novel. Recurring character Scott Coleman assists him, Dumond is his computer geek (how many times have I read the paragraph outlining Dumond's background!). Anna was supposed to stay w/ Congressman O’Rourke (Book 1) for protection. The story started off great -- he is double-crossed and shot in Germany while assassinating a rich German guy who funnels cash to terrorists. Then we have a flurry of “hiring assassins” to off the multiple layers that Mitch is peeling back to find out who is behind it all – the German couple is offed by Peter Cameron and Villaume and Marco (hired by Cameron), Cameron is offed by Donatella (hired by Clark), Marco is offed by Duser (hired by Cameron), Duser is offed by Mitch, who took Anna. It gets dumb. The top of the food chain is Clark who gets away, and he was doing it all to bring the CIA under investigation and make Irene look bad (she’s poised to take over CIA as Stansfield’s death is imminent) so he could look good enough to run for pres in the future? Weak. And he keeps re-hashing what happened in previous books. I sense Flynn grappling with real execution issues as he settles into the role of author of a modern-day, action, spy-assassin hero. Don't get me wrong, I love Flynn, but remember the first macrame weaving you did at summer camp when you were 14? The strings were going in different directions, then you remembered them hanging out there flapping, tried to weave them back in, encountered some knotty problems, so you just whacked them off and tucked them under, hoping no one would notice? And have I mentioned yet how much I hate the Anna character? She is no match for Mitch Rapp. She's insipid.
