So, I'm in a "rut," but it's a good rut. I'm trying to read everything written by Ayako Miura that's been translated into English. So far I only know of 4 books that fit this description (Heart of Winter, Wind is Howling, Freezing Point, Shiokari Pass). Any more I'm missing? I really have enjoyed Miura's writing so far. Shiokari Pass was no exception. The author really takes the reader on an emotional roller coaster through the first couple of chapters. In the space of just a few pages, I went from thinking that the main character's mother was dead and that his father was doing a good job of conscientiously raising his son to thinking that his father is a terrible two-timer having an affair with a local housewife. Then just a few pages later, I find that everything I've thought is turned upside down as I learn that Mom is not really dead after all. And Dad is not such a "player" either. Rather, he is secretly visiting his wife on a regular basis at her house across town because he's been forbidden to remain married to this Christian woman by his devoutly Buddhist mother. Crazy stuff. Not to mention that this book gives some really interesting peeks into Japanese culture (especially the culture of the past -- but I think there are still plenty of Japanese people who operate under very similar influences). One such example that really shocked me was the inability of the father to stand up for his own marriage in the face of his mother. It was perceived as completely unacceptable, and this was a cultural expectation he was absolutely unwilling to cross (or maybe didn't even imagine it would be possible to cross). Even when it meant choosing his mother above his wife. Again, crazy stuff. Other concepts touched on in the course of the story: Sexual struggles (especially fantasy & invitation to the red district) as experienced by a Japanese man both before & after conversion to Christianity. The TB epidemic shortly following WWII -- wow! what a terrible disease! The sometimes inevitable reality of having an "arch nemisis" as a Christian. This can be a very real method of spiritual attack. I have one quibble with the way the ending of the book was written. And I'm not sure whether it was originally written with this ambiguity or whether it was created in translation... I honestly couldn't tell was was happening in the last paragraph of the book: "Suddenly Fujiko threw herself down on the track. Yoshikawa stood rooted to the spot. In his eyes, blurred with tears, Fujiko's figure and the white spiraea blended together. Her heart-rending cries reached him clearly. It was noon on a cloudless day at Shiokari Pass." Is this passage depicting Fujiko's graphic display of grief, or has she just committed suicide? I wasn't sure how to take this description. A couple people I've talked to since I read the book have assured me that Fujiko was simply grieving, and is still alive and well at the end of the book -- Phew!!! --Jen This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
