“There was a day, a very hot and humid Saturday in early August, when in the company of two criminologists who were preparing to testify for the defense, I went inside 544 Castle Drive. I remained for five hours, amid the mustiness, the clutter, and the dust. For the most part it was the little things to which my attention was drawn…Eventually, I became aware of a noise. A low hum, being emitted by the refrigerator. The [Criminal Investigation Division] agent who had opened the apartment that morning told me the refrigerator had never been unplugged. There was a standing order at CID headquarters: every six weeks send an MP to defrost it. For nine and a half years, the Army, as part of its continuing crime scene supervision, had been preserving the food that no one had eaten, that no one would ever eat…I shut the door. The hum of the refrigerator seemed to grow louder. After a while, I lost all desire to open closet doors or to check under beds, or to make lists of personal effects or household furnishings. I didn’t want to find any Christmas tree tinsel on the living room rug, or any threads from a blue pajama top, anywhere…” - Joe McGinniss, Fatal Vision “Every journalist who is not too stupid or too full of himself to notice what is going on knows that what he does is morally indefensible.” - Janet Malcom, The Journalist and the Murderer Here’s a warning before you start Joe McGinniss’s Fatal Vision : The door that you are about to enter leads to a rabbit hole. At 663-hardcover pages, Fatal Vision is a beast, and that doesn’t even include the afterwords to the updated editions. But that’s only the start. Because once you’ve read McGinniss’s controversial classic, you need to follow up with Janet Malcom’s 176-page study of McGinniss’s journalistic ethics. And of course, there is Errol Morris’s Wilderness of Error , which comes to a conclusion that is diametrically opposed to McGinniss, and also weighs in at nearly 500 pages. Starting to get tired just thinking of all these words? I hate to break it to you: This is just a sampling of the literature. Once you get started, you’re going to want to go to the primary sources. That is, you’re going to want to read the actual legal documents that chart the many twists and turns in the case of United States v. Jeffrey MacDonald . The last opinion issued in this case – from December 2018, by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals – runs to 154 pages. Hell, this review itself adds approximately 2,000 more words to a prodigious pile. So, if you are going to start this journey, do so with the understanding that it’s going to take a while. Oh, you think you can stop? Maybe, maybe not. But once you are in this thicket, you might have a hard time finding your way out. This grisly true crime story seeps into you like the damp. *** On the night of February 16-17, 1970, military policemen at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, responded to the scene of a triple murder. The dead: Colette MacDonald, pregnant with her third child; Kimberly MacDonald, age five; and Kristen MacDonald, just two. Seemingly unconscious but still alive was Captain Jeffrey MacDonald, educated at Princeton and Northwestern University Medical School, a Green Beret, a husband and father. Soon, as well, to be a suspect in one of the most celebrated, compelling, and utterly tragic of all murder cases. According to MacDonald’s version of events, a Manson-like party of four had killed his family and injured him, all while chanting “acid is groovy” and “kill the pigs.” This far-out tale did not convince CID agents, who singled him out as the culprit. However, after a lengthy Article 32 hearing (sort of like a preliminary hearing in civilian court), he was cleared of charges and was free to leave the Army and continue his life. This included going on talk shows, moving to California, dating beautiful women, and buying a yacht. Hounded by a vengeful parent – stepfather Alfred “Freddy” Kassab – the Justice Department eventually convened a grand jury, which indicted MacDonald on three murders. Initially, the indictment was thrown out, when the Fourth Circuit determined that MacDonald’s speedy-trial rights had been violated. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed this decision, and MacDonald went through a jury trial nine years after the murders. After the trial, he was duly convicted and sent to prison. But then, the Fourth Circuit reversed again, on speedy trial grounds, and ordered his release. Again, the U.S. Supreme Court intervened and reversed the Fourth Circuit’s reversal, sending MacDonald back to prison. This serpentine case is covered mostly in its entirety by Joe McGinniss’s famous and provocative Fatal Vision . (Published in 1983, with periodic afterwords added to later editions, the book does not cover MacDonald’s various postconviction actions). In my mind, McGinniss’s big accomplishment is in compiling a tremendous amount of information, and weaving it into an interesting narrative, one that artfully intercuts the main storyline with flashbacks to MacDonald’s life narrated by none other than MacDonald himself, in long, apparently unedited chunks. There are also lengthy excerpts – seemingly verbatim – of various legal hearings, including the trial. As a sometimes-courthouse junkie, I appreciate the word-for-word transcription, rather than the author’s summation. It should be noted, however, that you have to take all this material on faith, as McGinniss does not provide endnotes, or even an explanation of his research. From bits and pieces found in the text and the afterwords, it becomes clear that McGinniss imbedded himself in the MacDonald legal team shortly before MacDonald’s trial, signing a contract that gave him incredibly deep access to the legal files. Still, this does not entirely explain how McGinniss was able to give such detailed accounts of certain events, such as the supposedly-secret grand jury proceeding that handed down the MacDonald indictment. For most of Fatal Vision , I mainly appreciated McGinniss’s workmanlike ability to project a comprehensive and coherent structure on a veritable legal epic that otherwise threatens to burst at the seams. At the end, though, in his final chapters, McGinniss strives for something more, an effort to reach a higher plain, such as that surmounted by Capote in In Cold Blood . This attempt climaxes in a scene set in the abandoned MacDonald family home, now a crime scene, which has been dutifully preserved for nearly a decade. This chilling sequence reaches the core of the best true crime, finding the lost humanity in the midst of an inhuman mess. Had Fatal Vision ended there, I might have been content. But it does not simply end there. The version I read contained two afterwords, in which McGinniss tried, with diminishing success, to explain the fallout of his hugely successful book (and accompanying miniseries). To put it plainly: I have to mention McGinniss’s journalistic ethics. *** Called into question by Janet Malcom in The Journalist and the Murderer , the issue boils down to McGinniss’s promises – or lack of promises – to MacDonald at the outset of their project together. McGinniss said he made no promises about what he would write; MacDonald said he did. Eventually, MacDonald sued McGinniss, and they settled out of court – after a hung jury – for between $200,000-300,000. In a rather whiny, churlish, and prickly manner, McGinniss defends the settlement while lashing out at the federal judge who heard his case; at Janet Malcom for daring to impugn him while being a female journalist; and at everyone else who dared look at him askance. Without knowing the full truth of the matter – both McGinniss and MacDonald having plenty of reasons to massage the truth – it is worth noting that both the Kennedy family and Sarah Palin have accused McGinniss – who is deceased – of being factually challenged. It is not dispositive, but it’s possible that the truth lies at the intersection of agreement between Kennedys and Palins. In a certain sense, the ethics of Fatal Vision matter not. The book came out after MacDonald’s conviction, and after the resolution of his direct appeal. Thus, it did not influence the outcome one way or another. Indeed, the notoriety has helped MacDonald by keeping his case in the spotlight (and attracting powerful advocates, like Errol Morris). Still, the scent here is a bit off, and it taints the volume. *** As hard as he tried, McGinniss never turned up a smoking gun proving MacDonald’s ultimate guilt. His most impressive “discovery,” which came after the trial, was nothing more than an additional piece of circumstantial evidence in an entirely circumstantial case. Viewed together, and with just a bit of squinting, you can see a guilty verdict clearly in those tea leaves. At the same time, you can also see reasonable doubt. What McGinniss does – in the absence of unequivocal evidence – is engage in a trial of character , ending in MacDonald being entirely guilty of narcissism and raging asshole-ism. This is what unsettles. Much of the proof comes from MacDonald’s own words, which McGinniss provides without comment, and without provenance. There is also a constant authorial shading, whereby scenes with MacDonald and his lawyers are given a negative slant, while the prosecutors are presented as faultless angels who sing but of the truth. McGinniss’s interpretations of various incidents bely his later assertions that he liked MacDonald as a person, and enjoyed spending time with him. This contradiction makes it easy for me to imagine that McGinniss – who actually spent time in MacDonald’s SoCal condo while doing research – did in fact lie to MacDonald about being on his side, all while fitting him for the noose. *** The reason this case, this book, gets into you – and the reason this review has gone on so long – is that it is hard to square. Murder can not be excused, but most can be explained. An explosion of temper. A tempestuous affair. Financial gain. This one defies any sense whatsoever. MacDonald had everything going for him. Yet he is probably guilty of killing his family. More to the point, he slaughtered them in the literal sense of the word, blow after blow. This was not rage; this took too long to be rage. Rage expends itself quickly. No, this was close, heavy work. None of his family died quickly. MacDonald’s arms and shoulders would have tired; his lungs would have burned. He would have felt the hot breath of his kids on his face, their hot blood on his hands. He would have looked into their eyes as he had on the first day, then took it all away with full consciousness of his actions. The prosecutors say he laid one of his children across his lap to stab them, repeatedly. If that be so, the sooner the flood comes to take us all the better. As I read, I kept thinking MacDonald couldn’t do it, that it was impossible. Because who could? That’s the trap, though, to judge people based on ourselves. Even reconciled to MacDonald’s guilt, I am still troubled by the problems in the case. McGinniss has no such qualms. He is certain. I find that certainty to be troubling and simplistic. That, more than McGinniss’s questionable ethics, is what dogs Fatal Vision . Oftentimes the best true crime writing embraces the reality that sometimes – despite all our striving – there is no final answer. The riddle remains a riddle; a mystery a mystery. Life is filled with unknown unknowns, especially in the realm of inexplicable crimes. Fatal Vision harbors no doubts. It is confident in its ability to judge a man’s actions at a discrete point in time based on his likeability, or lack thereof; on whether he expresses grief “normally” or “abnormally”; on how he tells his own story. I find this some flimsy proof, but McGinniss is positive, and that certainly feels better than the imponderable possibility of convicting a skilled surgeon for a crime he might not have committed, adding a lifetime in prison to the immeasurable loss of his family. This near-certitude - call it smugness - on McGinniss’s part serves to strip Fatal Vision of some of its otherwise-formidable power.
