Twas the moment deep When we are conscious of the secret dawn Amid the darkness that we feel is green… Thy face remembered is from other worlds, It has been died for, though I know not when, It has been sung of, though I know not where… Anya Seton has written here a dual-time tale of a girl, Celia Bohun, living in 1550’s Tudor England, and her reincarnated counterpart, Celia Marsdon, living in 1968. The Tudor story is three quarters of the novel and the modern day story only one quarter, which suited me well, since I usually seem to have more interest in the earlier time frames when reading such novels. We are told at the outset, so no spoiler, that the original Celia was walled up alive in a castle called Ightham Mote, after becoming pregnant at the hand of a monk, and this tidbit keeps the reader plowing ahead, after all, anyone would want to know how and why such a thing should happen to a young girl. Unfortunately, that tidbit might have been the only reason I kept reading. I was vaguely interested in the developing relationship between Celia and Brother Stephen and Seton draws an intriguing picture of life for Catholics in the chaos of changing loyalties during the reigns of Edward, then Mary, and finally Elizabeth. However, I failed completely at feeling any connection or even concern for the two main characters. Much of their story made no logical sense to me. Perhaps I have become too old for stories in which the physical attraction of a body consumes one’s soul. I wanted there to be something deeper underlying this attraction, but Seton never gave me that, so the unrelenting nature of Celia’s love seemed naive and false and contrived. I was put in mind of a stubborn child who simply wants the toy and is pitching a tantrum for it. She did not receive the kind of encouragement that I would have thought necessary in order to take some of the ridiculous choices that she took. I have read Seton before and enjoyed her writing, so this one was a disappointment for me. I have given it a 3✯ rating because I did “like” it, I just didn’t love it or think it would be very memorable. I suspect that if you asked me six months from now I would be hard pressed to tell you a single detail except the obvious one that comes early on and kept me reading.
