Mid-20th Century North American Crime 1966 - This is my second read as I'm reading MacDonald's first 12 McGee books over before finishing them up. Why? Because either they seem over-rated, or I'm missing something. HOOK - 3 stars: McGee is about to descend 'into that guck' of Chicago's O'Hare airport. "What am I doing here," he thinks. An old friend, Glory Doyle, has called for help. A damsel in distress, perfect for McGee. PACE - 2 stars: Lots of ruminations about the past, or about the present conditions of the world. McGee thinks: "There is...almost no useful thing the human animal will not in his eternal perversity misuse, whether it be alcohol, gasoline, gunpowder, aspirin, chocolate fudge, mescaline, or LSD." Perhaps. And at one point, the author steps in and talks about the best places to surf around the world. Odd. This isn't a page-turner. PLOT - 4: A man has died with $600,000, but the money has disappeared. It's been slowly moved by the owner out of various accounts over a period of a few years. Why? The money is somewhere, certainly. A good plot made more interesting by a good... CAST - 4: Glory Doyle is a mess. At 22, she had married Karl, a man "not capable of love". Karl kills himself and their two children. She takes off for Fort Lauderdale and as a dining room hostess meets Dr. Fortner Geis. Glory reaches 29, Geis is a famous neurosurgeon but dies, leaving a mess of a household. There is his children, Roger and Heidi, sure that Glory is only a gold-digger. Anna Ottlo is a housekeeper who might know too much. Anna's daughter, Gretchen hangs around, what does she know. Janice Stanyard is a stand-out as Geis's OR Nurse. McGee at one point thinks, "The man who knows that his preferences are solidly heterosexual has no need to go about thumping everybody who lisps." True to a point, but not all gay folks lisp, so MacDonald/McGee are at least warming up for the future. But here in this book, MacDonald writes of a rich family with problems and secrets, and this is the MacDonald novel that seems most like Ross McDonald to me, and that's not necessarily a bad thing. ATMOSPHERE - 4: As I say in my previous review (below), Chicago is cold and dark. But it's perfectly presented here. SUMMARY - 3.4: I enjoyed this book much more the second time around. I think it's because I've become a big fan of Ross McDonald (who focuses on messed-up rich families), and often this novel felt like a good Ross novel. ORIGINAL REVIEW: McGee travels to Chicago and there it's cold and it's dark, much too dark for me, in more ways than one. (I lived in Chicago one winter, that's all I could take, and was never so happy to see a city in the rear view mirror of my car as it was just so painfully cold, but I do hear the city is great in the summer months.) This is the darkest (to me) of McGee's adventures so far, and the plot consists of a mess of relatives whose connections were, well, just too messy for much contemplation. I prefer MacDonald/McGee to be more on the warm (literally and figuratively) side and thi one hurt, the bad guy is truly horrific. I prefer mystery/crime novels on the Christie/Cozy side and this one is way, way, way on the other side of the tracks. If you're like me, and you do like McGee in the hot Florida sun, you might want to skip this one. Two stars, only because of so much contemporary trash.
