Brilliant! In its early pages it’s interesting to think of this book as a flipside of Naguib Mahfouz’s The Cairo Trilogy . Both stories are multigenerational family sagas set in Egypt during the same period, early to mid-20th century. But while Mahfouz’s three-volume book focuses on an Arab family and its falsely pious roué paterfamilias in Cairo, Out of Egypt is about an eccentric Jewish family living in nearby Alexandria. There’s nothing here of Mahfouz’s abhorrence of British colonialism, and the political protests of the Arab population to shake off that yoke. Rather, it’s clear that author Aciman’s Jewish ancestors depended on that yoke if they were to continue to live there. In the years after the Suez Crisis, 1956, they were forced to flee in the face of expropriation, arrest and torture. First we meet the grandmothers who are not yet grandmothers, before the author’s mother and father met. The women were neighbors on the Rue Memphis and shared six languages between them, including the obscure Ladino, which Wikipedia calls: “. . . a Romance language derived from Old Spanish. Originally spoken in the former territories of the Ottoman Empire . . . Today it is spoken mainly by Sephardic minorities in more than 30 countries, with most of the speakers residing in Israel.” The tenor of Proust is here in the family arguments, the work of the servants, who are described beautifully and berated intolerably. The writing is vivid, so intensely so that it approaches the synesthetic. One can smell the rosemary and rhododendrons in the gardens; the Parmesan cheese in the houses, the reek of hilba on the Arab servants. There’s Aunt Flora playing Schubert’s B-flat major sonata while the Nazis threaten the city before El Alamein. Flora’s sleeps with the author’s future father who then jilts her for the neighbor’s deaf daughter. This alignment produces the author. Flora befriends Mimi, the new wife. In October 1956, when the Suez Crisis erupted, Nasser brought in a set of sweeping regulations abolishing civil liberties and allowing the state to stage mass arrests without charge and strip away Egyptian citizenship from any group it desired; these measures were mostly directed against the Jews of Egypt. As part of its new policy, 1,000 Jews were arrested and 500 Jewish businesses were seized by the government. A statement branding the Jews as "Zionists and enemies of the state" was read out in the mosques of Cairo and Alexandria. Jewish bank accounts were confiscated and many Jews lost their jobs. Lawyers, engineers, doctors and teachers were not allowed to work in their professions. Thousands of Jews were ordered to leave the country. They were allowed to take only one suitcase and a small sum of cash, and forced to sign declarations "donating" their property to the Egyptian government.—Wikipedia There’s a wonderful line delivered by the odious Uncle Isaac, when he learns that because Israel was part of the Triumvirate that attacked Port Said, that the Jews in Egypt were being targeted. “Why?” he says. “We’re not Israelis.” There’s a wonderful incapacity to understand racism here, that I think anyone with a brain shares. I remember that incomprehensibilty when reading extensively on the Holocaust years ago. That comment made me like Isaac, a splenetic and disagreeable man, as I had not before. After most of Aciman’s family members leave Egypt, his father insists on staying behind because of his robust textile business. The young author is sent to Victory College—formerly known as Victoria College—once a proud though far flung stronghold of the British educational system, now a hotbed of antisemitic rage and a serious tool for inculcating nationalist views in Egyptian youth. Aciman is the only Jew in the school. Part of his studies include the memorization of Arabic doggerel that depicts Egypt as all powerful, and Jews as hook-nosed savages being crushed under the wheel of the new national pride. Aciman’s father, who is largely consigned to the fringes of this ample memoir, takes no notice of this wretched antisemitic content, but insists his son learn it like the other boys lest his failure be looked on as an act of sedition by the government, and thus justification for expulsion. This penultimate chapter, called “The Lotus-Eaters,” is a gobsmacker. Then comes the coda with its intimidating, anonymous phonecalls. The voice knows the family’s complete history. Chillingly, the voice speaks of their daily activities. Mostly it asks: “Where is your father?” Not until the textile business is taken by Nassar’s government, though, do they decamp. It’s hard to imagine living under such a strain. I put Out of Egypt on the same shelf with William Dalrymple’s marvelous City of Djinns and Peter Matthiessen’s The Snow Leopard , though neither Matthiessen nor Dalrymple ever had to worry about their personal safety when researching those books. They are travel books whereas Egypt is a prelude-to-exile book. Maybe it’s even closer to Victor Klemperer’s two-volume I Will Bear Witness , which recounts the author’s life during the Nazi period with his “Aryan” wife, though Klemperer never went into exile. Vladimir Nabokov entered exile, though he was a child at the time, and so did Victor Serge , both escaping revolutionary Russia. Napoleon did, too, perhaps most famously. About the latter I highly recommend Julia Blackburn’s fine The Emperor’s Last Island .
