I did not like this book very much and I am really surprised the book has avg rating of 4.21 (which is what drove me to read the book in the first place). The book isn't entirely bad though. It is action-packed and has an interesting, yet creepy plot. With that said, I felt like the author placed a greater emphasis on the plot, rather than the characters. I couldn't relate to any of them at all, and felt like many of them didn't have distinct personalities. That bothered me greatly. I won't recommend this book to anyone in particular, unless someone is looking for a quick-read to keep them entertained for an hour or two. The novel is fine, actually, but it's not like Harry Potter or Twilight. I can't get really "into" it. Here come the **spoilers**: This book is about a girl/"witch" named Stacy Brown. She has weird nightmares about her best friend and current roommate, Drea. They seem to foreshadow Drea's death. In these dreams, lilies are all always present; lilies also happen to be the flower that represent death. Stacy becomes really worried because she has had dreams like this in the past, and the last time she didn't act upon them. The result was the death of a little girl named Maura. Stacy isn't sure if she is misinterpreting her nightmares, so she uses card-reading to verify her visions. They all seem to indicate the same thing: Chad, Drea's ex-boyfriend is going to schedule something like date, then cancel on her, Drea is going to get mysterious packages and Drea is going to die soon. To make things even worse, Drea is getting calls from a mysterious guy, and she refuses to tell Stacy who he is. A few days later, Drea gets a package and Stacy becomes paranoid. Stacy doesn't want to tell Drea what her visions indicate, but after these odd phone calls, and the mysterious package, Stacy decides it's about time to tell her the truth. Stacy also tells Amber who is another friend of theirs. Drea doesn't take Stacy's warning seriously. The next day, Drea receives an odd message about Drea having only four more days. Along with the message is four lilies. Drea and Stacy are convinced that the number of lilies represent the number of days Drea has to live. However, despite this, Drea continues to talk to the mysterious guy on the phone, and she admits to Stacy and Amber that she has no idea who he is. Amber completely flips out, and advises her not to talk to him again. Stacy takes it upon herself to solve this mystery, and begins to get threatening messages. A mean girl named Veronica starts telling everyone that she is being stalked too, and has been sentenced to die the same day Drea has; however, Stacy feels that there is more to that story and Veronica is not telling the truth. All of a sudden, Veronica is murdered, which forces the police to get involved. Meanwhile, Stacy has problems with her relationship with Chad. She likes him, and she's pretty sure he likes her, but he was Drea's ex-boyfriend. Drea also gets annoyed with Stacy when she spends time with Chad, and that results in a major fight between Stacy and Drea. On top of all this, Stacy is having nightmares about Chad being the threating person/stalker. The day Veronica dies, Drea hyperventilates and is taken to the hospital. She is released later that night, but she never makes it back to her room. Stacy becomes worried and alerts the police but they aren't too concerned; in their eyes, Veronica's death is the main the problem. Stacy goes searching for Drea, and relies on her visions and her instinct to find her. She goes to a forest (after calling the police and letting them know), and finds Donnovan, a guy who has had a crush/obsession on Drea since third grade, there. Stacy cuts her foot, and Donnovan tells her to stay put while he goes and looks around for some help (apparently his cell phone had no connection). At first she trusts him, but the she questions why he is even here in the first place. That makes her suspicious so she continues her search for Drea. Donnovan gets mad and tells her that she wouldn't want to see what happened to her. Stacy finds Drea in the fetal position all tied up in a shed-like place. The two of them try to escape from Donnovan while he threatens them with a knife. When it almost seems like Stacy is going to die, the police appear on the scene just in time. Donnovan is arrested and taken away, while Drea and Stacy are taken back to the various locations to be questioned by different people. In the end, it turns out that Donnovan was the one who was threatening Drea from the beginning. Donnovan has been obsessed with Drea since third-grade, but she didn't like him back in that sense. Donnovan thought that if he could lure Drea away from Chad and her friends, and spend sometime with her, she would possibly love him. Veronica realized that Drea was getting a lot attention through this problem, and decided to fake the idea of being stalked too. She decided that she would leave town the day of the "murder," and when she came back Drea would be gone, as in dead. With Drea out of the way, she could have Chad to herself. However, Donnovan got upset with Veronica and decided that he had to do something about her. So, as he tells the court, he "accidentally" killed her. The court decides that Donnovan is not mentally straight, and he is sent to juvenile-jail for five years. They also require some counseling sessions for Donnovan. Meanwhile, Drea decides to leave campus and go back home to study for a year. She needs time to get over this ordeal. Also, she thanks Stacy for not bailing out on her, even though she was extremely rude to Stacy. Lastly, she gives permission to Stacy to date Chad. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
