Nadine Gordimer's 1994 novel, None to Accompany Me, is set in the hinge period between the end of apartheid in South Africa and the turn to black-majority democratic rule. Its protagonist is Vera Stark, a white lawyer who works on land disputes for a nonprofit foundation. Despite the scope of the tale, also examining the experience of black Movement friends framing the new constitution and governmental structure, Vera is the odd key to everything. The two themes of the novel are power versus justice and sexual dependency versus selfhood. Vera is on the side of justice--she's clear about this--but she is less certain about the possibilities of selfhood absent sexual dependence, i.e., the fulfillment in sex between man and woman. Early in her first marriage, then again in her second marriage, she's drawn to infidelity, but even as she switches men, she longs for a man who doesn't need to put all of himself in her keeping, which is the case with her second husband, Ben. That said, her daughter's lesbianism strikes her as a non-answer at the gut level, and her son's marital uncertainties suggest he's no better at resolving sexual needs than she is. By contrast, Vera's closest black Movement friends seem a bit more adept at managing their affairs by emphasizing their need for and commitment to power...even to the point of Didymus, a rough player during Apartheid rule, accepting lower political status than that accorded to his wife, Sibongile. Their constrained sexuality is focused on an avid teenage daughter's love interests, and what they want, after the girl is impregnated by a married man, is to shut her down and abort the baby, which would detract from their somewhat puritanical and impersonal political claims. This is a novel built around brief scenes, more briefly described physical settings and circumstances, and more extensively elaborated exercises in reasoning, quite close reasoning. It has the virtue of skillfully rolling a lifetime into a single narrative, thus achieving, in the end, a sense of persuasive duration. There are so many twists and turns in the text, nuances and second thoughts, that a short novel (relatively) seems like a long one, and some of the surprises at the end unfold quite convincingly without much explicit foreshadowing. Ben and Vera, for example, separate in a casual way: Ben's visit to London to spend time with their son, Ivan, becomes a permanent exile from Vera back in South Africa. They just begin calling one another less often, each assuming the other is now living in a separate world. Meanwhile, Ivan takes up the financial slack, enabling both parents to live modestly but well apart. One odd feature of this book, which I have never associated with Nadine Gordimer, is how peculiarly and often badly it is written. The text is strewn with weak, clumsy sentences, strange uses of punctuation, and thoughts Gordimer just hasn't sufficiently reflected upon to state clearly. This isn't arty stuff; it's careless stuff; and it hinders the flow of the story, which has a choppy quality to it. I suspect that Nobel Prizes--Gordimer won hers before writing this novel--aren't good for writers, or at the very least, they cause editors to clam up when they should be raising objections.
