There are a lot of great stories in this collection, though my favorite is definitely "With Delicate Mad Hands." I can read it multiple times and cry at the end of each. I'm going to include a brief summary of each of the stories, both for myself and others. **Warning**: there will be spoilers as I'm going to give away the ending. "Angel Fix:" Alien comes to earth and finds "good" people and offers them a portal to a fabulous vacation world and is like "don't tell people about it" except the aliens' plan is for the earthlings to all leave earth for the wonder land and they can sell earth for a profit after the bad people ruin it. This one was very Tiptree, in that Tip liked to write about aliens manipulating humans into ruining the earth so they can sell it (see "The Screwfly Solution"). -- "Your Faces, O My Sisters! Your Faces Filled of Light!" Girl thinks she's walking through a dystopian world as a messenger, but she's actually a regular woman who went a little crazy and is just walking through the streets. She gets "eaten by dogs"/raped and beaten by men. This story was at once both beautiful and terrible at the same time, because it was more or less about women's journey through the world and the dangers they face. -- "Beaver Tears:" Guy watches a documentary about relocated beavers, and then he and his neighbors are relocated by aliens. This one was a little meh: interesting, but not as great as some of Tip's other stories. -- "The Screwfly Solution:" Alien realtors infect men with a strong desire to murder all women so they can sell the earth. This. One. Is. Amazing. I've read it several times and it's horrifying because it goes in a sort of "Handmaid's Tale" direction where women are subjugated by men, except it goes a step further because the men kill them all. -- "Time-Sharing Angel:" Alien sends a "solution" to earth because this lady is sad that the earth is being overrun, and his solution is a thing that puts all but 1 child in a family asleep at a time, and they don't age so it slows population growth (and will eventually end up with far fewer humans). I personally enjoy all the different ideas Tiptree comes up with on how to fix overpopulation and pollution. This story is a very "be careful what you wish for" tale. -- "We Who Stole the Dream:" An enslaved race steals a ship, flies it toward where it thinks its people are, discovers they produce the torture juice the slavers enjoyed. This was fascinating, thrilling, and ultimately depressing since the freedom the slaves thought they were getting was tainted. -- "Slow Music:" The last woman and man want to stay on earth and do obsolete human things, everyone has been uploaded to a "river." The man and woman fail and ultimately join the flow as well. This story sort of dragged on? It was interesting, as usual, but not as great as the others. -- "With Delicate Mad Hands:" Carol Page aka Cold Pig goes to space and commandeers the space ship to fly toward where she has always heard a voice calling to her. She doesn't expect it to be real, but she finds a planet. This one I won't spoil because the ending means so much to me and I want others to be overwhelmed by the result of Carol's journey. Suffice to say, I love it very very much. -- "A Source of Innocent Merriment:" Guy talks about how he flew over a planet, and it was somehow alive and showed him things in his mind including a beautiful woman of his dreams that he then could never see again. Another example of Tiptree finding joy in space and then wrenching it away. -- "Out of the Everywhere:" This one contains incest, so if that's a big "no" from you, I'd skip this one. An alien has to hide in an iceberg on earth and splits its consciousness into three connected folks, including a father and daughter; the daughter seduces the dad (I totally called it) and ultimately the three people arrange to haul the iceberg to California and the alien is released, only to be tempted by another alien but the little girl saves him and joins his consciousness, and now the alien wants to study life on other planets. Aside from the truly messed up father/daughter incest in this story (also the daughter is like 11 when she seduces her dad so it's also pedophilia), this is a really cool story about how aliens interact with earth. For the most part, earth and its humans are insignificant specks in the cosmos (a feeling Tiptree carried with him/her all their life) and Tiptree really enjoys telling stories that reinforce that perspective.
