I first became interested in Mount Everest when I watched that movie "Everest." I was so moved by it, that I spent a few hours afterward researching the incident. When I saw this ebook on sale, I couldn't pass it up. And wow! I read it in two days! Now, I've never gone mountaineering and have no intention to. I've never really understood the draw of climbing Everest, but the book basically said that mountaineers got to go mountaineering, it's a part of them, in their blood, so to speak. I liken it to chefs got to cook, writers got to write, artists got to paint, etc. There doesn't have to be a solid reason. It's what you do. That was an interesting insight on its own. I thought the book was so well-written. It alternates between Conrad Anker in the first person and David Roberts in the third person, chronicling George Mallory's story. Mr. Anker was part of the expedition that found Mallory's body on Everest, where he was lost in the 1920s. The big question has been: did Mallory and Irvine summit? Were they the first to summit Everest? I thought that perhaps they did, it was the romantic in me. Even if they didn't summit, Mallory and his team still had performed amazing feats. I found Mr. Anker's hypothesis to be compelling, especially as he described the logistics and what it's like up there: the cold, the terrain, comparing modern gear with Mallory's gear, and observing the geology of the area. Mr. Anker described his role in the expedition and in the aftermath, including the controversies of bringing down artifacts and publishing photos of the deceased. Tabloids gonna tabloid, though, right? They're not known for being tasteful and sensitive. Mr. Roberts offered a biography of George Mallory, including his school years and his two previous trips to Everest, with interesting insights into his other team members. I can't imagine how difficult such a journey must have been in the 1920s. I mean, it's challenging enough today! But back then, you had to sail, board a train (?), ride mountain ponies, and walk. There were no planes and cars that could make the travel easier. And on the mountain itself, there were no fixed lines to help with climbing and the ropes were thinner and weaker than today's. Their gear and instruments were rudimentary by today's standards. I cannot imagine the endurance required for such an excursion. I thought it was most interesting that Mallory predicted that he wouldn't come home. I wonder what made him think that? I wonder what he thought about before he left, on the journey, and on the mountain. Mysteries that we can only speculate on. I hope that someday a future expedition will find Irvine and their camera. I'd love to see what photos they had taken, if they offer insight into their last hours. However, I recognize that they might never find him. I was a bit surprised that no one tried to bring Mallory home to his family, but after a few moments thought, I imagine that would be insanely difficult and it's for the best to let him rest in peace on his mountain.
