Brimstone is the 5th book in the Pendergast series written by Douglas Preston and Lincoln Child. Part thriller/suspense, part science-fiction at times (very minimal), this collection offers an intense FBI investigation based in NYC with travels all around the world. Pendergast is a strange and intelligent agent who relies on his relationships and powers of persuasion to solve a bizarre crime. He almost always knows the answers before he asks the questions, and when his head is focused on motive and opportunity, it almost feels like I can see the steam rise through the pages of the book. There are so many things to cling to in this series: its New York City setting, where often I recognize all the places they're describing; its creative plot lines full of just enough impossibilities to stretch your imagination; and its vivid characters who make you want to throttle them on occasion. In Brimstone, the Devil has supposedly appeared, and until 90% in, we really think he has. I'm not giving away spoilers, but the whole story works you up to try to understand how on earth these people were dying, and when you learn the details, it's both confusing and so technical, I am not able to rationalize it. BUT I love it, and I am excited to get all the gory details. This one kicks off a three-book mini-series within the larger series where we learn more about Pendergast's family, including his elusive brother Diogenes who is up to something awful. Constance is not quite family, but she's 100+ years old and looks about 20. There's a backstory there, and some day we will find out the truth. I can't imagine the series being written any differently; I am not one for science-fiction, but this has such a safe balance, it works really well. I love the clever tactics and insanity of how Pendergast solves all the missing pieces of the murder. I think he and I would get along quite well, but I'd also find myself easily offended (in a good way). There's a complicated sense of power in this story, and anytime I think Pendergast has been beaten at his own game, he rises like a phoenix. It's completely amazing to watch the story unfold, and I highly recommend it for solid construction and that hint of disbelief that you need in order to immerse yourself in a book. #6 has been ordered and will be in my early July reading schedule.
