I couldn't sit through the Disney adaptation of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang , but I remember it from my childhood. I also remember trying Mary Poppins and I didn't like that one either. But I'm big on nostalgia. Remembering them good ole days, them calmer days. A few years ago I revisited The Wind in the Willows , which I'm told Mom read to me as a kid and we both hated. When I revisited, I was enthralled. I don't think it was simply nostalgia. Sure it brought back memories of summertime and warm grass and swingsets and ..., but it was more than that: the story rocked, the characters rocked, and crazy Toad (of Toad Hall) was a raucous anarchist who was friggin hilarious. Sometimes nostalgia's just a feeling, misremembered. In the case of Willows it was a pleasant surprise. So, I had high hopes last Sunday when I decided to revisit Chitty Chitty Bang Bang . It's a neat story how Chitty came to be. It was written by James Bond author Ian Fleming while convalescing from a second heart attack. A friend brought Fleming a copy of a book by Beatrix Potter and suggested he write up the story he used to tell his son before bed. James Bond author does children's fiction, sounds good. The inherent nostalgia in imagining Fleming telling this story to his son was also nice to think about. And, Chitty, the car, is based on a real automobile! How cool! Sadly, Fleming would not live long enough to see the book's publication several years later. All of these things made me wanna try it. My buddy Kasia said her Dad had read several Bond novels and was not all that fond of Fleming's writing style. I bore this in mind as I began. By the end of chapter one, I saw just what Papa S. meant. Ian Fleming and I did't jive. His writing is like watching a car pull up to a railroad track, stop at the black and white crossbar, and just as the locomotive is crossing in front of it, proceed ahead with the pedal to the metal. When you think a sentence should syntactically end, Fleming, in every case, barrels forward with no heed, rolling, tumbling, cavorting, leap-frogging, jump-jacking, cartwheeling - this is making it sound more interesting than it is. . . And really, the story goes nowhere. First we meet the family. They're flat as cardboard. Couldn't tell you much about any of them. The father's a stereotypical mad scientist. There were a couple other people in the story but I couldn't tell you a thing about them. In a couple chapters the family adopts the car. The car's pretty interesting, what little we get to see of it. Car's kind of snooty, though. That wasn't cool. Then the family goes to the beach and acts very stupid. I can't remember much after that. After seven chapters I had enough. Sometimes nostalgia works in mysterious ways. Sometimes nostalgia is better left in the mind
