Francesca Lia Block does it again. I love the way she writes! Everything feels like magic and madness, beauty and suffering, religion and hell. Tweetie Sweet Pea: The kind of story that feels familiar and strange all at once. It's two young sisters enjoying a summer day with their parents, knowing that adulthood will come for them eventually. 3/5 Blue: After La's mother kills herself, La finds a tiny blue faerie in her closet. Blue could be La's grief or her love or her sexuality or a mental illness or an imaginary friend. Or she could be real and pure magic when La needs it most. 5/5 Dragons in Manhattan: Tuck Budd has beautiful loving mothers, Izzy and Anastasia, but she desperately wants to know who her father is so she leaves to find him. The result it certainly not what you expect, but it's inclusive and wonderful. This is one of my favorite little stories! 5/5 Girl Goddess #9: Lady Ivory (Emily) and Alabaster Duchess (Anna) write a magazine about music and life. They score an interview with a rockstar and later meet his lover. Perhaps they met a goddess, perhaps they discovered heartbreak. 4/5 Rave: We all know (knew) someone like Raven "Rave" White. Those stars burn so brightly until they just burn out... 5/5 The Canyon: Desiree lives with her abusive mother and she falls in love with Dobey, a member of a band. Despite the terrible hand she's dealt, Desiree dreams of building a welcoming home with beautiful children where she can be happy and take care of the people she loves. 4/5 Pixie and Pony: "I keep wishing that we were best friends." "Best friends? We are sisters." 4/5 Winnie and Cubby: Cubby's dad was abusive and he left. Winnie's father loved her and he died. Cubby is gay and has been trying to force himself to love Winnie, but he can't. They'll always be best friends, no matter what. 4/5 Orpheus: The final story feels like it's about the author who wrote everything that came before. It's a fantastic closing. 3/5 I love all these short stories, especially Dragons in Manhattan. 5/5 overall!
