Teaching Troubles and Dilemmas A Disgrace to the Profession Charles Newton and Gretchen Kauffman Realistic Fiction 357 pages A Disgrace to the Profession is a novel about a teacher in Des Moines, Iowa. Karen Merchant has been teaching for a long time at Bancroft, but does not want to go back. When Nicolaus Staal becomes a teacher at her school, however, it changes her entire perspective. The two of them create an underground newsletter to change the school system to help benefit their students, as well as their teaching. Karen Merchant is an important character because she represents the teaching profession very well. She can teach without hesitation and she knows what she’s doing. I like Karen because she reminds me of my mom, who is also a teacher. My mom and Karen are smart people who aren’t afraid to stand up for themselves. Nicholas Staal is a new teacher at Bancroft. He was the one who came up with the newsletter. Karen agrees with a lot of things he says; he is a good public speaker. I like Nick because he has good intentions but is misunderstood for little things he says and does. He is smart and can influence people and their opinions with ease. Robert Aneyh is the principal at Bancroft. He is rude and instructs the teachers very poorly. When there is bad leadership, those being led become frustrated. He always changes the way teachers should instruct their students, but no one listens to him. The teachers teach how they always have. Aneyh wants to put an end to the newsletter that Karen and Nick are running. A theme in A Disgrace to the Profession is to respect and appreciate everything that our teachers do. Teachers do more work than we can see. They don’t just work at school; they spend countless hours outside of school on their own time to finish working. Teachers should not be blamed for the student’s poor behavior causing them to fail. “‘This has nothing to do with us. The teaching corps is not incompetent; the system is. This system won’t let teachers teach!’” (131). Teachers should not be blamed for a student’s poor decisions making them fail. It made me think about how teachers are treated today. Teachers do so much work to make sure that students are learning. Being a teacher is a very hard job and isn’t something that everyone can do; you need lots of endurance and patience. I wondered what it would be like to be Karen or Nick and how it would feel to lead the underground newsletter. They were the ones who cared so much about teaching that they were willing to do anything to help improve it. I wondered what motivated them to do so. “‘Board members, you should stand in our shoes. For two decades critics have had their gory years. American teachers have been castigated, maligned, ridiculed, pilloried--’” (131). This is what Nick felt. This is how teachers have been treated and because of the poor system, the teachers have not been able to teach. The authors chose to write this book because it is a serious issue and it needs to be addressed. The events of this book kept me interested. Even though, at times, it became a little difficult to understand what was going on because of the vocabulary. It also felt like it jumped from scene to scene with little to no transition, which made things harder to follow. Older teenagers and adults, preferably teachers, would enjoy reading this book. They would have the most understanding of it and they would be able to relate to it more. Younger teenagers and children won’t be able to comprehend it as well. I would recommend this book to a friend because it conveys a very nice message and many people should read it.
