An odd and hectic piece – a sort of vaudeville Western. Sin Killer , at first, seems like a mistake; the premise of a family of aristocratic Brits (the wackily-named Berrybenders) raising hell on the American frontier in the year of our Lord 1832 is a joke that threatens to tire before it's even begun. The writing style is more affected than author Larry McMurtry's usual moreish prose (though the storytelling ability is still there), and there is an unremitting onslaught of boorish and entitled behaviour from the aristos, along with bursts of bawdy humour and vomit and erections. It can be disconcerting to switch from this sort of content to the book's incidents of rape, violence and elemental hardship. And any attempt by the reader to discern a literary motive to McMurtry's novel – namely the contrast between Old World and New, settled and unsettled (pg. 36) – quickly leads them to throw up their hands. The Berrybenders left England on a "whim" (pg. 24); and "what the passengers meant to do in such wild country was a puzzle" (pg. 94). Fortunately, once you do throw up your hands in defeat the book becomes a bit more palatable. McMurtry knows his genre, and despite the outlandish goings-on, his West always comes across as authentic. Those boorish and scatter-brained characters begin to develop a bit – it helps that a goodly few get killed off – and the book begins to settle. Those hectic "alarums" which are "merely the stuff of day-to-day life, when the Berrybenders are assembled" (pg. 294) become less grating, and the parameters of the story begin to become more defined. A shame, then, that it's at this point the book ends without much sense of occasion: Sin Killer is most definitely Part One of an ongoing story than a book that can stand on its own two feet. Once you accept this isn't going to be your typical Western – not even your typical McMurtry Western – its own charm emerges, even if it remains a rather shallow charm. Some of the characters may even grow on you, which when combined with the general ease and breeziness of the read, makes picking up the second book a prospect.
