Once again a satisfying read from Michael Gruber's potboiler days. I'm so impressed with the complexity and intelligence both of the story/plot and the research going into everything from how a prosecutor's office works to how a small team of terrorists might take over an airliner. Everything is plausible as far as these sections. In true potboiler fashion, we are reintroduced to everyone remaining from the first Butch Karp novel. These kinds of books are rather like a TV series in this way. And like a TV series or movie sequel, we get more or less the same product. Gruber makes it unique enough to be worth it. Gruber is like many of my favorite novelists who use their work to not just tell a story but to educate. You don't just get a surface level scan, you get a little deeper into both the main characters and the circumstances motivating the plot. As with the previous entry, Gruber injects the prosecutor's office with an occasional dose of what I'll describe as college humor. Some of Butch Karp's friends wouldn't stick out from one of those old National Lampoon's movies that 70s era alums from SNL made in the early 80s. Honestly, I'm not sure these books need that levity. It is a bit jarring and it brings back memories of those lame Police Academy movies that even I as a seven year old thought were pretty juvenile, haha. I think I'm not in the target audience for those bits, tho. My review of the first Karp book goes into my ideas about that, so I'll drop it here. I'm happy Karp and his girl are working it out after the devastating twist at the end of the first book. That's all handled very well even though some of the other ways she's handled, particularly the way Gruber constantly has men leering at her or leave her ready and game for ever dude who comes along seeming to test their sexual chances are. I suppose this is simply how a woman's life is? I was raised by a single mother along with two older sisters who I witnessed in such situations many, many times. The part that grates on me is the way Gruber seems to leer himself, haha. I was a reader in high school, but I eventually abandoned most mainstream paperbacks because I got tired of so many books having leads that were thinly veiled representations of the author at middle age, usually college instructors in the story, and who were invariably either having a sexual relationship with a plucky student inevitably described as the smartest in class. The girls were always "care free" in a way that meant they'd be at this middle-aged tub-o-lard's sexual beck and call or they'd be cool and "ambitious," using the teacher and lacking the warmth for him that he felt for her....which meant she was at his sexual beck and call and probably part of whatever evil plot that came up against him. I'm describing the Micheal Cricton books I read. There'd always been a fatter, crass best friend who begged for details of the relationships with students and who later "knew people," the right people, just when the protagonist needed the right people. Sorry, I'm ranting about other books. haha. Aside from those two reservations, which aren't even that bad in the scheme of things, Karp #2 is another fun read that assures me to continue onto Karp #3 after I've taken a break for a palette cleanser. I'm a major Michael Gruber fan, so all of these Karp books (I think the first 10 to 15?) are quite the discovery for me, even if they're potboilers. Turns out Gruber even does those better than most!
