As one might imagine (and, if one is conscious not to prejudge, one would indeed imagine after a brief survey of the table of contents), this is a sweeping summation of a large amount of time in the history of philosophy. This is most certainly true: Father Copleston begins with a consideration of early Christian philosophy (whether or not one would call the early Christians "philosophers" in the true sense is, in my mind, debatable; most certainly some of the Ante-Nicene fathers are more philosophic than others), through (of course) Augustine and ending with Duns Scotus. For those who want numbers, the volume begins effectively with the 2nd century CE and ends at the 13th: approximately 1100 years! This is, in some ways, rather unfortunate; allow me to elucidate. Some philosophers are of the belief that philosophy was subjugated to theology as a result of the rise of the Christian faith, was held captive to the demands of bored monks bickering on matters of faith and employing philosophical tools to prove inherently non-philosophical points, and was only released with Ockham in the 13th century. That Copleston encapsules so much time into one volume would seem to enforce such a conception; but at the same time, one must also realize that it is not entirely a misconception, and Copleston even mentions the fact in this volume. For instance, one often finds him noting that Augustine never divided philosophy from theology: they were, in his and in some previous Christian minds (think Clement of Alexandria), one and the same thing; the only difference being that, whereas the pagans had philosophy, which was good, the Christians had revelation, which fulfilled philosophy's inevitable shortcomings. The distinction between faith and philosophy did not really begin until Aquinas. So, in a way, and as Copleston will openly declare at many time, the opinion that philosophy operated within a distinctively theological context is true; the difference will lie in the opinion that, in contradistinction to those philosophers mentioned above, Copleston would argue that philosophy was not subjugated in the sense that it was not free to speculate; it only speculated in a new context. The validity of this argument I will not argue in favor or in disagreement with. This being said, what Copleston discusses, is discussed in detail. Six chapters are devoted to Augustine, and both Islamic and Jewish philosophy are each given a chapter (which, I believe, is far too short, especially considering that the former includes persons such as Avicenna and Averroes). Bonaventure is given five chapters, while to Duns Scotus is devoted six. But of course, as one might guess, the main focus of the work is on Thomas Aquinas, the crowning jewel of medieval philosophy (and theology). Ten chapters (and an additional chapter discussing controversies surrounding his Aristotelianism) are devoted to him, so that one feels, for a large section of the reading of this volume, is essentially a work on Aquinas and the origins of Thomism. But, most certainly, I do not think this should be too much of a bother, since often the only philosopher given any attention at all from these eleven centuries is Aquinas. It is, of course, a necessary read for anyone who wishes to attain at least a basic grounding of the history of philosophy. One cannot reject the works of this period as "merely theological," for without theology, we cannot at all be certain where philosophy would have gone. This is not a good argument--in fact, it is no argument at all. But what I do want to say is that one cannot rightly write off the works of these persons because their interests were directly related to ecclesiastical concerns and controversies; indeed, philosophy proved her use and influence during this time as much as at any other time.
