Do you like cliffhangers? I believe the term originated with serial stories in magazines and on radio. The hero or heroine or damsel in distress finished an episode hanging onto a cliff or in a similar perilous position. A great way to encourage readers or listeners to return for the next installment! Not great if you prefer that your entertainment be tied up in a pretty little bow when you finish. At the end of Larry McMurtry's "Sin Killer", written in 2002, the first of the four-novel series "The Berrybender Narratives", we are certainly left hanging. So there is that sense of not having finished something... In "Sin Killer" we follow the Berrybender family, lately of England, as they start a paddleboat trip in 1832 up the Missouri River from what is now Kansas City toward the Mandan villages and points west. There is a cast of characters large enough to fill two pages at the beginning of the book, but even I had no difficulty keeping them in mind as they are all colorful and unique. Lord Berrybender, a wealthy grand buffoon, has whimsically arranged the journey so that he can a.) escape thirty bastard children in England and b.) hunt animals not found at home. A love story quickly blossoms between the Berrybender's eldest daughter Tasmin and a frontiersman whom she meets bathing in the river. His name is Jim Snow, but he is known to those in the west as the Sin Killer, because he is a fiercely moral man who tolerates nothing less in others. The narration alternates between the goings-on aboard the boat and the adventures of Tasmin and Jim who, for obvious reasons, prefer to make their way onshore by themselves. Anyone who reads McMurtry extensively knows that he has also written several acclaimed histories of The West, and that his knowledge of that part of American History is encyclopedic. In "Sin Killer" the fear of Indian attacks is ever present. I was surprised to learn that the old adage "safety in numbers" was not always the wisest course of action. Whereas Indians apparently often left two or three trappers alone, large contingents on horseback (or on a paddleboat!) were sometimes attacked for the potential of a large bounty and because a large group was seen as more of a threat. McMurtry's riotous and physical humor is here aplenty, often cartoonish. One satisfied reviewer said "Lewis and Clark meet Monty Python". In the case of "Sin Killer", since it is a funny riverboat story, we might add Mark Twain to the mix. When I tell friends about my love of McMurtry's work, I talk about his humor and his amazing ability to write great dialogue. That's certainly all here in "Sin Killer". But I think another thing that people appreciate about McMurtry, and perhaps what has attracted Hollywood to his work, is his amazing insight into the way women think about men and vice versa. I'll leave you with an excerpt as Tasmin stews about the way Jim has just treated her: "The insult that had driven her away from the campfire - Jim's casual assurance that her progress at practical tasks meant that she might someday hope to equal the performance of his two native wives - had of course not been intended as an insult at all; it had clearly been meant as a compliment, and yet it was a compliment that starkly revealed to Tasmin that the Great Plains of America, where she had enjoyed several very happy weeks, were no wider than the distance that lay between herself and the young man she had joined herself to. Could the frontiersman from the New World ever really know and appreciate a woman of the Old World? And the child, when it came - which would it belong to?"
