I've heard it said that "rock'n'roll ain't pretty". I never it expected it to be quite so repugnant, however. Read this book if you want more information than anybody needs about what goes on when young adults are allowed to have no limits absolutely. I'd have to blame most of the raucous behavior on the road manager, Richard Cole, and the band's manager, Peter Grant. I'd only been a casual fan of Led Zeppelin (collected all their cds but preferred my 70's hard rock a bit more Purple or Black), so I had not previously heard of either of these guys. Between the two of them, they basically set the musicians of Zeppelin as idiot kings, able to satisfy every whim and never worry about consequences. Not a good recipe. I'd read a similar account in the Alice Cooper book (Billion Dollar Baby). Their manager, Shep Gordon, used this tactic to vault the band to stardom. If you act like stars, and are treated like stars, then the confidence you gain might actually make it true. In Alice Cooper's case, it was also to the eventual detriment to the band. Only Alice himself (a true sheep-in-wolves-clothing) was able to get past these excesses, although his battles with alcoholism were not minor. What price, fame? And in Led Zeppelin's case, you can read in this book how things fell apart. Jimmy Page starts out as quite a nice young man, wise with session experience and seemingly smart enough not to get spaced out like the elder Yardbirds he had joined. In fact, it's his vision that helped allow Zeppelin to craft such superior-quality music. But you'll find out too many disappointing things about Jimmy as you read the book to its end. Robert Plant comes across as a pretty nice guy. He goes wild at first but does seem to rein things in a bit as time goes on. John Paul Jones may be the only one to retain his good sense throughout the band's tenure. Not coincidentally, the book speaks at length about the distance he kept from the band. He was not one to spend his time with the carousing crew like Bonzo. And Bonham... what can be said? Described as a nice guy with a heart of gold when he's sober, he's probably the kind of guy who would have troubles fitting in (due to his temper and love of drink) in an ordinary life. But with Richard Cole and Peter Grant around to keep encouraging the worst sort of behavior, and also to help him avoid any serious consequences, it's no surprise that he eventually met with tragedy. But enough with the excesses of rock'n'roll. Being only a casual fan, I did learn quite a bit about the band. - in the early days of recording rock groups, the producer would bring in the group of choice. Often he'd have a song picked out for them. If some of the musicians couldn't play their parts quickly enough, a session musician would immediately step in to finish the track. That's how Jimmy Page (pre-Led Zeppelin) got such great experience. (It's also the way that Ritchie Blackmore got his start before Deep Purple, but that's another story.) - Jimmy's first "real" group was the Yardbirds, but he joined at their zenith. They fell apart, leaving him the name. In fact, the first set of shows that Led Zeppelin did was under the name "The New Yardbirds". [image error] - Led Zeppelin really did steal a lot of musical ideas. They crafted their songs well, but it would have been appropriate to share some credit. - Led Zeppelin's double album "Physical Grafitti" was not all recorded at the same time. Nearly half of it were tracks unused from previous sessions. It's probably not that much of a secret to diehard fans, but it was news to me. - Led Zeppelin was unlike other landmark 70's hard rock bands (Deep Purple and Black Sabbath) because they were highly famous almost at the start. Jimmy Page was able to take his session experience and his Yardbirds experience and use that to orchestrate a band with a lot of appeal and drive right from the start. What's my proof? I do have a quite a few early bootlegs that I've collected over the internet in the past 10 years, and I've always wondered why Led Zeppelin had more available than other notable bands. Right from the start, fans were appreciating Zeppelin enough to archive their every performance. Other bands have far fewer such recordings available in their early years. It's all due to Jimmy Page, his previous experience, and his uncanny musical vision of the new supergroup Led Zeppelin. ** Deep Purple had a similar story in that Ritchie Blackmore also had a lot of session experience, but without strong group experience (like Jimmy in the Yardbirds), the first incarnation of Deep Purple (with singer Rod Evans) was basically the training ground for when the vision would be clarified with new singer Ian Gillan (who brought with him experience with Episode Six, to add to organist Jon Lord's experience with the Artwoods). ** Black Sabbath had no such session experience to draw on, nor any previous group experience. They benefited from a strong vision of their musical style from their first recorded output. But it takes time for a following to build up, and hard rock had no radio airplay at that time. One Final Word -------------- Many reviewers here have critized the author's "poor writing skills". I'd have to argue, but I'll pick my spots carefully. If you dwell on the list of hedonistic excesses, the book gets monotonous. However, if you go back and reread only those sections that deal with the songs (or the performances themselves), you'll see that the author really has a way of describing the music in ways to make it come alive. Nearly every time the author was describing a song, I felt the urge to pull up that track from the album (or from the bootleg of the show he was describing) and listen to it. The author truly does have a skill in describing the music. It's by the far the best parts of the book, and worthy of your attention. Like writing numerous love scenes, it cannot be easy to write about numerous songs and make them come alive.
