“We fell in love, despite our differences, and once we did, something rare and beautiful was created. For me, love like that has only happened once, and that's why every minute we spent together has been seared in my memory. I'll never forget a single moment of it.” ---- This book is the reason why I’m an hopeless romantic and I was never more proud to be one. Considering the fact that I love the movie and cried like a baby while watching it, I should’ve been prepared for this book. In fact, I knew I would love the story the second I thrifted the book. But still, I was not prepared for the last 60 pages. at. all. In the beginning we follow Noah Calhoun and Allison Nelson in the 1940s in North Carolina. One summer they meet – and obviously - this summer is becoming a dream for both of them. But in the end they still live in different social strata and have to figure out what they want their life to look like. Yes, this story is no new invention, but that’s good, because it was never the aim of the book to create something new. “I am nothing special, of this I am sure. I am a common man with common thoughts and I've led a common life. There are no monuments dedicated to me and my name will soon be forgotten, but I've loved another with all my heart and soul, and to me, this has always been enough..” The notebook is about love, but not about the basic love you find in other books, it’s about real, deep and indestructible love. The love with which Noah loved Allie and Allie loved Noah. Written in the most incredible heart-warming and heart-breaking way, we follow their relationship, through good times, bad times, sickness and health. Noah and Allie cherish each other so much. Reading about their love and also reading about how hard it actually is to love someone, was just incredible. All the things you endure for the other. I’m still tearing up now, because in my mind I’m still in the last 60 pages of the book. I want to find this love in my life, I want to have a Noah, who talks about me the way he did about Allie. I won’t spoil too much of the book, because I’m selfish and want you all to read it. And please do actually read it, I swear you won’t regret it. The notebook has now become one of my favourite books. <33
