By far one of the best and most inspirational books I've ever read. I've underlined so many parts of this book! I first read this with my first book club almost 10 years ago and read it back in October with my current book club -- still find it absolutely amazing and one I want to read and re-read. One of my favorite themes of the book is stated by the author on page 31: "the experiences of our lives, when we let God use them, become the mysterious and perfect preparation for the work He will give us to do." Goes along with my belief that all things will work together for our good. Not that only good things will happen to us, but that all things will work for our good. Even when our Father takes us, not to "the windmill ... or swans on the canal" but somewhere where we don't want to go and we howl and struggle all the way (p. 40). We can trust in Him that all things will work together for our good. Another favorite part is in the example of Betsie, the author's sister, who gives thanks in all circumstances, even for the fleas (p. 210). Several pages later, the author explains how even the fleas worked together for their good (p.220). Even when we may not always have the "whys", we can trust in Him that our experiences are for our good. I found it amazing when Nollie is asked by if Annaliese is a Jew and she responds, "yes." Nollie's perfect honesty requires that she answer "yes" even when it may mean death for someone who has trusted them! Nollie has perfect faith that no suffering will come to Annaliese because Nollie obeyed Him in being honest in all things. Miraculously and sure enough, Annaliese is set free. As a mother, I have always wondered how the Jewish people hid their children (crying babies etc.) from the Nazis when they were in hiding. I found it poignant and sad when the author noted that "even the youngest had developed the uncanny silence of small hunted things" (p. 114). Above all, I love this book for its reminder to me of the eternal perspective. How true that He can give us His perspective when we feel trapped in the reality of filthy and cramped barracks, His way of seeing people who we cannot understand, His forgiveness for those who have hurt us, His love for those we think we cannot love, and His strength to replace our weaknesses. Which leads me to a final favorite quote and life-lesson I've learned: "When He tells us to love our enemies [or any other thing He has asked us to do], He gives, along with the command the love itself" (p. 248).
