What more could I say about this book? DISCLAIMER: I can not do this book justice with a review. The artist, the pervert, the homosexual, Freud, adults, Hitler, kids.....basically all of humanity gets placed under the analytic microscope that is Ernest Becker's mind. With intense clarity of vision he exposes us all as the frail mortal human beings that we are. He embarrasses us for our petty quests for immortality. He exposes the artist for the fraud that he is. Oh vain wanna be creator! You can only vainly shadow the Great Artisan's infinite light! Wee mortal man! How many have you slain? How many books, paintings, sculptures!? In your quest to be remembered, how many will forget you in a decade?! (Artists, don't hate me, I can say this. I once had to channel my quest for immortality into many works. Poetic and musical in essence, but that topic is for another day.) Back to the review. According to Ernest Becker there is a thin line between the madman/woman and the genius. The neurotic and the artist. That difference is an outlet for creativity. Ernest Becker argues that the madmen/women suffer because they take in too much of the infinite REALITY of existence and cannot narrow their view. The madmen/women and the neurotic have no way of expressing the infinite. The genius and the artist do the same, they take more of REALITY in, but channel it in a healthy way into some kind of creative work. This is healthy. This channeling of the perceptive mind of man. Ernest Becker argues that to cope with reality we all have to narrow and focus on what's most important to us. There is a filter that we willingly learn to place over reality so that we do not spend the whole day viewing the infinite beauty of a shaft of light piercing through the window. The delicate fibers of dust playing in its beam, the 360 degree view that one could take of it. The shadow it creates and elongates like a beautiful alive gray puppet. Uh, oh, I think I'm doing it again. Appreciating the infinite quality of the present. The artist will try to lovingly recreate that beam of light into a work of poetry, painting, novel, review (Lol) etc. While the neurotic will be lost in it, and not being able to escape its beauty, will be consumed. To sum it all up. This book blew my mind, and I hope it blows your mind as well.
