This was written before competition cooking shows existed so keep that in mind starting out. The first section of the book is about the Culinary Institute of America's Master Chef exam. It's fascinating. Loved that part of the book. It was fascinating and since I didn't know anything about that side of the cooking world, very informative as well. That first section warrants 4.5 stars. The second section follows Michael Symon around (before he's a Food Network star) at his restaurant, Lola. Again, interesting but this is where the author starts to move from journalist to fan - and it bugs. He starts to lose his journalist objective and starts to ruminate on his love for a certain food writer. It's weird and totally out of place, IMO. Most of the second section is a solid 3 star. It does make me want to fly to Cleveland and go to Lola! The third, and final, section is about Thomas Keller and his famous restaurant, the French Laundry. Here's the thing, I want to go to the French Laundry and experience the food just like the next foodie. I was excited to read about it and to learn more about Keller. But I felt like instead of writing like he did in the first section, Mr. Ruhlman ends up writing a love fest about Keller and his food. I get it - he has a man crush. But I don't want to keep reading about it. I keep thinking as I'm reading this last section that if the author would just shut up about himself and his thoughts - the book would be a lot better. So far I'm back and forth between a 2.5 star and 3 star for this section. Yes, that's right. I'm reviewing a book before I'm totally finished. Here's the thing though, if Ruhlman keeps up his man crush love fest I'm bored and moving on. I'll let you all know how it goes. Okay, update. The last section def got better. When Mr. Ruhlman focuses on the subject he writes quite well, engaging the reader to want to keep reading (and needing to eat what he's describing). If I could I'd rate this book a solid 3.5 stars. If you're interested in the cooking, the nuts and bolts, this is a great insight. It's a very meaty (pun intended) book so flying through it in one sitting is not to be expected. I def feel like I learned a lot about the cooking world and basic cooking techniques.
