If I had to give an unprepared TED Talk on a topic I'm passionate about & one I hold more knowledge than the average person. I would talk about exploring the intersections among decolonisation, neoliberalism, deconstruction & feminism. So finding a book that did just that, really tickled my fancy & was up my alley. We move through many time periods, moving seamlessly between rural/homeland Nigeria to the big city of Lagos. We start out with the story of Nnu Ego's parents, to Nnu Ego herself & her life journey. The book explores many weighty topics namely polygamy, marriage, tribalism, colonisation, feminism...but manages to adequately unpack each one with ease. This is not easy to do but Emecheta does this effortlessly. Many times during Nnu Ego's reflections & inner thoughts, she was tackling or working through issues in African society that have been prevalent through the times. Her realisation that she has never been & never will be free is so jarring. However, she chooses to keep on going & does so right till the very end. Her only wish was to be a mother & when she finally has that granted in abundance, this very gift that she long yearned for runs her into the ground. The sons, especially who she had toiled hard for & placed more importance over the other children barely took care of her when the time came. While I understood Oshia's ambitions, I couldn't help but resent him & his brother for not even looking back once to where they came from. If not for both their parents, at least for their mother. Although it was not Oshia's fault for being born into his family situation, I felt that he could have done better by his mother. That mother-son relationship holds this popular quote true: when a woman raises her son, she also raises her oppressor. Nnaife was a terrible man who did not appreciate his wife. However, it was interesting to me how after he came back from the ships, he was no longer as religious. While Nnu Ego, who initially did not understand much about the church eventually became a devout churchgoer. Exploring the dynamics of how the quality of the workers' livelihood depended on their church attendance & participation, was very interesting. So much of their indigenous identity & culture was washed away. We see this seep into the practice of dowry when the standard amount skyrockets & the elders lament how things will never be the same again. And boy were they right! The book is called, The Joys of Motherhood but nary a joy was found in the motherhood! There are so many quotes I enjoyed, I can't share them all so I will only share one. "When will I be free? But even in her confusion, she knew the answer. Never, not even in death. I am a prisoner of my own flesh & blood." It's absolutely mandatory to read this book! Ma'am Buchi Emecheta, your pen game is unmatched. A heartfelt & deep thank you for this book.
