This had absolutely no flow whatsoever and was so disjointed. Almost every time I flipped the page it was to discover a new thought that didn't follow along with the previous page and had nothing to do with it. The story wasn't very clear because it bounced around to so many different things like the author didn't know what to do with it. It wasn't at all what I expected and the way it started made me think it was going to be one way, only for it to end a completely different way. It began with the last day of school and the teacher giving them a surprise spelling test, for some reason. Anyone who has ever attended school knows that you do not take a test on the last day of school, much less a surprise one. The last test would be the EOG at the most, because the teacher wouldn't have time to give and grade a test that close to the end. He passed out report cards and there would be no way he had time to add the spelling test scores and calculate it in. A small detail, but one you need to get right. Buster was going to camp and Arthur was going on a family vacation he wasn't excited about. They packed and D.W. asked if she could bring her dollhouse and her swing. No one made one comment in response to her. I waited for them to say something about packing too much and not being able to fit those things in the car or her not needing them or something, but it was nothing. I was so confused why it was in there if it served no purpose. Arthur wished Buster could come, despaired of being without his best friend for a whole week. He imagined Buster doing all these fun things like swimming, canoeing, archery, roasting marshmallows and horse riding. When they got to the beach the motel advertised that there's always a vacancy which was a bad sign to me. Also, there was an angry customer speaking to the woman at the desk through the window. The "ocean view" wasn't oceanfront at all, was across a road and a mall. The pool was tiny. That evening they had a lobster dinner and Arthur asked if they could go to the beach tomorrow, and his dad replied that he's sure the rain would stop. When did it start raining? No one mentioned rain, and he was just making up one thing after another in an attempt to have all these calamities and bad things happen one right after another. The next day it rained and they decided to send out postcards. Arthur wished Buster was there and D.W. said their grandma was smart not to come. When was she ever coming? The grandma was never in the picture. So random! All of a sudden Arthur realized that at camp there's always something fun to do even in the rain. So he took them on a field trip. It started with a cow festival, in which Arthur got a cow T-shirt. Arthur and D.W. rode on the back of a cow--yeah, right. Most cows are not the riding kind..--in a wet pasture while a man fed the cows...It was so random. Like okayy. Their dad took a pic and Arthur mentioned a milking contest. That led to other activities like alligators, fudge factory, jungle tour, and a movie. It didn't make for engaging reading, just having all these random scenes with a little script. On the last day they finally got to go to the beach on a beautiful day. Back at home, Arthur came over and they both missed each other. Buster asked how he got along with D.W. and Arthur said great and showed him a picture of him burying her in the sand, which made Buster say Arthur really did have a good time. Idk if I've read one with the baby sister before, but just like with the Berenstain Bears, it's like the authors didn't know what to do with just two kids, the boy and the girl, so they introduced a third kid because they didn't know what else to do. And the baby serves no purpose other than to be in pictures because she certainly didn't say anything and no one commented to her or about her even once! If you didn't look at the pictures you wouldn't even know she existed. I mean no point whatsoever to have her there. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
