Having set out to read every single one of Kerouac's principal prose works I decided to leave this one till last. This was mostly because I had assumed, given the date of its writing, that it would have been as drink sodden and as loosely coherent as Satori in Paris. He was after all near the sad end of his tragic drink fuelled decline when he wrote it. But actually Kerouac is very reigned in here. That's not to say he never indulges in any characteristic flights of poetic fancy (even if they're never as extended as in Doctor Sax or Maggie Cassidy). Or that Kerouac's reactionary lamentations against the state of hippie youth (peppered throughout the length of the book) don't read as utterly cringeworthy (although it's surprising to see Kerouac mention the Beatles at one point, I had expected him to disdain the mere mention). All in all though the book turns out to be actually very readable. On the flip slide, the writing in Vanity is sort of prosaic or at least it never really sparkles like Kerouac's earlier stuff. Nevertheless for anyone interested in the whole trajectory of the man's life and the Duluoz mythos, that epic feat of American (semi-)auto-biography which constituted his life work, this is an essential piece of the puzzle. Vanity fills in many of the details of Kerouac's youthful career as a star athlete, navy recruit (very briefly), merchant marine and finally budding debauche. The novel is also interesting for its description of his incipient relationship with the other Beats (Ginsberg is mentioned a few times but in a dismissive way; the tenderness of Kerouac's description of Burroughs on the other hand is actually quite surprising). Ultimately, Vanity of Duluoz feels like Kerouac attempting to set the record straight on his failure to make it as a college athelete and the underwhelming state of his war record, from the perspective of a remorseful middle aged conservative for whom these things had taken on greatly enhanced value (while the bohemian, literary lifestyle which he was then being lauded had clearly become a source of painful regret). Understandably, there is a deep tone of melancholy and grief running through Vanity of Duluoz. There's one very revealing moment in the book that hints at what might have been behind Kerouac's suicidal relationship with alcohol. Kerouac recounts how quiet he had been on one of his sea voyages, having exchanged a handful of words to the rest of the crew throughout the trip, until that is, "we all get paid in little brown envelopes and I unloose about a hundred thousand words on all those poor shipmates of mine because somebody's brought beer aboard and I'm drunk and they complain 'That goddam Du Louse aint said ten words on the whole trip now listen to him!'"
