What did I think of this book? Hm, It was good, I liked the story, I laughed aloud in some places and anxious in others. I really didn't care much for the writing style though. It didn't flow, it was hard to follow and it switched between first and third person narratives with no warning. Several times I had to go back and reread a paragraph or start a section over again just to figure out who was doing the talking or who was being talked about. The author not only confused me with the narratives, but also with the story line itself. This might not come across right, but I would feel totally lost with what was happening, then go back and reread to see if I had missed something only to realize that, NO, I had not missed anything - she just skipped the middle of a story. I'd be reading about an event going to take place, a conversation between two people or maybe just a thought someone was having and then two pages later I'd be reading about the aftermath of said conversation or event that was to take place with no idea of when it happened...it felt like I was missing a piece of the puzzle only to find it already in place. Bad analogy? That being said, the story in and of itself goes like most novels do. There are, of course, exceptions. For example. I can't think of another story I've read in which a random character is added in the last 50 pages of the book. That was weird. But perhaps I am missing some literary symbolism because I really didn't see the point in doing that. At this point you may be asking yourself, "How on Earth did it get 4 stars?". Yeah, that was a tough call. I really wanted to give it 3 just because I was annoyed about being confused so many times and having to go back and reread, which i really don't like doing. BUT the story itself was really good once you can get into it and forgive it's faults. So, it does have it's redeeming qualities. I liked most of the characters, a couple were annoying, but that's ok because I don't want to like everybody. I liked how those characters have individual lives at first but though certain turns of events, whether they be natural disasters or manmade ones, become entwined and somewhat responsible for one another. I enjoyed reading about their personal demons and the symbolism it provided and how people dealt with and lived with their choices and the choices of other people. There is a love story to be found here too. Not just between two people or couples, but a different kind of love for everyone whose lives were involved. Love found in unexpected places, love that is lost, love that stretches the limits of the soul, love that is pure, love that redeems, love that destroys, and love that endures. There are lives lived in this book that are so unusual for the time period that I personally find it hard to believe, but hey, it's a story and anything is possible. So there it is in a nutshell, without giving anything away. I hope you find it helpful.
