I have not read any JCO in a while and have an entire shelf of books by her. I have also decided that it is time to focus on some short stories since my brain seems hard pressed to retain significant quantities of detail in longer stories. I just finished a book of short stories where most were ten pages or less and I enjoyed most of them. However, the final two stories were 30 and 35 pages and I didn’t enjoy them so much. So, when I say SHORT, I am serious. It turns out that there are 35 stories in this book of less than 200 pages. Really short stories! I open this book with the hope of being entertained. That is one way of having your life improved without interference of significant money or morality. Considering JCO is a well known and prolific author, this book published in 1992 has been rated by relatively few GR readers. Oates takes me places that I might not otherwise go and gives me a strong sense that I am right there. The women’s room in the Trailways station was a familiar, dreary place: the kind of public place you never think of when you’re away from it, but once you push open the door, step inside, you realize it has been there all along, waiting for you. The lipstick scrawls on the cinderblock walls, the mirrors specked with grime, stained sinks with hairs visible in the drains, stained toilets. I rushed in, steeling myself for some disagreeable sight or odor, and one of the mirrors showed me wild-looking in the face, damp eyes and a mouth that appeared lipless. I winced, looked away, refused to acknowledge myself before I was ready to be seen. The twenty year old is getting ready for a date and is late. There will be an uncertain transformation in just a few minutes and I will experience it in her mind’s eye. Trevor “raising a slow hand to signal me from the farthest end of the bar, looking me over, smiling, teeth like a skull’s, liking what he saw, maybe.” Ready for the next story? It is also two pages and waiting for you right now. You could pause, take a breath, ready yourself. That is what we do in life, isn’t it? What’s next? Remember that I expressed some hope of being entertained? Well, good luck with that! I forgot. This is Joyce Carol Fucking Oates. Her entertainment will cost you some piece of mind. She makes you think. But not necessarily will she make you smile. She fled, she returned home. And she did telephone the SPCA. And the local police. And whether they came to the woman’s house at the end of the dirt road and saved Shot from his misery, or made any difference at all in the dog’s life, she didn’t know; she kept her windows closed in the morning and kept her air-conditioning unit on. It was hot weather, in any case. Often, she heard dogs barking. In the distance. Any number of dogs. For the world was filled with barking dogs after all. The book is filled with special people. One or more in every short story. And then the murderer was arrested. And confessed. (A local man, a resident too of the welfare hotel.) And though Dennis Brewer was innocent (presumably) people continued to view him with a certain degree of suspicion. It was as if the man had been absorbed and been contaminated by evil as freshly laundered white sheets, hung out to dry, might absorb and be contaminated by polluted air. Even the children could not shake off the expectation, or was it the perverse unspoken hope, that their uncle Dennie had done something special – was something special. Though of course they knew better. As everyone knew better. Got to love JC Fucking Oates. But be careful of her sharp edges. Four stars.
