After an exciting trip to a different library near me as my closest is very small and the YA section is even smaller. I went into this library with the intention to get a couple of extra books and ended up coming out with 12 books. I could’ve easily got more but my library account would not let me. This book really stood out to me and not just because of the reflective needle plastered across the front cover. I had already seen reviews saying how it so gritty and one of the best UKYA they had read in a long time.When I saw the introduction was written by Malorie Blackman I was really excited to read it as I have always loved books written by Malorie Blackman although I actually didn’t enjoy the introduction as much as I thought I would. I really enjoyed the rest of the book, which I found surprising due my previous love for Malorie Blackman. At first, I struggled with the constant changing point of views and I had to keep going back to the start of the chapter to remind myself who’s point of view it was in. Although, this was only a problem when I was reading lots at once as I had gotten use to one narrator for it to change. I really enjoyed this book and from the writing I could really resonate with the characters even though I’m not a drug addict. The development of the characters were slow but it was done in such a way I still felt very emotionally connected to the characters and when something bad happened to one of them I did feel sad. At the start of the book I really loved the character Tar but less so Gemma. I felt she was very dependent and her life that she thought was so bad was just her parents caring about her unlike Tar. At the end of the book however that had completely changed. I could really empathise with the people who in real life I would avoid at all costs. This book was very eye opening and really allowed me to observe the life of a group of underage teenagers who are all addicted to heroin, who had genuine struggles and what it must be like from their point of view which people don’t usually take into consideration. I have questions to ask Melvin Burgees as to how he portrayed it so well and from the reviews I have read I have seen that I am not the only impressed with the detail and accuracy of the book. It showed such a huge commitment to friends who despite will do anything for their next hit of heroin are always there for each other and despite not being successful whenever one of them decided to stop they all gave up together to help the other. When their friend is pregnant they all move away and have a cleanse and as a team try and quit heroin even though they don’t last it is the commitment of the group of friends that amazed me throughout. This book is one of those books that I think that everybody should read at least once in their life.
