HATE! HATE! HATE! HATE! HATE! To clarify...HATED IT! Ok so I was willing...totally willing to give this dumb book a chance, what do I get? THIS! The kid got sick and because in that time there were very little cures for anything, especially serious illnesses, the kid is now a cripple. He is a brat. The book clearly states that. I can't remember whether directly or indirectly. But ANYHOW he is such a brat that he scares away anybody and everybody willing to help him or care for him...Oh yha and his parents are important people so their off helping with a war effort. Oh did I mention there was a war? I'm pretty sure there was a war. The kid wanted so bad to fight in the same war his daddy was figting in so he was REALLY frustrated at being bed-ridden. After everybody had fled the house in terror he realized he coudn't do anything. OOPS! He's helpless. What does he do now? Why he waits for a creepy monk named John to take pity on him. A bunch of stuff happens and the kid is now at the monistary and is learning how to read, carve, write, and best of all, hobble. Yup. Our poor little cripple is now on crutches. AND swimming. So after all this happens the kid wants to see his dad since he's been writing letters and his dad says it's ok for him to come up. John 'go in the wynd' (I'm not kidding) and some crazy dude that plays a harp go on a trip. So after all their scary adventures and avoiding being killed on the way to their destination they FINALLY get there. So then there is a ambush. AFTER their in the castle type place. Everybody's going crazy. Theirs fog and no one knows where their coming from. So the kid takes it UPON HIMSELF (Brave kid you got sir...also slightly stupid) to go to his friend about 5 miles away and tell him about the attack so they can save the day. So this little 10 year old is waling around in crutches in the fog...maybe heading straight towards a attack. No matter. He avoids all THAT and gets there safe and sound. He saves the day. Says a friendly hi to his parents. And gets congratalations from the King. What a couple months! "Kid, you must me tired. What can I get you? Oh... your fine? Oh you already got a medal. Well ok then. Let me know if you need anything." *Quietly walks away from the house while "accidently" dropping a lit cigerette.* So basically this book has everything. Bad writing, a stupid character, boring plot, creepy characters. What more could you ask for. The moral of this review: DON'T BOTHER! - Sentiments brought to you by your friendly neighborhood book worm This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
