It may have been twenty years ago that I bought my copy of Tom Phillips’s A HUMUMENT. This postmodern objet d’art had been a decades-long project of his. Using as his source material the 1892 edition of the Victorian novel “A Human Document” by W.H. Mallock, Phillips scrupulously examined the text, page by page, for its hidden potential, then painted over most of the words, leaving a found text that relates fragments of the story of his found character, Bill Toge, whose name crops up whenever the word “together” offers itself for the obscuration of its last four letters. Phillips is a brilliant, inventive graphic artist. The colors, textures, compositions, and concepts of his paintings vary wildly from one page to the next. For many years, I had periodically thumbed through A HUMUMENT primarily for the beauty of its art, jumping here and there, dipping in, taking pleasure in the seemingly random quality of the text, but never actually sitting down to “read” it all the way through. Now I have. How does it stand up as literature? Does it matter? I am reminded of John Cage’s readings through “Finnegan’s Wake.” You simply take the ride and let all the sights wash over you. On the first page of Mallock’s original, in the proper order, Phillips was able to find the perfect words for announcing his project, in a tone of voice that evokes the grand baritone of Whitman: “The following sing I a book. a book of art of mind art and that which he hid I reveal.” The next two pages take tentative steps into the story: “is The woman we are speaking of over her ankles in the storm and fire and desire of art; and the art of art and would have given us a humument or two / for photo dismay. / my pillow book, the puzzled sheets / my pocket-volume bound in reality.” Bill Toge first appears on page 6: “… journal contents as yet is only one half of the toge story / the first scenes and feelings.” A love story develops, one episode of which is revealed on page 189: “speech gave way / At last she felt toge / even night gave in.” Several passages read as poetic lists, such as page 187, consisting entirely, with one exception, of a series of two-word declarative sentences, provocative and touching: “words work / nature conditions / needs kill / women support / friends fit / nothing happens / successes close / experience knows / time walks / exercise kills / faculties function / star shuts / life stands alone.” On page 279, Bill Toge sits down to a meal and all present are named: “twelve for breakfast: alf shrink and ron comptoir, stan gage, alf rosp, ted wink, clare somewhat and olive ribe, len welve, and eve sardine, al plish, val rant, Mrs. Mornspot, bill with his friends all about him.” Written descriptions do not do justice to the richness of this book. It has to be held in the hand, the pages turned, the colorful paintings reaching out directly to the eyes.
