4.5/5 Mexico. Melancholy, profoundly right and wrong, it embraces as it strangulates. Destiny is not a metaphysical confrontation with one's self, rather, society has knit its pattern so tight that a confrontation with it is inevitable. There are many gaps in my reading record, but one of the largest and/or most unforgivable is that of Chicana/Xicana literature. My return to the university has brought me even closer to that country my homeland loves to bleed, the food and the views and the people of that Latino/Latina/Latinx extraction, fueler of drug lord narratives and political plans of the Great Wall of Texas, or whatever is the name of the latest US scheme to control absolutely what along this particular borderland is injected and extracted. I've indulged in Bolaño and Márquez and Allende in a half-assed attempt to understand the whole of the countries in the south of this unnaturally spliced continental mass, but it's not the whole that's cleaned my house every month for as long as I can remember. It's not the whole that's railed against on public television with implications of single mothers and welfare and the utmost need for women like me to sterilize the likes of them out of duty to nation and kith and kind. Academia has its ills, but shoving me through whatever ice was keeping me from books like The Mixquiahuala Letters is not one of them. No one wants a woman of color in the halls of postmodernism (although the politics of that statement's tricky cause there's plenty of white Latinxs on both sides of the nation state, and if you've ever parsed the matters of Latinx and Hispanic and black and white brown you know how easily the power relations break down and why one's never permitted to think. intersctionality, y'know), so we've got this postmodernist epistolary novel shoved in Womens and School and Feminism. Alright, then. Let's roll with how the novelty's not much beyond the Hopscotch structuring and the inevitability of talking about menace and abortion and gang rape when it comes to women and even more so when it comes poor women and even more when it comes women with physical evidence of indigenous blood. As it states, nothing new. The socioeconmoics of colorism and fetishization. I am reminded of So Long a Letter with two friends of great divergence and long acquaintance, except those two never drifted along the roads of grit and ghosts and godforsaken lies. Spring break Tijuana or whatever college kids do these days, except that's where one's family resides. Tacos and tequila and drug mule delights, except that's where one's history bleeds. My local supermarket keeps fucking around with Day of the Dead make up and, regardless of whether you refer back to The Book of Life or the sex worker-led protests against the female homicides of Ciudad Juárez, that shit's all sorts of bad faith. The irony of my atheist self being more respectful of other spirituality's than whatever Christian majority's setting the market price wore off a long time ago. Maybe it's the survival aspect that turned me off from this branch of feminism I'd eventually have to learn to respect if I ever wanted to get anywhere in life. Sordid conspiracies and violent cartels are far more titillating when one follows the trail of bodies instead of side-tracking forevermore behind the ones who got away, and it's harder to thrill at the dramatic reports of Mexico when one considers the women who live through them. The young rebel, the family rejects, it falls apart, the less young come back, the least young conform, the family accepts, the drugs fall off, the children live, an inheritance of pre-colonial civilization and post-colonial livelihood becomes the day to day requirements of food, security, love. When that happens, one can no longer label the violent events of time as excitement, freedom, necessary experience, a tale to tell the grandchildren, anything but what they are. She could've been raped, but she wasn't. She could've been killed, but she wasn't. White girls travel to Mexico in order to perk up their lives a little, but the shields of physical wealth and that military industrial complex of a US breathing down the other's neck does wonders for the perks of survival. For two women who lack such measures, there is a record of friendship that may yet, may not, may still. The hour that was for them, for us, all who had awakened one morning to see their fields covered with blood rather than the harvest, who didn't seek to change the world but lived in good faith and prayer offered to an imposing God, for the young women who mended their mens' clothing and held their sons' mouths to the purple nipples of sweet breasts, for the man who watched the sun descend behind the mountain every evening and dreamed and when his sons were grown, passed on his dreams, for the black nights when guitars harmonized with the wind's song, to the bottle of regional brew, and a hand-rolled cigarette, to the baptism and a dance of celebration, to the aroma of soups simmering on wood-burning stoves and filled the bellies of those who worked the fields, to a candle that burned in vigil while a hungry mind gulped the printed truth of another's legacy, to the owl that called from between the moon and earth while lovers enwrapped their passion on silver tinted grass, to the history of the world and to its future, to all that had lived and died and had been born again in that moment as i approached an opaque window and pointed my weapon.
