"The longer and more carefully we look at a funny story, the sadder it becomes." — Nikolai Gogol Before saying anything else, I think I must begin with my association with this novel. It was that period of my age, years and years ago when I had read only a few books, most of them incomplete, yet I used to impress my friends with that precocious intelligence I gathered from those books devoured by me in such scanty doses. And what about my knowledge of Russian literature then?... That was extraordinarily abundant even at that time. Was that a joke?... Indeed... it was! If you had asked me to name any two authors of Russia then, I would have said the first name in a very confident tone... 'Tolstoy'... and second name, after a pause of a few seconds, I could have uttered aforementioned in full, with little more dignity... 'The Leo Tolstoy'. Yes! That is true. I was not aware of any other name. What a pity! No. I was like an infant still swinging in my cradle of innocent ignorance as long as the book reading was concerned. I was a newbie. After some time when I started reading contemporary authors. I was reading a book by Jhumpa Lahiri . There, for the first time, I encountered this unique name... GOGOL...Jhumpa had created a fictitious character there in her plot whose name was Gogol. I thought then that she might have been inspired by the modern-day 'Google'. However somewhere in between, she described the Gogol as someone like this as far as I remember, "an eccentric genius, an intelligent queer and sickly creature, a hypochondriac and a deeply paranoid, morbidly melancholic... one among Russian literary greats" So, Jhumpa was decidedly the one who introduced me to the second name from the Russian Literary world many years back...GOGOL... Since then I wanted to read this fellow. I had notified Gogol and his Dead Souls in excitement then. It seems a silly association but it is quite true. Before turning to Dead souls finally, I had already read him three years back in his short tales, The Nose and The Overcoat . I loved both of them. Now coming back to the Book, you can instantly see that I was reading this book with very high expectations and enthusiasm. Did this book meet my expectations? I’ll first say YES. And then I’ll say NO as well. Actually this book had two parts. In the first part, I loved everything whatsoever was written by Gogol there. But in the second part, I’ll say my excitement just perished in a very unusual way. It ended flat from the point of view of the story, leaving me disconcerting and a little disappointed as well. So this book just fell short of a five star read for me. The storyline is rather simple. A clever man is trying to make wealth through trick and hoax. He is using the officials. Corruption practices among those officeholders made his fraud of buying and selling those dead souls quite convenient. Dead souls were those serfs who were dead but they were still shown as living ones in the census there on paper. So this guy used all his brain to acquire a huge sum of money through the deed of sale of such dead souls. Our hero, the hero of this novel, as is defined in the beginning, is peripatetic rouge and is very solicitous about his descendants. Our hero is a traveler but his travel is of a different sort. One day our hero CHICHIKOV enters in a provincial city of N. Gogol has constantly used this term ‘our hero’ everywhere in the narration, whenever he had a strong intent to peep out in between the storyline and wanted to talk to the reader directly, this ‘our hero’ of Gogol, though acts throughout the book villainously. He entered in style on a pretty brichka (a type of horse-drawn carriage) and entered the gate of a hostelry in this city…And thus began his journey in this novel Dead souls. Every chapter of this book brings to the reader a unique character and an entirely new backdrop from Russian society. A scene changes every time a chapter finishes. Chichikov either deliberately reaches there or lands up there accidentally. And here in every chapter of this novel especially in the first part, Gogol has shown the class of his penmanship in framing such humorous circumstances and very sharp observations of Russian people and their behavior. And I really liked all the characters created by Gogol in this book. The humor content is at its best and the conversations and Gogol's delibrations on various issues of Russia can be seen in a new light. "But wise is the man who disdains no character, but with searching glance explores him to the root and cause of all." These FOUR things I noticed throughout the book. You will find here DIVERSITY of Russian classes and characters, then you will witness the DRAMA among the characters in the satirical language of Gogol, the dialogues and narration will fill you with unstoppable jest in that classic Gogolian HUMOR, and finally, a big-time SUSPENSE will linger on every time there. So, Diversity, Drama, Humor, and Suspense are my four takeaways from this novel. This is for sure a great classic book and is quite strange and queer in its approach and scope both, and one must read it if one is interested in peeking into the Russian ways of the 19th century through the eyes and style of Gogol. Nabokov had once described Gogol as "the strangest prose-poet Russia ever produced" and I too have felt this strangeness of his craft in this novel.
