the novel opens really nicely, with descriptions of the Abbey, and it's monks and their different roles. I enjoyed it's familiar and friendly tongue-in-cheek(i)ness 🙂😉 Cadfael's gardens, his routines within them, and his stored and drying herbs, are nicely described too 🌿 I think I'd enjoy being his apprentice 😁💚 I liked the scene setting, and also the storyline - a potential change of prior bringing small, and less small, disruptions to their order. no less a murder! 😯 the murder is of the second husband of Richildis, Cadfael's once love, and her son is the chief suspect (not that anyone who knows him believes that). Cadfael determines to find the real murderer, while keeping the boy/young man safe. Cadfael muses on the path of fatherhood he never took... tho also whether there are any children with his heritage born to women, and in places, he once knew 🤔🙂 much more investigation ensues... Brother Cadfael is assisted in Shrewsbury by his apprentice, young Brother Mark 🙂 and then travels into Wales, called there to treat an ailing Brother, where he manages to further his investigations and bring the case to a close. 🌱🌿🌳🌿🌳🌿🌱 I especially enjoyed: 🧡 Cadfael's moments of musing on mistakes/things he hadn't foreseen.. not in a self reproaching way, but in his usual quiet considered way, and leaving things to trust/not fretting overly over things he can't control 🙂 💚 Cadfael's time in Wales to administer to a sick Brother across the border (and to help tend the sheep while he recovers). I enjoyed his interactions and reflections there, the descriptions of the land (his homeland) and some of the Welsh practices and culture, and there's a nice mention of Welsh/Celtic Christianity compared to Roman led Christianity. 💙 young Brother Mark's energy and uncomplicated enthusiasm and glee 😃😁 🌱🌿🌳🌿🌳🌿🌱 my favourite Brother Cadfael novel so far! not sure what it was about this one, and/or maybe just where I was at/my mood, but I thoroughly enjoyed this novel, and my time with it 😊 🌟 🌟 🌟 🌟 accessed as an RNIB talking book, ably read by George Hagan. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
