Cyberpunk, politics, detective work, futuristic arcologies, and the type of psionics that could have inspired Marc Miller’s original Traveller role-playing game provide the ingredients for Larry Niven’s The Long Arm of Gil Hamilton . Three separately published novellas, each featuring protagonist Gil Hamilton, a United Nations law enforcement expert with a unique psionic ability, have been collated into this 1976 anthology. It mixes genres I enjoy and it does so superbly. In the first novella, “Death by Ecstasy,” Niven deals with addiction, suicide, and organ-legging using a patina of “current addiction,” the application of electrical stimulus to the pleasure center of the brain. I don’t think I’ve read a story that explored this in quite this way since I read George Alec Effinger’s classic trilogy beginning with When Gravity Fails . Admittedly, Effinger’s concept was broader than “mere” electrical stimulus and he published long after this story appeared in Galaxy magazine (1969). Nonetheless, the concepts of plugging directly into the brain and providing some modification is an intriguing exploration of the human/machine interface and its use as an analogy to drug addiction. Without providing a spoiler, let me just say that the resolution of the final encounter in “Death by Ecstasy” was cleverly (and in the context of the story’s fictional universe, “realistically”) done. The second novella, “The Defenseless Dead,” was published in 1973. At that point, many were still fantasizing about cryogenics as a means to stave off fatal diseases until a cure could be developed. Niven takes that idea with its wishful thinking about immortality to explore both the political aspects of cryogenic storage (along with the cynical observations about human greed and opportunism. The case becomes personal for Gil Hamilton, the UN officer for ARM (originally the Amalgamation of Regional Militia) and the eponymous wielder of the “long arm” in the collection’s title, when he spots a former kidnap victim at a local restaurant and is victim of an attempted murder as he exits. Positing that kidnapping, organlegging, the murder attempt, and an upcoming bill to release the “corpsicles” of the preserved dead for organ transplants were connected in some way, Hamilton begins the investigation. Hamilton’s route to the ultimate bad guy in this novella is bumpy, but satisfying. Third up was something a little different. In 1975, people were still concerned about Paul Ehrlich’s The Population Bomb . The background for this story was the implementation of Fertility Restriction Laws (more extreme version of the one-child policy in mainland China) and how it might have influenced a possible murder case. There is also an interesting feature where one of the witnesses/suspects has had a sex change operation and doesn’t want another person of interest to know. That seems to have been a facet of the story that is even more ahead of its time than the overt science-fiction aspects of the novella. One of the two murder cases involved a time compression device related, allegedly, to an inertialess drive. The science-fiction aspects made it a classic “locked door” mystery. My favorite line in this story was a response from our ARM protagonist, Gil Hamilton, to an LAPD officer who admitted to being bothered by the machine involved in the murder: “Well, it should, Julio. The Los Angeles police were not trained to deal with a mad scientist’s nightmare running quietly in the middle of a murder scene.” (p. 154) The solutions to both murders are clever and satisfying, In a brief afterward, Niven makes one of those statements which should be obvious, but which need to be stated regularly for the benefit of most would-be writers: “Much detective fiction is also sociological fiction…as is much science fiction…” (p. 178). As suggested earlier in this review, Niven has mixed a strong cocktail of economics, sociology, futuristic speculation, and mystery. As a result, I need to rate this extremely high on my personal scale.
