Being as nice as I can be, I must also be very frank: in my estimation, it is the worst biography on Luther. I was excited to read it because it promised a different look into Luther and his driving force. Sadly, what I got was someone who just hated Luther and preferred Erasmus, has never given Protestantism (generally and specifically the Lutheran expressions) much consideration and looks down on it, and, at times, I questioned whether the author understood Christian religion at all. The excellent story telling that makes a history book interesting was eclipsed by the overwhelming amount of assumption heavily woven through; so much so, that it was disruptive rather than informative or entertaining. There were many moments where the historical interactions between Luther and other figures were twisted and truncated to make the author's point, rather than being a compelling new telling of the events. While there is very good evidence that the text depended on Luther's Works, both LW and WA, and that the author is clearly a historian of the age, there are broad sweeping, poorly evidenced conclusions. For example, Luther downplayed the sacraments stripping them of their sacred power for the believer, stripped the scripture of its authority, was drunk when (and progressively getting more so) when he wrote his lambasting of the peasants, that Luther never evolved his opinion on "rebellion" in all its forms, and that Luther was intentionally forming his own movement (this last one is super sad considering all the work that has been done by current Luther scholars stitching Luther back together with his catholic tradition). Many of these broadly drawn conclusions are, unfortunately (maybe?) contradicted in other parts of the book. The summaries of the principal texts reviewed and engaged with for the book, were twisted to fit a particular conclusion of the Author, which always is, in the end, Luther was a failure and horrible. (I won't disagree whole-heartedly with the second of these, but a failure? really? because he was frustrated and angry at being thrust into forming a church when he just wanted the old church to reform, or that "evangelicalism" was new and people didn't quite understand it, or that he had to come to terms with the spontaneity of obedience to God's law was more difficult to meet out in the lives of the people?) The driving thesis of the book--that Luther wasn't scared of God's judgment but death (the event)--was touted as unique, but yet, it wasn't. (Even the epilogue betrayed the thesis and linked Luther's fear of death with also that which came after.) Here I have to ask, was a fear of death (the event) all that different from a fear of God's judgment or what could potentially come after death? While Luther's self-story telling is clearly a product of memory fry and ego, I'm not sure dismissing what he says and then forming one's own conclusion and forcing it into Luther's mouth is really a good antidote. This makes me want to bring up that at no point does the author take into account that Luther was excessively anxious as a product of his upbringing and his environment--manifesting as health anxiety and paranoia, anger and fear, which only got worse as time went on. Rather than offering a modicum of compassion, the author--even after affirming Erikson's Freudian psychoanalysis of Luther--uses that to paint Luther in wretched colors. Do our anxiety disorders dismiss the consequences of our actions? No. But do I know this in 2025? yes I do because a lot of work has been done to give me this knowledge. If Luther were alive today, I wonder what personal work he would have done while he was pursuing such a reform...I'm sure things would've looked different. However, that's not what we have and thus my expectations of the man Luther must remain as they are as things were in the 16th century and refrain from imposing my expectations and assumptions of collegial and academic decorum on Luther. Could he have been less of a hot head? Yeah, that would've been great. But what we have is raw Luther, un medicated, un therapized, un personal work. While holding him accountable, there's a better middle line to walk than using it to assail and defame the man... (and, again, he's good at doing this himself...must one color harder over that clear image?). The author insults people who both study and like Luther's works while simultaneously not giving many of Luther's works a thorough or amicable reading. The author assumes that his reader is just like him and ascribes to his views. By doing this, he loses those of us who aren't; evidencing that his works is for those of a small community of the like-minded rather than a robust contribution to Luther studies. I wish the author had simply written a biography on Erasmus, who is clearly the star of the show. Vilifying Luther more than Luther vilified himself in order to make Erasmus shine leads me to believe that Erasmus maybe didn't shine that much. Why boast of Erasmus by dragging Luther so hard (and, again, Luther drags himself well enough...) While I made it to the very end, it was a lot of work. I really wanted this text to be fun to read, but it wasn't. It was infuriating and insulting as both a protestant and Luther scholar (as new at this as I might be). For those who hate Luther and want to be affirmed in that disdain, this book is for you. For those who are looking for another or a new take on Luther that also provides beneficial insight leading to a better relationship to the man, take a pass on this.
