Maryanne and the Search for Tigger It starts off Dawn and Maryanne are going to the pet shop to get toys for Tigger, somehow his cat toys keep falling in the space behind the refrigerator and Maryanne can’t reach them. So, a lot of her money keeps going toward getting new ones. Dawn and Maryanne talk about their parents date and both think their mom and dad had a good time. Maryanne gets two packs of three balls. They drop them off to him (Tigger) and then head for the meeting. At the end of the meeting, Logan calls because his parents need a sitter for Kerri and Hunter (his brother and sister). He can’t do it because he has baseball practice. Maryanne wants the job and gets it. It’s a Friday after school and Logan and Maryanne are sitting outside her house. (They can’t go in because she’s not allowed to have boys over when her dad isn’t there). So she’s sitting there watching Tigger play and exclaiming every other minute how cute he is. Then she tells him not to go to far off which makes her think of how her dad use to be over protective. Then she wonders if she’s being too overprotective. Logan gets short tempered with her and says again. Like he’s heard this a million times. So, the conversation gets kinda non-existent until Jaime stops by and starts to play with Tigger. Then Myriah and Gabby come over. I wanna say Logan’s problem here is that he’s tired of kids always being around Maryanne, He says “overrun with kids” in a kind of annoyed way. But then Myriah and Gabby say they have something to show Jaime and they all leave. But then Charlotte comes by and plays with Tigger. When she leaves, so does Logan. Before he leaves and they’re taking about what Maryanne can expect he says Hunter’s allergies are bad and that Kerri is going through a stage where she wants to be more independent. Maryanne is making dinner after a club meeting when she realizes that Tigger isn’t beside her so she looks all over the house. He’s not in any of the rooms. Her dad and she take flashlights and look outside. He’s not out there either. They take his toys and jiggle them so they make noise. This doesn’t do anything. By eleven Tigger still hasn’t shown up. The next morning, he’s not back either. So, Maryanne goes to her sitting job at the Brunos. Hunter’s allergies are having a field day wit hhim. He wants to go outside but Maryanne decides best to keep him inside. So they play games in his room (one called Vet, and Chutes and Ladders). Kerri is being way to helpful and keeps going to her room to “check on something”. When Maryanne gets back, Tigger still isn’t there. She calls Kristy and Kristy declares an emergency meeting. They decide to put “Missing” Posters. They’ll also offer a reward. Combining their own money and some from the treasury they come up with 30.00. This touches Maryanne. Then they decide to put his picture on the poster. Claudia draws an exact replica. When she calls Logan later he says “Gett that’s too bad”. He’s distracted watching videos from the practice. I’m not sure if this is an actual sitting job but Jessi is watching Squirt and Becca. Squit is just learning to feed himself and gets food everywhere. They start talking about Tigger and Becca says that the) -the people that she had a job pet sitting for= has a cat that is about to have babies. Becca says if they don’t find Tigger maybe they’ll give Maryanne one of the kittens. Jessi says she might not want another kitten right away. Then Beccaa helps Squirt walk and shows Jessi that because she (Beeca) cheered him on, now he cheers himself on. (It is kinda cute!) Kristy gets the posters made and the BSC (plus Logan) meet and go around the neighboorhood on Sunday putting the posters up. Logan says he’s sorry about Tigger but then tells Maryanne she’s being to dramatic when she says it’s the worse thing that every happened to her. Mallory is speed posting figuring that the quicker they put them out the quicker they find Tigger. Mr. Spier offers to put some posters in the window of the store and some other places on his way out, Maryanne starts to worry if Tigger is lost, or has been hit, or if he’s dead. A boy that looks about 10 tries to be slick and mislead Maryanne into thinking she’s seen Tigger so he’ll get the reward. He said his name was on his collar only Tigger didn’t have on a collar. He asks was it for information letting to him. She says no it’s for putting him in her hands. Charlotte, Myriah, Gabby, Nicky, and Matt join the search. Jaime says if he had thirty dollars he’d buy a thousand racing cars, but he’d father just have Tigger back. Jamie suggests on another day they look again. So, she takes him, Lucy, Myriah and Gabby and they look around some more. Maryanne goes back home and finds a ransom note in the mail asking for 100.00. Maryanne invites Logan to the next meeting and tells him about the note but he seems not to be too excited over it. At the meeting when she tears up he doesn’t even do anything to console her. They talk it over and decide that a child wrote the note. There’s no proof that this person has Tigger. Just an ampty threat. (The note says I If You Want To See Your Cat Alive). There’s no picture of Tigger just Claudia’s drawing. Then 100,00 doesn’t seem like all that much for him. So Logan comes up with a plan. Maryanne will go to Brenner’s Field and leave an velope with fake money. Then she’ll go home, but sneak back. The others will be hidden and they’ll bust the person Dawn sits for the Barrett’s. Buddy, and Suzy have heard about Tigger’s kidnapping and have decided to guard Pow so the same thing won’t happen to him. Matt told Buddy. Nickey told him. Jaime told him. So, they built him a special box. Dawn says how about if he let Pow out if he agrees not to go anywhere without him knowing it. Then tomorrow they’ll know if someone really kidnapped Tigger. Buddy wants to know how they’ll know. D awn says they just will. Then she gives him the good news that his mom said he can watch a show called “Dragon Warriors”. Later that night, Dawn and Maryanne talk during a storm. Dawn mentions that Logan’s been having a rough time on the field. She saw one of his games and he missed a play and got teased. The person who wrote the randsome note turns out to be the same kid that tried to get the money out of Maryanne. He doesn’t have Tigger. Logan asks Maryanne if she wants to turn him in and make a citizens arrest. She says it isn’t worth it. Dlaudia sits for the Perkins girl. The job consists of listening to them sing songs like “I’ll Be Home For Christmas” and “Blue Suede Shoes” and playing detectives. Jaime comes by and they pretend o look for Tigger (but it’s really RC the Perkins caT). When Maryanne sits for Hunter she notices his sneezing is worse so she tries to find out the cause. It’s not her perfume. It’s not her clothes. It’s not his Erector set. To her surprise she searches Kerri’s room and finds Tigger. Kerri admits she found Tigger the day the weather was bad and took him home. Later, she realized who he was but said that Maryanne clearly wasn’t doing a good job taking care of him and she knew she could do better. She never missed a day of feeding him and brought his a dish, food, and toys. Mrs. Hunter tells her she still can’t have a pet. Her brothers allergies are just too bad. Maryanne gets it in her mind that Logan must have known but didn’t say anything because he was protecting his sister. She decides to ask him after practice, but he says he didn’t know anything about it. He tells her the reason he hasn’t been herself is because he’s about to get kicked off the baseball team. The coach expects more from him than anyone else since he use to be a star player on his old team. At the BSC meeting, Logan updates them that Kerri will be allowed to get a hairless pet tho she will be lightly punished by washing the car. She’ll also start to hang out with Charlotte (I think they have a playdate). My Thoughts: Maybe Richard and Maryanne need to put a fence around their house. I’m just saying if it’s that easy for Tigger to wander off into the street. Not that he couldn’t still slip out. My mom had a dog once and we have a fenced backyard and he *still* somehow found himself in a neighbor’s yard WAY up the street. I’m not really sure how that happened but if Richard is a lawer its something he *night* want to consider. Then I’ve said it once, I’ll say it again. Males take sports WAY to seriously. Maryanne was a lot more understanding than I would have been. You got cut from a middle school baseball team? OH KAAY and thas a reason for you to be insensitive to your girlfriend whose going through it because her pet might be hurt or dead. If that’s the way you treated that situation, I’d hate to see what youd do if something happened to her FATHER! C’mon Logan. I’m disappointed in you. Although you *did* come up with a good plan. I guess that gives you some points back. Still, GET OVER IT! It’s not like your playing pro and lost a ton of money. And Maryanne take this as a lesson. Now you see how Logan will handle things in your life if things are bad in his and close up your cat’s door when you aren’t home (and your fathers) Rating: 5 It’s weird that a few chapters in after not reading this book for years I remembered about Kerri and I thought oh Kerri has it=with nothing in the story to go on or point me in that direction-. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
