From my blog, The Writer Diaries . I didn't like this book. At all. I found myself skipping through paragraphs of description, mostly the spells, cause it felt like a big info dump. You use playing cards because...... insert lengthy reason why. You use oil because...... another lengthy reason why. I feel like I know more about calming oils and protection spells than I do the characters. Stacy starts having nightmares about something terrible happening to her friend Drea. She knows that they mean something because this has happened to her before with a child she babysat, Maura. This time Stacy plans on preventing Drea's death. And here I was rooting for Drea to die. She is the worst kind of itch with a heavy case of B. She's a horrible, arrogant friend who believes 'whats mine is mine' including people. She even tells Stacy's crush that she wets her bed - we'll address this little problem later - all because she walked in their dorm and found them sleeping. Fully clothed. A parent would get angry. Your best friend should not, especially since she isn't dating that guy anymore. But alas, Drea thinks he and every other guy in school, belong to her. Honestly, I don't know why Stacy tried so hard to be her friend. I wouldn't want anything to do with her with how she treats people. I kept getting the vibe this was set in the 90s, what with all the payphones, and a mention of a walkman. It seems unbelievable that only one student at this wealthy prep school has a cell phone, so I'm going to guess it was 90s. Oh, and Stacy is a bedwetter. There's nothing wrong with it, but did the author really have to address it every. single. scene? I couldn't go two pages without Stacy peeing all over herself. Honey, get that checked out. It was explained in the book, but the author doing it over and over again for a total of 9 million times in the book is overdone. I read more about peeing than a plot. And character development! Ha! I knew the first time they introduced Donovan he would be the one. His obsession made it obvious. There wasn't any doubt in my mind. No suspense. No characterization. Nada. Did I mention that I was rooting for the killer to kill everyone? Because they are all horrible characters. On Amazon, it DID say it was for ages 7-10. I'll leave this to the middle schoolers. Once upon a time I enjoyed books regardless of what they lacked.
