Hannibal Lecter rises! This is the first novel about Dr. Hannibal Lecter, introducing the character. MINDS ALIKE You never know what path a novel will take, specially when this becomes the beginning of a book series. When you're reading you could think that Will Graham would be the "hero" of this book series, but the tremendous success of Dr. Hannibal Lecter, even before the filming of The Silence of the Lambs (based on the sequel book), it was clear that the "good guy" won't the "hero" of this book series but... ... the Bad Guy ! And you won't find badder guy than Dr. Hannibal Lecter, since he isn't just a psychopath, but he's a psychiatrist, therefore he knows all the tricks that criminal profilers do, and he knows all the tricks of the psychologists whom try to treat him... ...oh, and if that wasn't enough... ...he eats his victims, with the best cuisine techniques! How, Will Graham, special investigator of the FBI was able to catch him? That's where things got creepy... ...since Will Graham thinks too much alike as Lecter. To catch a madman, you need a madman. And the worse of that? When the madman needs the help of the other madman. That's where things get creepier... ...and bloodier!!! EVIL KNOWS EVIL Will Graham got three dangeours serial killers, including the infamous Dr. Hannibal Lecter... ...but at a great cost... ...so he decided to leave all that behind and having a quiet life with his family. But evil never takes vacations... ...the Tooth Fairy, a new and twisted serial killer rises and entire families are paying the price. Special Agent Jack Crawford, in charge of the Behavioral Science Unit of the FBI, knows that the Tooth Fairy not only is something out of the regular serial killers, but also it's on a bloody spree, so there's little time to avoid more massacres... ...so he needs to call again Will Graham. Nobody can gets into the minds of serial killers like Graham. However, since the Tooth Fairy is a menace racing against time... ...Will Graham needs to get into contact of Dr. Hannibal Lecter to ask for his help in the case... ...the game is on again... ...and Dr. Hannibal Lecter enjoys to play!
