Brown, by Richard Rodriguez, addresses many paradoxes (wanting to belong versus wanting to be an individual, extremes vs. mediocrity, etc.), yet the main main theme that resonated with me was the idea that political correctness, the act of tiptoeing around the issue of race, can be much more racist than the blatant fact. Though we have been in our past offensive, banishing native tribes of our nation to tiny reservations plagued with disease and alcohol and drug abuse, and, of course, committed the shameful sin of slavery, we have reached a time where we can recognize other races for what they are: people. And at this time, when we should be accepting of what others want for themselves and ingratiating that into our culture, we have decided to put people in boxes, categorize, and set apart. Rodriguez makes the case that people do not want to be identified by terms that make them “politically correct.” He writes, “Young negroes with no time to waste, no patience for eternal justice, renamed themselves ‘black’” (17). Though, for some reason, white America feels that it’s job is to make everyone feel equally addressed, minorities have begun to take matters into their own hands, establishing their identities for what they want to be instead of what they are told to be. When Johnson introduced Affirmative Action as a way to solve the country’s race problem, cultures and people became colors became statistics. Rodriguez writes, “In college, because of Lyndon Johnson, I became a ‘minority student’… a government document of dulling prose would redefine America as an idea in five colors: White. Black. Yellow. Red. Brown” (94). Furthermore, Americans, real Americans, use this idea to justify the separation we are “trying” to avoid. The author writes, “’We are Americans, too,’ they said. No, you’re not, you are Mexicans. And you are Canadians. We are Americans ©” (119). We feel the need to constantly hyphenate, to keep ourselves pure, and maintain distaste for mixture and the influence of cultures we do not feel to be ours. I believe that it is a thin line we tread between being crudely offensive and overly protective; an inability to say “black” or “Indian” or even say nothing at all leads to ignorance, a “softness on geography” (117) that leads to our idea of the American identity. But wouldn’t it just be best to leave everyone be?
