If anyone ever tells you that you can’t write a book, keep in mind Lewis Carroll. Lewis Carroll, the author of Alice’s Adventure in Wonderland, is actually a pen name (As Lisa of Troy isn’t my real name, he already gets bonus points from me). His real name was Charles Lutwidge Dodgson. Wikipedia describes him as “somewhat asymmetrical.” He walked rather stiffly and awkwardly, and he was deaf in one ear. He had a weak chest from a bout of whopping cough and a stammer. And yet….. He wrote Alice in Wonderland. Everything was smooth sailing from there on out, right? Of course, not! In June 1865, the first two thousand copies of Alice’s Adventure in Wonderland were printed. However, the illustrator, John Tenniel, was so dissatisfied with the printing of the pictures that Carroll decided that all 2,000 copies would be sold as wastepaper. Carroll wrote in his journal about how he probably would not even break even. According to Wikipedia, there are only 22 known copies of the “wastepaper” version in existence, and they are incredibly valuable. Here’s hoping that my mistakes will one day be worth millions! What did I think of the story itself? Dodgson made some huge gambles. For starters, he picked a female protagonist in the 1860’s. Alice is having adventures, not talking about boys or love. Thank you, Mr. Dodgson! The author is also highly creative, inventing all different kinds of characters from the Cheshire Cat to the Queen of Hearts. Alice also drinks and eats to become smaller and larger. This was such a great concept to think about. Aren’t there instances where you feel like you have very little power, almost voiceless, and other instances where you feel like you can make a great big difference, where you are a key player? “What is an unbirthday present?” “A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.” The opening to Alice’s Adventure in Wonderland is such an intriguing scene. Alice sees a rabbit dressed up, looking at his watch, and stating, “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be too late!” For me, this is the perfect blend of reality and fantasy. I can imagine being in a park and seeing a rabbit hopping out from his or her hiding place. It isn’t too far of a stretch to imagine it also clothed and talking. In Through the Looking-Glass, there is a poem within the book entitled, Jabberwocky, which I read back in nineth grade. Reading it again, it almost cries out to be read aloud. It is so much fun! Also, traces of Through The Looking-Glass can be seen in Neil Gaiman’s Coraline which I loved. However, this type of literary genre is not my favorite. Philip Pullman (my favorite author) says this of how to write, “think of some interesting events, put them in the right order to make clear the connections between them, and recount them as clearly as you can.” In this particular case, I didn’t see the connection between scenes. Alice seems to shift quickly between her interactions, and I don’t understand how this is one united story. Because the story is so disjointed, I didn’t feel like we were making any progress and didn’t feel the suspense rising. The other question when you go into an alternate realm is “How are we going to get home?” The answer to that question in this book is entirely underwhelming. Based on my research, it appears that there is some symbolism underneath the story, but I don’t fully understand what that is. Perhaps it is a function of not living in the Victorian era or understanding the politics and mores of Oxford. Now if only I can think of a children’s story that will stand the test of time……if not, I guess at least I’m not asymmetrical. 2025 Reading Schedule Jan A Town Like Alice Feb Birdsong Mar Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere Apr War and Peace May The Woman in White Jun Atonement Jul The Shadow of the Wind Aug Jude the Obscure Sep Ulysses Oct Vanity Fair Nov A Fine Balance Dec Germinal Connect With Me! Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango
