This was the first Simak I read, some decades back, and I enjoyed it then and now. I begin to wonder if it's his best, because nothing I've read by him since compares, although I haven't read many and I've enjoyed all of them except The Visitors . The funny thing is, Simak's writing is deeply flawed -- just for starts his characters tend to blend in the mind, and his phrasing is often clunky -- yet his books have a Midwestern warmth that is particularly unusual in the s-f world. I grabbed two passages that to me show him at his worst and his best. As is often true of Clifford D. Simak, the dialogue in this book has a stiltedness to it; a rhythm that is just a little off; too many short declarative sentences in a row; the occasional phrase awkwardly structured. Drove me crazy in The Visitors , which is the last one I read so it's not that it was new to me. In this one the awkwardness is rare and mostly subtle enough it doesn’t particularly bother me, for the most part; just strong enough to notice when what they’re saying doesn’t hold enough of my attention. Example of his awkwardness (in this passage, particularly with his placement of identifiers), and the resulting choppiness (my italics): “I do not know,” he said, “how I can explain our policy without seeming rude.” “Then, Your Eminence,” said Jill, “ please that you be rude. For I want to know..” “We have no wish,” said the cardinal, “to be publicized. We do not wish our existence and our work exposed to public view.” “You could have told me that before I made my trip, Your Eminence. You could have written to discourage me. I would have listened to reason. I might even have accepted, perhaps have understood, your posture. But you hoped, of course, that ignoring me would be discouragement enough.” I can’t quite put my finger on it, but much of that dialogue feels like I’m rushing forward yet repeatedly hitting stops, which is what often bugs me about Simak’s writing style. And I think it bothers me most in dialogue because all his characters seem to do it, giving them a sameness I find uncomfortable. But a few chapters later, Simak will offer me something like this: "He could swear that he had heard the crackle and rustle of fallen autumn leaves beneath his feet, that he had breathed a sharp, crisp, wine-like air redolent of leaf bonfires, of ripened apples hanging on a laden bough, the faint scent of late-blooming flowers and a touch of frost on withering vegetation. He had heard, or thought he heard, the rustle of a field-dried patch of corn, the patter of hickory nuts falling from a tree, the sudden, far-off whir of partridge wings, the soft, liquid singing of a placid brook carrying on its surface a freight of fallen autumn leaves. And there had been color—he was sure of that—the coin-golden color of a walnut tree, the purple of an ash, the shouting sun-bright yellow of an aspen, the bright-blood of a sugar maple, and rich red and brown of oak. And over and above it all that bittersweet feel of autumn, the glory of the dying year when work was done and a quiet season of rest had been proclaimed. "… He had felt at ease with it, had entered wholeheartedly into it. He had tramped the hills and gone along the winding brook, he had stood and stared across the brown and gold of an autumn-haunted marsh, he had heard the shouting of the gold and red and yellow of the painted trees against the sky and he had felt a strange abiding peace within him. The peace that comes at the long end of summer, the peace and quiet before the chill winter of the soul comes howling down. The little time of respite, the time for resting and for thought, the time for binding up the ancient wounds and forgetting them and all the vagaries of life that had inflicted them." Which, for anyone who has lived long in the midwest, is resonant and just lovely. Thankfully there are fewer awkward notes in the dialogue as this book goes on, but he still pitches out the occasional clunker that jars me a bit. And despite its flaws, I'd still recommend reading Project Pope if the subject matter sounds interesting. There's a certain indefinable charm to Simak's writing that is a rare quality which, like love, covers a multitude of offenses. If you're one of those people who appreciates that quality, this book is one of Simak's best. It's not bad as a straight-up s-f story, either.
