Paladin Christoff “Anvil” Magnússon and Reverend Mother Jen “Pool Noodle” Kumiko are vectors of transmission, looking to infect all sentient creatures of the wasteland with a meta-viral-load known as the collected works of Neal Stephenson (a.k.a. “The Goddamn Word”). Sartorially ejaculated into the tight crevices of their T-69 power suits, with their integrated heavy exterior composite armor and steel encased depleted uranium bilayer, and armed to the nucleotide with technology designed to produce sudden and vertiginous negative externalities within the respective portfolios of the heretical - they are the vanguard of The Brotherhood of The Goddamn Word’s evangelical designs. Brother Christoff removes his giant power-hammer from the magnetic holster on his back, its shaft telescoping to full length in his gauntleted fist. He grips the holy sledge (Homeostasis Fucker) and admires the warm light emanating from its massive head as radioactive isotopes engage in holy fission. Actuators within his suit hum as he hefts the instrument aloft. “Knight Vision on.” He says. Both pressing their fingers to their necks as if detecting a pulse, causing visors of gunmetal gray to shroud their faces. Dual slits open and glow with a cold blue light as associated visual tech augments their paltry biological capacities. “For as it is written in Snow Crash; Brother Ng, in his impenetrable chariot of repurposed runway fire truck, did use thermals to detect snipers most hidden and thus protect Holy Mother Y.T. from elements of vile industriousness.” “As it is written.” Noodle intones. Withdrawing her somewhat diminutive, ordinary tack hammer and rapping it across her palm. “Uncle Enzo did attend to details most assiduously. Like unto when he removed his socks and slit his trousers to proceed stealthily against a foe most worthy. He of the Fu Manchu and the molecule blades. And Lady Jaunita did condense fact from the nuance of vapor.” “So mote it be.” Anvil agrees, pointing to a cluster of makeshift housing rising from the garbage-scape. An incongruous boil of life on a mummified ass. “Two warm bodies inside. Both unarmed. A sentinel of arachnid origins, equipped with primitive slug thrower, patrolling outside.” “Radscorp?” Noodle asks. “A big one.” “On your command.” “Proceed with your original composition of The Goddamn Word.” “Ahh..” Noodle clears her throat and begins her rhetorical assault as the two forge ahead. Anvil with Homeostasis Fucker high over head, leading the way. Tongue punching aural geometries with her amplified voice; “Citizens of the wastes! Have you ever, while nurturing a bolus of combat stimulants deep within the nested hierarchy of your experiential existence, found yourself stricken with an incredible need for Cyberpunk in the vein of Brother Gibson?” Radioactive hoboscorpion with shotgun chitters into view. Fluorescent chemicals glowing in the ultraviolet spectrum across its exoskeleton. Pincers working the lever of the slug thrower. Tail poised to strike and deposit venom. Brother anvil, with servos screaming, crests embankment of detritus with titanic speed, leaping high into the air with spring loaded grace, rocket packs deploying calculated thrust to maximize parabolic grandeur. “I ask you again! Citizens of the wastes! Have you ever, while carpet-bombing your nervous systems with vast quantities of psychoactive drugs, felt a deep spiritual need for dystopian science fiction in which the world has been balkanized into corporate fiefdoms where anarcho-capitalist ideologies reflect their morphological absurdities in the funhouse mirrors of Emperor Stephenson’s inexhaustible imagination?” Anvil crashes back to the earth, his hammer flattening the chitinous offender with such violence that all eight legs rocket from its central body, each carrying enough force to knock a bison crossed eyed. It’s pincers, still clutching the gun, are jettisoned into the atmosphere where they discharge both barrels as if in impotent rage. The rapid expansion of superheated air around the buried maul creates a peel of thunder, sending out a spray of errant scrap as the shockwave expands, flattening nearby double-headed oxen and ripping the siding off several proximate tenements, revealing a man squatting above a hole and a woman rising from her agitated half sleep now in mortal fear. “A technological thriller alloyed with explorations of mythology...” Noodle continues, taking a moment to deflect, with her claw hammer, a rusty muffler borne aloft by concussive forces. “In which linguistics are examined in a manner that is most intriguing. In which pitbull terriers, cloaked in the vestments of cybernetic enhancement, locomote in fashions super sonic. Where the bestest good boy, verily, I say unto you; Fido! Doth well and truly shine most stellarly at denouements commencing. Inside these pages, you may escape the squalor of your lives, like unto Father Protagonist, who, jacking into the metaverse, transcends the ignominy of dwelling within the bowels of U-Store-It and fulfills his namesake.” Anvil, with Homeostasis Fucker resting comfortable across his shoulders, gestures for Noodle to take the lead. “Brother. Sister.” She says, producing two copies of Snow Crash and placing them inside the skeletal remains of their exploded domicile. “Enjoy The Goddamn Word.”
