While the book's cover blurb did not really do Nightlife justice, it still proved to be an absorbing read. Hodge is something of a wordsmith, and unlike most horror novels of this era (published in 1991) the character building is superb. Definitely a strange tale, and one of moral failure and redemption to boot. We start off in the rain forests of Venezuela with a tribe of Yanomamo about to raid another tribe (I will skip all the complicated names). The Yanomamo employ a peculiar dried bark compound in their daily rituals, one that supposedly connects them to life in broader terms such as their place in the cosmos. One tribe (the one about to be raided) has developed this bark powder in a novel way that, when used in quantity, can actually transform the user into part animal (whatever their spirit animal is). The raiders see this as an affront, in particular as the renegade tribe is selling the new power to the drug cartels. To make a long story short, six kilos of 'Skullflush' make it out of the rain forest and are eventually transported and sold to a dealer in Tampa, FL. Our main protagonist (Justin Gray) is something of a drunk and is flying to Tampa to hook up with an old college buddy (Erik) to help start a new life. Justin was a small time dealer in the midwest, with a good job and wife, but ran into some trouble-- some of the smack he sold was laced with poison and killed a kid. He eventually works out a deal with the DEA to flip his supplier. Now, after a divorce and jobless, he is hoping his buddy and Tampa will turn things around. Justin and Erik head to a nightclub that evening to meet some friends and it is a typical late 80s scene, with lots of coke floating around the disco lights. Justin is invited by the local pusher (a sort of friend of the group) for some 'Tampa hospitality' and heads to the bathroom with a recent acquaintance. The pusher, Tony, has just scored the Skullflush, a milky green power, and offers it around. He has no idea what it is and as he does not partake himself, wants to see! For Justin, one line is quite enough thank you, but his buddy/acquaintance snorts several and bursts from the bathroom partially changed in to a jungle cat and attacks the dancers. The plotting is fairly complex and feels a little like Miami Vice, but in a good way. One of the tribal raiders follows the trail of the Skullflush to see it destroyed and has lots fun working his way through the Colombian Cartels, eventually ending up in Tampa. After finding out what the drug does, Tony wants to get rid of any witnesses, and that leads us back to our protagonist Justin... Like most good literature, all the main characters are flawed, some horribly, but tend to have some redeeming qualities as well. Before the smelly stuff hits the spinning blades, Justin thinks he has found a new love (April) and she as well. Tony the pusher is developed in some detail, becoming almost like the lead in Scarface. Add in some killer piranhas to the mix and things get interesting! Unlike the cover blurb suggests, Skullflush never makes it past a few people and Nightlife largely takes the form of a crime thriller with some supernatural aspects added for extra flavor. 4 stars!
