At this point I really can't be bothered to read a Mary Anne book, but I am still curious about Dawn and they're both intrinsically linked in the series (plus, this is a precursor to a Dawn book that is in my queue). Comments: 1. Why are they suddenly making a big deal about Claudia's leg that was broken in book 19? It wasn't mentioned in some of the books in the 20s and I had to double-check to make sure that didn't come after Mimi's death (I haven't reread book 19). 2. Why did Mary Anne have to check with Dawn about how old her mom is? Shouldn't her dad be roughly the same age, considering they were high school sweethearts (although I can't remember if they were in the same grade, since it's theoretically possible for one to be in 12th grade while the other in 10th--another reason parents would disapprove)? 3. Why the odd emphasis thaf Jessi also talked out loud while he signed to Matt so the hearing children wouldn't feel left out? 4. Jessi. Why you doing the eeny-meeny rhyme? You know "tiger" was a replacement word for one that has two syllables, starts with an n, and has a short i instead of a long one. 5. Mary Anne really is insufferable, maybe more so than a regular 13 year old because her schtick is being shy and sensitive (and claiming to be some of the good things people tend to associate with those traits). This is her book and she's supposed to come off as the protagonist, but she's just mean and even makes Dawn cry and Dawn is the one trying to make up with her (the title of the next book seems fitting). Also, what good is having a steady boyfriend if you barely talk to him? 6. Remember when 10 year olds (and, as in the case of Stacey, 13 year olds) were allowed to get on planes by themselves? 7. I don't understand why Dawn insists on sharing a room with Mary Anne. After a whole episode with the Arnold twins where the lesson is "separate rooms make happy siblings" (with Mary Anne herself being the one to encourage the idea), why go there? 8. I don't understand Claudia's sarcastic "Good going" comment to Mary Anne as makeup's coming off her face because she's crying. It's just uncalled for, and made worse because everyone in the BSC knows Mary Anne cries easily (so why the make up, and also can you look "natural" if you're wearing blue shadow)? I know some of the ghostwriters are men, so maybe they're not understanding girls don't get away with insulting each other as much as boys do. 9. Dawn tells Mary Anne the "something new" her mom wears to the wedding is underwear, and she says it slyly, implying it's for the wedding night. (This is also after Mary Anne figuratively rolls her eyes at 10 year olds laughing at half-naked paintings in church, which in itself implies girls know some things (like sex) are normal and natural, so much so that we don't even need to talk about them because we just know.) First of all, shit went under the radar for a series usually known to be wholesome! Second of all, I can see Dawn's mom being open enough about sex with Dawn and Dawn thinking it's totally normal to allude to your parents' sex lives--while Mary Anne probably has to learn the first thing about sex from a boyfriend.
