Summary: This book is a memoir written by Kayano Shigeru, an Ainu who strove to preserve his people's cultural heritage and sense of nationhood through preservation of Ainu objects, campaigning for cultural preservation and was the first Ainu politician to sit in the Diet of Japan. It details a very harsh life rife with discrimination and witnessing the fading of your people. However, his work went a long way in preserving Ainu culture including acknowledgement of the Ainu as the indigenous people of Hokkaido for the first time, the repealing of the The Protective Act for the Ainus of Hokkaido and the enacting of the Act for the Promotion of Ainu Culture and Dissemination of Knowledge Regarding Ainu Traditions. I think this book is a fantastic starting point for anyone seeking to understand the struggles the Ainu faced and constinue to face. It provides a strong insight into Ainu culture and language as well. I would recommend this book to anyone interested in the Ainu and anyone interested in indigenous cultures. The main message I took from this book is that how quickly an established culture can lose it vitality, population and identity and become exposed to the threat of disappearing completely. Some notable points: - The author spent considerable time and resources collecting and protecting various Ainu objects. These objects were carefully preserved and some were displayed in the Nibutani Museum. The author regards this chance to collect them as an act of the gods, who may manipulate a human being to perform a task they are unwilling to undertake themselves. - The author went to China in February 1976 and was welcomed as such: "We welcome you all not as Ainu people of the Ainu nation, but as a minority nationality among the Japanese people of the nation Japan. Therefore, please do not misrepresent yourselves as members of an Ainu tribe from the land of the Ainu. We will not speak of nor recognise the Ainu nation, as that would be a criticism of Japanese internal affairs. The Chinese people, however, extend a full welcome to the Ainu minority nationality of Japan." Needless to say the author was not entirely impressed by this. - Whenever the author had the opportunity to speak to the Hokkaido legislature, they proposed the following: "The Ainu have no recollection of either selling or lending Ainu Mosir, or what the 'Japanese' have arbitrarily renamed Hokkaido, to the nation of 'Japan'. I know that even if we were to tell you 'Japanese' to go back to the 'Japanese mainland', it would be no easy matter for you to leave. I do not ask for such impossibilities. I wish for the Ainu and the 'Japanese' in Ainu Mosir to work together to protect our natural surroundings. I want you to put into effect policies that would effectively improve the living conditions of the original settlers, the Ainu, who have constantly suffered discrimination. Build homes for people who have none. Offer scholarship to serious students who cannot afford higher education. Since the Ainu are too few to be elected as Diet members or prefectural legislators, create laws and regulations that would allow us to have our own representatives. In order to revive the Ainu language and share the benefits of Ainu culture, establish, in regions that want them, nursery schools and elementary, junior high, and high schools that teach the Ainu language. Funding should be provided by the national and state governments as a form of restitution of land taxes to the yet unpaid original landholders. The country, this prefecture, and its cities, town, and villages all lack any modicum of sensitivity regarding the issue of the Ainu as an ethnic minority. In neighbouring China, regions populated by ethnic Koreans have bus schedules printed in both Korean and the standard dialect, Mandarin, In fact, all fifty-four minority nationalities in autonomous regions throughout China similarly display two languages." - While discussing the learning environment and how Japanese students who grow up seated next to Ainu students would not be discriminatory, the author noted how on numerous occasions, when an Ainu and a Japanese fell in love, the parents of the Japanese person would protest saying that if their blood mixes they won't be able to face their ancestral spirits. This was despite the parents having sat side by side with Ainu students in school.
