The blurb doesn’t really explain the conflict in this story, although the aunt did want the h to marry the H and that was a cause of embarrassment for both of them. The conflict is about trust – specifically the hero’s trust in women. He’s got scars, y’all, from his mother walking out on him when he was a toddler. The H is a gallery owner and the h works as a secretary in his West Country branch. The h also runs an antiques store with a friend, but it doesn’t make enough to cover the bills – so she works a full time job. She has an artist friend (with the same startling blue eyes as the H) who wants her to sell some Winslow Homer drawings for him. He claims they have been in his family for generations after the artist stayed in his family home on his trip from America. When the h checks the church registrar against his family tree and the time it was thought WH was in England, it seems to be a true story. She hands the drawings over, but won’t reveal the name of the artist by his request. The H comes down from London to check them out and realizes he knows the h from when she was a child. Seems her maiden aunt and his dad had some sort of relationship after his mother walked out. He had fond memories of the aunt. The heroine does not. Seems the aunt hated the heroine’s mother and only took her in after their deaths as a matter of duty. But now the old control freak wants a marriage between the H and h, since she never had that H’s dad for herself. The hero thinks the h is some kind of schemer, but he wants to know about the drawings. His dad, who lives in Bermuda because of his arthritis, is an expert on Winslow Homer. And his New York gallery guy will want to see them, too. So off they go to Bermuda. The heroine assures the H she has no designs on his hot bod, but that is a red flag to a bull. The hero sets out to seduce her and then leave her hanging to prove his point that she is attracted to him. The heroine reacts badly. The hero is ashamed of himself. And the father gets all kinds of revealing info out of the h about her sad life with the aunt. A truce is called. There ‘s a travelogue of Bermuda. The NY guy thinks the drawings are real, as does the dad. They will include them in an auction. The relationship between the H/h heats up and they have finally have sex - it’s the first time for the h. The H proposes. They are happy until controlling auntie shows up. The antiques store friend told the auntie that the h was having an affair with the artist and told her his name. (This was pre-arranged so the auntie wouldn’t get her hopes up about the H/h) The aunt knows this name. It’s the H’s jealous half brother who did time in jail for damaging some paintings at the H’s gallery. The drawings he had are obviously fraudulent. The aunt thinks the h is in on the fraudulent drawings and is having an affair so she’s traveled to Bermuda to rescue the H. The H believes the h is having an affair with his half-brother (even though he took her virginity). The H’s dad doesn’t believe that h had anything to do with the fraudulent drawings. But the H is furious and says terrible things. The angst kicks up a couple of notches. The h begs the artist friend to tell the H the truth, but he makes it worse and tells him a bunch of lies. The H returns to London in disgust. Once home, the h has lost her job, then she has to sell her antiques store because her partner got married. Then her aunt has a stroke and the h goes to care for her in her home. The H gets wind of this development and wants to move the aunt to a nursing home, but the h is adamant that the aunt knows her surroundings and would be happiest at home. The H insists she has a trained nurse – who is pretty and flirty and kisses the H whenever he visits. The h is working herself to the bone, and keeps fainting and throwing up. She’s convinced she’s pregnant. She’s going to tell the H but he’s too busy kissing the nurse. Finally the aunt dies and leaves everything to the H. Now, with nothing, the h steals away to London to find a job. Eventually she sees an ad asking her to contact her aunt’s solicitors. That’s how the hero finds her and startles her so much at her attic bedsitter she falls down the stairs. The h is in and out of consciousness for days. The H stays by her bedside. Eventually, her strength returns and she discovers she is no longer pregnant. In fact, she was never pregnant. It was a hysterical pregnancy based on her longing for the H. The H is now sorry for not trusting her when he knew his half-brother was proven liar and nut case. His excuse is mommy dearest and how much passion he felt for the heroine. He does grovel nicely and the wedding is on. I think there might be another hysterical pregnancy in the Harlequin line, but I’m not sure. The angst was OTT at the end – which is to say – just like I like it. The beginning is slow and the travelogue was a bit overdone, so that knocked off a star. On an interesting note: This author only wrote 4 romances and this is the last one for me to read. I found it on the donations rack at the hospital in perfect shape with a loose piece of paper that had the correct first page. It seems this edition was misprinted. The first page bound in the book had totally different characters. Instead of pulping that edition, Harlequin just stuffed the first page into every book. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
