Oh I still remember reading this book as a child. It was the first time I was too sick to go to church. I was so sick even my dad stayed home with me. That had never happened before. I'd never even skipped school until then, but it was awful. I remember so clearly. It was a Thursday. My mom was working nights, so she slept during the day while we were at school. I was miserable that day. I tried so hard to avoid being sent to the nurse. I was scared they would disturb my mom's sleep. But I couldn't stop coughing up phlegm, and the girl sitting in front of me kept complaining. Finally, I was sent to the nurse, and when my mom came, I was so conflicted - scared that my mom was going to go to work without having slept, angry that the principal Sister Theresa Paul was so mean to her when she arrived, and ashamed for having embarrassed her in front of the principal. So I was physically terrible and emotionally terrible and just a confused kid overall. We didn't have health insurance, so if my parents took me to a doctor, it was a really big deal. And for some reason, every time I went to a doctor, I felt better right away - as if I was never sick in the first place 🤣. In this case, it was pretty bad. I went home that Thursday and slept it out. Then that night, while my mom was at work, I had my first really bad asthma/bronchitis attack. My dad was super scared. I couldn't stop coughing while hyperventilating. He called an ambulance. I have no idea how long it took to pay off that hospital bill. So yah. That's how I ended up staying home from church that Sunday. I drank gallons of water, slept a lot and read this book. It was my introduction to classism in a way that I could understand. I knew we were poorer than the rest of my classmates, and I knew that we were really poor when we lived in Brooklyn. But I was still a pretty happy kid within the cocoon that is my family. This book was a wakeup call for me. It was what started me on my lifelong commitment to fighting for fairness and social justice. I also learned that everyone is the same when you strip away the titles, that we are all the same, but not everyone knows that or wants to admit that. I learned that kindness always surprises and that the truth is always honorable. As an adult, I think it gives another valuable lesson. A lot of people look at their bosses or their bosses' bosses or someone in some job that might be aspirational or even completely out of their fantasy leagues, and we think how easily we could do those jobs. I think that's why there are so many young people who think they can just snap their fingers and become instant social media influencers or why there are so many mid career professionals who resentfully look at their CEO and simmer about how they could do a better job. I dare them to try. Books like these - books that teach us lifelong lessons - these are so important to read with our children. A lot of kids grow up these days online or without adequate time with their parents or go to understaffed schools. They need all the help we can get them, and I really think books fill a gap, and that's why I think it's important to arm them with high quality books like this one.
