Dean Sinclair is the eldest Sinclair sibling and a Deputy US Marshal. Dean is totally by the book, wears a suit, follows the rules and weighs the pros and cons before doing anything. He doesn't want to get married, his parents were not the most involved so he took care of his siblings and he isn't sure if he will be like his father. He loves his job. He's on the stake-out, keeping an eye on the ex-girlfriend of an escaped convict along with his partner. The first time he meets her, it's dark and he doesn't recognize her, she also threatens to swing at him. It is the next day he finds out the woman he encountered and the legs he liked belongs to Reva. Reva who runs the best restaurant in town and who looks nothing like the girl in the picture and who also has a son. Reva made mistakes in life, after her mother left, Eddie promised her everything she ever wanted, so she fell in love with him, never knowing the truth about him until it was too late. Now, she has re-built a life she loves, she has friends and her son and needs no man. She is not that welcoming of Dean. Dean somehow contrary to his nature can't help but be around Reva. He tells her he is a handy-man and she puts him to works but he soon confesses he is in law enforcement and is thinking of changing his line of work. Reva is terrified of guns after Eddie threatened him with one while Dean doesn't go without it. Reva is not what Dean expected instead she is refined and good at putting distance. Dean gets in deep after his partner leaves and he crosses the line. Reva thinks he will leave and that is the way she wants it, she doesn't want anyone to learn about her son's paternity as she fears how people will react. Dean on the other hand knows he is screwed, he knows that Reva has no clue about Eddie and if he tells her she will kick him out but before he can tell her Reva distracts him. I enjoyed the book. How Dean couldn't help but fall for her and how Reva tried to keep her distance by constantly chanting to herself that he is leaving. Since they live in a small town, they had to be careful and it was hilarious seeing Dean sneak in through the window. I enjoyed this series thoroughly. Rating 3.5
