this is an excellent book concerning the interpretation of music in all its genera's which spans the notes of each individual style from prayer drums, , & tribal dances then on to the pomp & circumstance of classical music yes the explanations can go on and on as is said in the book,, music can drum out evil spirits, sing the praises of the virgin Mary, invoke the Buddha of universal salvation, enchant leaders & nations captivate, soothe, resurrect & transform. the speech of angles & atoms...in this book their is a chapter( the healing breeze of sound)...why are you so en-lighted asked the author, it is because ( i am awake).. was the reply... in Sanskrit " Buddha" means (the awakened one).. so through application and trial i have been able to help others.. he states if enlightenment is also the interpreting of rhythmic styles then this writer is so blessed, he has the zest of a Martial-arts master all the reader needs is to have the confidence to use this book as plainly as it it written.. and any one can benefit yet on page 17 he is asked why Mozart,...why not Beethoven, or the Beatles, or Gerswin Louis Armstrong, then there is the Gregorian-chants, Tibetan-mantras & singing bowl.. maybe it is because Mozart transcends his era, and it was a radical time john Wesley, Voltaire, Thomas Jefferson, Mary Wollstonecraft, Goethe, who stated that you could tell a persons charter by the way they laughed..!!! all were beyond reproach beneath the powdered wigs & make-up...traded in the politics & religion of the day...in a federal society yet thought the shape of sound remained constant to each composer. they moulded it to there own, like fathering a child.. ( cymatics).. how sound vibrations interact with matter gymnastics of the ear, as stated by alfred-tomatis...M.D " i don not teach children...i waken them...music affects the heartbeat, pulse, blood pressure, it can increase endorphins and enhance unconscious receptivity to symbolism (movie-scores)... and then to the voices of Venus & mars... sexual unity... THE TAO OF RAP.... the brain process rhyme & rhythm differently from regular speech..
