One of my all time favorite books! Written from the viewpoint of a seven year old named Via as she deals with her mom's death. "Then we're in the boat heading back home to Sky Island from Brimstone. My skin's all salty and the sun's going down. I'm sitting on the seat with Mum with a towel around me. I'm eating a peach. There are some clouds over near the sunset. They're pink and orange swipy swirls that go up to the middle of the sky. They look like glowing tails of a horse that are flared. I love this day. I love peaches. I love the way the ocean's so dark blue and the sky's so pink and orange. I love the way I feel the vibration of the boat's engine and that we're in a boat moving across the water, going home. Mum's next to me. I feel like I wish I could say something but I don't know what it is. Ethan's sitting down on the floor in front of us rolling a nerf ball under his bare foot. He's whistling to himself but I can't hear the whistle because of the humming engine and the wind. I can see it from his lips and the way he's moving his head. I'm leaning into Mum and her arm's around me. My peach is so good. The sunset's so big. The water's blue and, like, long. I shake my head around in the wind. I want to do something like gulp it all in or get it and catch it somehow. 'Look, Mum,' I say,'look,' meaning the sunset. I point at it with my foot. I know she sees it because we're heading straight for it, but I can't help it, I want to point it out to her. I want to show her more but I don't know what. I want to get everything and have her see it. 'Take a bite of this,' I tell Mum. I want her to taste the peach too. It's a perfect one. I want to take everything and put it all together somehow but I don't know how. Mum smiles at me. She's smiling at me because she knows how I feel. She lowers her head toward my ear so I can hear her over the engine. 'You must always remember, my pumpkin, that there will always be days like this,' she's smiling. 'Always,' she says again."
