A friend introduced me to this writer, I must admit I have never heard of him before and I think I will read more of his books. This was a quick and exciting read. I started of thinking it will be yet another story of a cruel, possessive brother and a sister who can't get away because she is torn between her love for her brother and the burning desire for her lover and somehow she can't have both (a cliche by now I am sure) but because I did not know what to expect at all, I was pleasantly surprised with everything that was thrown at me as a reader: interesting characters, good writing, lots of suspense (a real page turner), some mystery - a kind of psychological thriller at its best where everything gets tied together nicely at the end. And it did not bother me at all that around the middle of the book - I did see it coming! And there were some beautiful and witty passages worth remembering: "Ah yes, write. For at that time in my life I felt capable of everything. Having attempted nothing, I had no sense of my limitations; having dared nothing, I knew no boundaries to my courage. During the years of fatigue and dulling rote in medical school, I had daydreamed of a future confected of two careers: that of the brilliant and caring doctor and that of the inspired and inspiring poet. And why not? I was an avid and sensitive reader, and I made the common error of assuming that being a responsive reader indicated latent talent as a writer, as though being a gourmand was but a short step from being a chef." (love this one) or "It was, of course, the accuracy of his evaluation that irritated me. We all desire to be understood, but no one enjoys being obvious. I am afraid my annoyance was not well concealed, for he smiled in a way that told me he took pleasure in baiting me." or "There was a café frequented by the lady patients, as it offered a thin pallid liquid that claimed to be English tea (then quite fashionable) served with small cakes which, as they were dry and tasteless, were assumed to be quintessentially British. I suggested that we take some refreshment there, after her long walk." or "I realize that your intentions are of the best. You lack the imagination required to be genuinely evil."
