This is one of the most fascinating sci-fi/ alt history books I've ever read. Imagine how the world would be different if the Axis Powers, Japan and Nazi Germany, had won World War 2. This book provides that dark vision: a Europe dominated by the Third Reich, the Soviet Union crushed into impotence beyond the Urals; the Jews all but wiped out worldwide but for a tiny remnant; Africa turned by the victorious Nazis into a continental size version of the Congo, a massive killing field, under Belgium's Leopold II --- a holocaust dwarfing, by far, even that of the Jews. And that's just the beginning. The United States is no more --- the Eastern portion a province of the Third Reich with all the horror of the Nuremburg laws in force -- blacks exterminated, and the few survivors returned to slavery; the Jews wiped out --- a totalitarian extension of Germany itself. And the West Coast --- the Pacific States of America, governed by a Japanese puppet regime; and the middle --- the Rocky Mountain States, a buffer nation established to separate Japanese and German spheres of influence. A new sort of Cold War seems to exist -- the superpowers in this bipolar world, Japan and Germany, in place of the US and the USSR. What is interesting about this book is how its characters live in this strange dystopian reality in which the bad guys won. It's both fascinating and disturbing that, strangely, life seems to pretty much go on as before World War 2 --- people get married, hold down jobs, have relationships, buy, sell, make plans, dream dreams --- even as they offhandedly recall the horrific past events described above. Many of them have even assumed some of the world views and prejudices of their conquerors. In their world, it's hard for them to imagine that the victories of the Third Reich and the Japanese Empire could ever have turned out any other way. It's a postmodern world described here. Judaism is no more. Christianity is no more --- the book almost casually mentions how the Nazis, after the War, wiped out the "Bible-believers". In short, Judaeo-Christian morality and attitudes are extinct --- in their place, the racial superiority belief system of the Nazis; and, outside the Third Reich, the belief in Taoism or Buddhism with a superstitious faith in divination to determine when and how to act. At times, I found this a real page turner --- right up until near the end. And that's where this book fails horribly in my opinion. This book builds and builds around a book, "The Grasshopper Lies Heavy" about an alternative history in which the Allies win, and its author, Hawthorne Abendsen. But then, in what I can only describe as bordering on literary malpractice, it just ends --- almost as if Philip K. Dick (PKD), it author, could not figure where next to take the plot. Abendsen comes across as nonentity in the end, and the novel doesn't end in any fulfilling way at all --- not in a way that suggests hope for the future, or even a darker future still. It just ends -- like "Meh". It's a non-ending. That would be fine if this was part of a trilogy, for example. But, to end this way, is like as if Tolkien had ended "Lord of the Rings" at "The Two Towers" --- and that was it. So the crummy ending makes this a 4-stars for me. Had it ended in any better way, it would have a 5-star for sure. Because this really is a great book --- it is one that gets you thinking differently about history --- that the sureties of how history we're taught in grade school and college really weren't inevitable --- that a little change here, a slight nudge there, and history could have turned out far differently --- far more disastrously, in some cases, than most realize.
