Charmed Life 5 stars // read December 2021 I started reading this book with no other expectations than a vague hope of liking it. It absolutely blew me out of the water, and I actually enjoyed it significantly more than Howl’s Moving Castle *le gasp!* I actually stayed up until an unholy hour last night in other words, 2 a.m. reading this and I have No Regrets. Things: -Characters! Cat (aka Eric Chant, but nobody calls him that) tends to go along with whatever his sister wants and not really stick up for himself, and for the most part seems to be okay with it. Definitely not relatable whatsoever. Gwendolen, Cat’s sister, is a witch with enough ambition and ruthlessness for several politicians. One thing this book really highlights is that the main character is still a kid, doing normal kid stuff like playing with soldiers and in treehouses (albeit with some magic involved). -The worldbuilding! 😍 The magic system is really fascinating-the limits (Chrestomanci’s powers are affected by silver; Cat can only use his left hand for doing magic stuff) the backstory about why some people have nine lives , etc. I also liked all the fun little details- like the charm that prevents things getting stolen by yelling “this is the property of so-and-so!” when outside a certain parameter. Very practical and realistic for a magical world. -Interestingly enough, there was one part of the story that gave me serious Narnia vibes- the part where the magical peeps captured Chrestomanci and Cat- it reminded me of the scene in the Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe where the bad guys have captured Aslan. Not sure if that was intentional or not, or if I’m seeing similarity where there isn’t any, but it was interesting to me. 🤷‍♀️ Content: Language: one use of d***ed Violence: Mild/Medium. MAJOR SPOILERS: Cat accidentally kills himself by striking one of the matches that represents one of his lives. Gwendolen has killed him several times (apparently on purpose) by magically giving him horrible cramps. Bad magical peeps attempt to kill Cat. Other things to be aware of: The entire book revolves around witches, enchanters, and the like. Dark magic and necromancy pop up, but are shown in a negative light. A soothsayer attempts to tell Cat his future but kind of ends up getting possessed instead. While I love well-done magic systems, this kind of stuff is definitely in the Iffy Territory for me, personally. The Lives of Christopher Chant 5 stars // read December 2021 In which: -cricket is played -Christopher loses an alarming amount of lives -people are not exactly who they claim to be -a cat is named Throgmorten -and more! Another fun installment. Loved seeing how this wove back into Charmed Life. Recommend to readers 13/14+ (mainly due to violence.)
