This was eminently readable, avoided the confusion that many similar books wander into and finally clarified what crossing the Rubicon meant. Being an inhabitant of the UK where we have strived to recreate Rome with the backstabbing, the revolving doors of leadership, allegiances made and broken and an unending line of ambitious individuals vying to take power while proclaiming they are only in it for the good of the state. Sadly for us, we have no Caesar, Pompey, Mark Antony (although party boy Boris may be the closest), Cicero or Cato. Instead, we have a man in need of a pair of trousers that fit, a man who has never found his way to the barbers, a woman who was elected on her piss-poor impression of a former leader and a man who must have dirt of such magnitude that he keeps being promoted despite being the natural heir to Frank Spencer. Only Kwasi Kwarteng has any resonance with the Roman Republic and that is only in respect of his sleeping with the entire female contingent of parliament. This book goes to show that whatever safe-guards are in place, whatever the mores of the time power is always desired for self-gain and glory. Integrity is a rare trait and loyalty to person or ideals is fleeting. Still at least the Romans knew how to behave with dignity when their time was up. Cato eviscerated himself while Cicero bared his neck in the style of the Colosseum gladiators. Ours go sending out a spokesperson to deny they are hiding under a desk and proclaiming that a piece of cake and a bottle of Peroni a party doth not make. On a semi-serious note, where is our Cato? The voice of reason and the conscience of the state to hold its representatives to account. We have none except for a media that is focussed on the headline grabbing fripperies rather than the affronteries to office that the government is committing. We have reached the same point where the gains of the individual take precedence over the nation and we all know that never ends well. Empires rise and fall but, to quote Buzz Lightyear, some fall with style.
