Damn, so I was worried the book would end not happily. Luckily, it did but it ended on a cliffhanger... dah dah duh Book 3, The Eden Passion, starts right where Book 2 left off, with Elizabeth bringing John to Eden Castle along with Edward's body, which is to be buried. Until John's legitimacy is found, the Edens put him to work. The work was terrible & hard, I felt so sad to read about it. There were even maggots in the food that he was given! I shudder to think that this might have actually been someone's job back then if it is historically accurate... Lady Harriet Eden changes her mind and (to spite James I believe) brings John back to the family chambers. If you remember from Book 2, Harriet is John's mother. However, she does not know this and sends the new family solicitor off (who is also stealing funds from the family--I hated Morley Johnson!--was any solicitor honest?!) on a quest to find out who is John's real mother. In the meantime, John and Harriet become really close, with John falling in love with her, and they finally consummate their relationship. Yes, you heard me correctly: mother and son have sex with each other unknowingly! I only wish they had more time together in happiness before they discovered the truth, which Morely brought to them because he had finally unraveled the mystery of who exactly John's mom was. If only Harriet wasn't so determined to find out John's maternity... What happens next is pretty horrible & could be upsetting to some readers. My friend Nenia had to take a break from the book for about a week. Harriet self mutilates herself with silverware and stabs her eyes, blinding herself. Did this not happen in Oedipus Rex? Also, John kills the messenger of the news (not Morley) because he's so upset and Harriet just stabbed herself. John returns to London, uncertain of his future. Eventually, he goes off to the Crimean War as an assistant for Thomas Brassley, a very wealthy builder I believe. This was where the book dragged for me, and I didn't feel like it was necessary to the plot. I think other reviewers agree with me that we could have done without it. Next, he goes to India, a place he's dreamt of going to for a while, with dreams of stealing jewels from the king's palace, because he met a guy named Alex Aldwell in the hospital during the war who did just that. The British in India refer to the Indians by the n-word a lot, which obviously could be offensive to some readers. (John was offended lol.) I thought it was unnecessary to have the n-word included in this book... He leaves India with the granddaughter of the king, Dhari, and her son Aslam. Another gruesome event takes place. The Indians cut Dhari's tongue off because she lied to them, telling them that John had already left. This was the Indian Rebellion of 1857. I won't spoil what happens when John returns to England, but I will say that he finally returns to Eden Castle at the end of the novel. Ten years have passed since he left. Random Thoughts: 1.) Did James seriously die from drunkeness? That was kinda weird. 2.) Poor Richard--a lot of the Eden fortune & lands are gone because of Morley. 3.) Why does Eden Castle seem like such a claustrophobic place even though it's huge? It reminds me of the house in VC Andrew's the Dollanganger series, how even when they rebuilt it, there was still evil & darkness residing there... 4.) How can Harriet just stay cooped up in her room all day for years, never seeing or talking to anyone? For ten years, people! It is really selfish too, her kids need their mom. 5.) So what is going to happen to Dhari--is she John's mistress still or what? Or does he plan to be faithful to his new wife Lila (who he chose). Gotta read book 4 now because of that cliffhanger!
