Duty and a pile of coconuts I was surprised while reading this book that no one I spoke with had ever heard of "the mutiny on the Bounty." In 1789, Lieutenant William Bligh sailed his ship, the Bounty, to the beautiful island of Tahiti. He'd been there before with Captain James Cook, but now his goal wasn't exploration but commerce: he was to obtain breadfruit plants to start plantations in the West Indies. Bligh was a conscientious captain who looked out for the health and welfare of his men, even while insisting upon order. Unfortunately, a combination of combustible personalities, the beauty of Tahiti and its women, and a pile of stolen coconuts led to a mutiny that left Bligh and 18 other sailors abandoned on the rough seas in a very small boat. It was so heavily loaded that even small waves broke over the sides, and it seemed a certain death sentence. But Bligh managed to sail his tiny boat and crew for 3,500 nautical miles (over 4,000 land miles) through violent storms and open ocean (with almost no food!) to a safe harbor. Even more incredible was that only one man died in a clash with unfriendly islanders. News of this amazing feat and the eventual court martial of most of the mutineers who were apprehended a few years later in Tahiti, was talked about for decades. Some were hanged for their crimes, but Fletcher Christian, the one who led the mutiny, was never seen again. But the story doesn't end there. With savvy legal help, a couple of the mutineers managed to get pardons from His Royal Majesty, and several of the families involved worked hard to change the narrative of the incident. Bligh's temper and salty language – particularly over the stolen coconuts – was blamed for inciting the mutiny. But Caroline Alexander sorts through the facts and weaves a surprisingly interesting tale of the challenges of living on a small ship in a big ocean – and even tells what happened to Christian. And it's a very detailed story, with so much information that I found it slow reading in the beginning. Before long, however, I was caught up in it and couldn't put it down. She even tells where Christian and the others ended up, and what became of the community they established. The maps and illustrations were great to help follow the story, but I wished it had included a list of the 46 men on the ship and their positions at the beginning, since it was hard to tell them all apart. The extensive detail and backstory might put some readers off, but it turned out to be a great summer read.
