My sister recommended James Herbert and decided that since she thought I'd not have the heart nor stomach for horror (as I'm a fan of fantasy and dislike seeing anything gruesome or bone chilling freaky), that starting me off with The Magic Cottage would be a good first choice. Unfortunately, I expected serious horror and was disappointed by the time I was halfway through the book and hardly anything had happened. So this is what I disliked about the book; 1. The writer spends most his time talking about renovations of a cottage, the color of the walls, the state of the flowers and the eerie feel of the forest (which would have made the reader think that something would eventually leap out form its depth and devour somewhere in future chapters, but nothing does). 2. The storyline was very slow and at times tedious to read, and with amount of times the writer states something to the lines of "but it was nothing compared to what we were to experience later", made me expect something unbelievably jaw dropping will happen, creating all sorts of hideous monsters and plots so intriguing within my mind, but sadly that was not the case. Instead, it was very predictable and my own monsters made the writers seem like little kittens. 3. The cult was a lame part of the book, not scary, not threatening, just lame. I hoped that some great evil wizard will arise from the cult leader, someone who was hundreds of years old, but nothing, just a lame excuse for a man with tricks. 4. The most irritating part of the book was the fact that the so called "best parts" were no more then 2 chapters long and ended with a bland "So there you have it, that's the story". I nearly threw the book across the room for the writers inability to create something more of the ending. 5. Lastly, does one have to say "Christ" a hundred times throughout the entire book? Does this book character have less cursing vocabulary then a foreign man learning a new language? I don't know if I should give him lessons or smack him across the head. And so from all of the negative points I've mentioned (there were more but I cannot be asked to list them all), there were a few points I liked, mainly being: The only twist in the book was an interesting one, that being Mike discovering the power was within himself and not Midge, but it was a little bit obvious he was, considering I caught on when they were in the pyramid room and smoke was coming from his hands and mouth. Yeah, I figured it out then but brushed it aside in hope of not ruining the story for myself. And also enjoyed the part Mike had viewed the painting that came to life. There were some other good points to the book, but not enough to out weight the negative and not enough for me to list here. Over all, the book could have been much better and I rate it a 3.5 for the good effort. I will read the rest of his work only due to the fact that my sister will be passing her collection of James Herbert to me for reading pleasure. I just hope he doesn't let me down after giving his writing another try :) This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
