Edward Baltram is a twenty-year-old college student living in London. Maybe one day, he will become a writer. He has a friend, a very good friend, named Mark. Edward gives Mark a sandwich dripped with hallucinogenic drugs. Then a girlfriend, or rather a girl he hopes will one day become his girlfriend, calls. So, what does he do? He closes the door to his room where Mark is sleeping, knocked out by the drug, and pops out to the girl’s place. Delight, delight—she too is looking for sex. Half an hour later he is back in his room. The window is open. Mark has jumped. There he is down below, dead on the pavement. Edward becomes terribly depressed. Mark’s mother sends him threatening letters. She is going to murder him. This is the start of a long tale of introspection. Edward is one of several who search for understanding of themselves. All of Murdoch’s books have elements you begin to recognize the more of her books you read. They all focus on character portrayal and human relationships. The reader is quickly introduced to a handful or two of characters all interconnected in complicated ways. One must pay close attention at the start--one needs to grab as many details as possible. No character is irrelevant—each turns up in different situations and has a specific role to play. By the end of the book you know them all very well. Extramarital, homosexual and / or bisexual relationship pepper every story. There is usually a magical, mystical component—here we have a poltergeist and a medium capable of talking to spirits. At least one person always dies, and spooky, suspenseful scenes take place. There are always atmospheric descriptions of landscapes, gardens and houses and detailed descriptions of characters’ appearances. Either the sea or a river or a flooded fen and a meeting where all the characters come together are elements of all Murdoch’s stories. You begin to smile when the same ingredients pop up again and again in her books. The repetition becomes somewhat predictable and boring too. This book has all of the above. I spoke of complicated relationships. What do you think of this? Edward has lived his entire life with his stepfather and stepbrother. His mother was pregnant with another man’s child when she married Edward’s stepfather. Edward is that fetus in his mother’s belly. His mother dies when he is seven. He scarcely remembers her and doesn’t know his biological father. Midge, his mother’s younger sister, is the closest he gets to this mother’s family. Some of the relationships in this novel are, in my opinion, too extreme. Midge’s love for Stuart, Edward’s stepbrother is one example. You stop and ask yourself what the author is saying. That life is a jumble, not possible to fully understand, comes across loud and clear. Individuals who fulfill the requirements for what is good are not necessarily the proponents of good. When things go bad, we must pick ourselves up and get on with life. These are the messages I fasten on. The conclusions you draw may be different. I like how at the end each character’s views of what has occurred are summarized, but in a natural way. We see what most likely lies in the future for each. I did find the book a bit too long—it should have been tightened. Murdoch does not throw in extraneous characters—each and every one has a significant role in the story. It’s the philosophizing that could have been made more compact. Christopher Cazenova narrates the audiobook. I wish he had read slower. With Murdocn’s books you need time to think. He uses different intonations for the different characters, but I could not hear who was speaking. There is one character with a Scottish accent—he is easy to identify. Three stars for the narration; it was pretty good. You can hear the words. I like this more than The Sea, The Sea , so I am giving it three stars. It isn’t so ridiculously melodramatic. However, I need a lengthy pause before I pick up another of the author’s books. They are too similar to each other. ************************ * The Black Prince 4 stars * A Fairly Honourable Defeat 4 stars * The Sandcastle 4 stars * The Good Apprentice 3 stars * The Sea, The Sea 2 stars * Jackson's Dilemma 2 stars * The Unicorn wishlist * The Time of the Angels wishlist * The Bell wishlist * The Flight from the Enchanter wishlist * An Unofficial Rose TBR * The Italian Girl TBR * A Word Child TBR * A Severed Head TBR * Under the Net maybe * The Message to the Planet maybe
