A meaty read for anyone interested in American history, Schlesinger ranges broadly to give the reader a feel for the issues, conflicts, personalities and background of the period from 1830 to just after the Civil War. Democracy was interpreted in a very constricted way in the early years of the United States. Before the presidency of Andrew Jackson it was held by many wealthy propertied folks of the Federalist party that having property entitled one to a special place in the government of the United States. Men of property didn't attempt to hide their contempt for the common man. The Second Bank of the United States was created to assert and protect this claim-to-rule of the wealthy. The funds of the government were placed on deposit in this private bank and the bank could then lend freely as it saw fit, earning a tidy sum for its owners. The president of the Bank. Nicholas Biddle, even disputed the power of the U.S. President to have any say on what the Bank did, though the government was generously allowed 5 places on the 30 person board of bank directors. Once Jackson got into office the Bank had a limited time to live, to the great acclaim of the common folk in the Eastern U.S. and the consternation of the industrialists in the East and the speculators in the West. Schlesinger launches his book on this issue. We are introduced to the major players, the political parties, the philosophies of the time, the economics that made up this period that began before the railroad and the telegraph. Abraham Lincoln (b. 1808) makes a late appearance in this history and is not emphasized in his person, but only in his role as a "conscience" Whig then a Republican. The issue of slavery and state's rights are thoroughly covered, though. What you get is a well rounded feel for the time that should fascinate anyone who is intrigued by the history of the United States and interested in how democracy found its feet. Though the mid nineteenth century seems far in the past, the same contest for power of the populace vs wealth is still present. But after Jackson, all accepted the concept of rule by the people, whether or not it might be in fact or only in appearance. Since then, anyone interested in rising to the top office has had to present himself as a man of the people and the "born in a log cabin" or "just a regular guy (or gal) like you" mythology was on the road that continues today in the persons of G.W. Bush, the backyard BBQ patrician or Sarah Palin, the hockey mom, whose total ignorance on issues was thought by many to be beneficial. In the Age of Jackson, you'll find out about the Locofocos, the Barnburners, the Doughfaces, the Copperheads and even the fracas in Rhode Island known as the Dorr Rebellion, an attempt to take office by force (backed by two cannon) that failed. I discovered a real jewel mentioned by Schlesinger, A Short History of Paper Money and Banking written by William Gouge (like gouging out your eye), a simple to read tutorial on how banks work and why paper money is so dangerous to financial stability. This work was extremely influential in the 19th century and is well worth reading today.
