To do list - Defend “pop history,” talk about America I was on the phone with a history major friend of mine and I told him I had just finished Undaunted Courage. He chuckled and told me Stephen Ambrose is a “pop historian” who isn’t really worth reading. Well I asked him, when was the last time he had read a research paper or PHD thesis for fun? There exists a needless divide between academic writing versus accessible, interesting yet informative writing. The divide exists because of the attitude of people like my anonymous friend named after an African water dwelling mammal – if normal people can read it, well then it must not be sufficiently academic for the likes of me, a true intellectual. Instead of pretending to enjoy the esoteric research writing style I take my hat off to people like Ambrose who are able to express ideas in an intelligible and passionate way that is still understandable to most people. My favorite example of this would be Carl Sagan and Cosmos, but Ambrose is in a similar vein. He discusses big ideas and explains them in such a way that isn’t boring but instead enjoyable to read. He’s not writing to a handful of people who read peer reviewed journals, he’s talking to most people. What’s so bad about that? Onto America and this book. The story of the actual expedition is incredible. There journey was basically like exploring a new planet as the expedition was cut off from communication with the outside world for 2 years. They had no idea what they were going to encounter or discover. The best minds at the time knew the continent was about 3,000 miles wide, in between the coasts they believed that the Rockies would resemble the Appalachia in size and that dinosaurs still existed (there is a paragraph about Lewis speaking with Caspar Wistar before heading off). They really were setting off on a journey of discovery, people didn’t know what was out there but they had sharpened a method of recording data and reporting it back to the various intellectual societies. With an immense desire to learn and record what they saw diligently, Lewis, Clark and their 30 some odd men set off. The astonishing sense of possibility and discovery at the time, the leadership displayed by the captains, the perseverance of the Corp of Discovery, the fascinating stories of encountering tribes who had never seen white people before, the discovery of plants and animals (sometimes more frightening than others), survival of hardship, etc, all incredible. Within this book there are several stories that can be extracted and discussed. Some of my favorites are seeing a Sioux war dance, encountering the grizzly bear, Shoshones tribes and their lack of guns, 8 year old boys exploring and hunting in the woods at night. There are several personalities that are a delight to consider and who are presented with enthusiasm. This marks the second time I’ve read this book, and on my current America bender I read with a focus towards what makes America unique. What defines us, how did our soul begin to form? This book has a lot of information in those areas. I think the main things I walk away with are the sense of possibility, the joy of discovery, and the one I’d like to focus one – our unique leadership style of the passionate outdoorsman meets the quiet intellectual. Lewis embodies the American spirit in a body that Jefferson wishes he had (well, minus the suicidal part). He is intelligent, capable, a man of principle, a hard worker and a tough leader but a man who can get his hands dirty and would never ask a subordinate to do something he wouldn’t do himself, a man who inspires the best out of others – that’s the American spirit and leadership style to a t. Be able to get your hands dirty but still discuss Shakespeare. America was the right place at the right time, you had men who gave birth to an idea and real estate to the west that allowed their ideals to take on different shapes that were appropriate to the circumstances as they traveled. America is an idea that evolves and takes on different shapes while adhering to her fundamental principles of equality, opportunity and hard work. It’s interesting to note that at the beginning of the country there was still division over the how we go about doing this (do you favor the businessman or the common man, do you pinch pennies or do you invest in the future), I wonder if we still have such an acute sense of possibility or frankly the kind of opportunities that were available to people during this time or even our grandparents. I digress, but here’s the point – America kicks ass. We did then and we do now. The “new order of man” was perhaps a bit more excited then but if we can retain their idealism as we explore increasingly populated terrain. That’s this generation’s Lewis and Clark campaign. How do we navigate the new frontier of a crowded, entrenched and entitled group of people? Will we achieve the same excellence? Is it something we can maintain? We shall see. Quotes Jefferson talking about Lewis’ childhood, “he was remarkable even in infancy for enterprise, boldness and discretion. When only 8 years of age, he habitually went out in the dead of night alone with his dogs, into the forest to hunt the raccoon and opossum…”as a boy and young man, he went barefoot, in the Virginia manner. According to Jefferson, the young Lewis hunted barefoot in the snow. 24..30 (how cool is that?) In the years following the revolution, life on the Virginia plantation had much to recommend it. There was the reality of political independence. There were the balls and dinner, the entertainment. There was freedom of religion. The political talk, about the nature of man and the role of government, has not been surpassed at any time or any place since, and at its best the talk could stand compared to the level in ancient Athens. 33 In addition, it seemed unlikely that one nation could govern an entire contient. The distances were just too great. A critical fact in the world of 1801 was that nothing moved faster than the speed of a horse. No human being, no manufactured item, no bushel of wheat, no side of beef, no letter, no information, no idea, order, or instruction of any kind moved faster. Nothing ever had moved any faster, and, as far as Jefferson’s contemporaries were able to tell, nothing ever would. 52 Jefferson believed in what he called “an empire of liberty.” “Our confederacy must be viewed as the nest from which all America, North or South, is to be peopled,” he wrote even before the Constitution was adopted, and as president he said that he awaited with impatience the day when the continent would be settled by a people “speaking the same language, governed in similar forms, and by similar laws. In an age of imperialism, he was the greatest empire builder of all. His mind encompassed the continent. From the beginning of the revolution, he thought of the United States as a nation stretching from sea to sea. More than any other man, he made that happen…Thanks to Thomas Jefferson the United States would be an empire without colonies, an empire of equals. 56 Henry Adams described the American of 1801 in these words: “Stripped for the hardest work, every muscle firm and elastic, every ounce of brain ready for use and not a trace of superfluous flesh on his nervous and supple body, the American stood in the world a new order of man.” 58 It was a favorite saying of one of President Johnson’s twentieth-century success, Dwight Eisenhower, that in war, before the battle is joined, plans are everything, but once the shooting begins, plans are worthless. The same aphorism can be said about exploration. 81 Napoleon on the Louisiana purchase “The sale assures forever the power of the United States, and I have given England a rival who, sooner or later, will humble her pride. “ 101 His intense curiosity compelled him to study the world around him and the sky above him. 120 These young heroes were in great shape, strong as bulls, eager to get going, full of energy and testosterone – and bored. So they fought, and drank – and drank, and fought. 130 Lewis’ objectives, as given to him by Jefferson, were to establish American sovereignty, peace, and a trading empire in which the warriors would put down their weapons and take up traps…Relations with the Indians were important, establishing commercial ties with them was desirable, but the sin qua quo of the expedition was to return with as much information as possible. Put more bluntly, Lewis’ first objective was to get through, and whatever he had to sacrifice to do it would be sacrificed. 154 Their blood was up. They were Virginia gentlemen who had been challenged. They were ready to fight. 171 The soldiers meanwhile, enjoyed the favors of the Arikara women, often encouraged to do so by the husbands, who believed that they would catch some of the power of the white men from such intercourse, transmitted to them through their wives. One warrior invited York [Clark’s black servant] to his lodge, offered him his wife, and guarded the entrance during the act. York was said to be “the big Medison.” Whether the Indians got white or black powers from the intercourse cannot be said, but what they had gotten for sure from their hospitality to previous white traders was venereal disease, which was rampant in the villages and passed on the men of the expedition. [this happened in a few Indian villages] 180 He was ready, intensely alive. Every nerve ending was sensitive to the slightest change, whether what the eye saw or the skin felt or the ears heard or the tongue tasted or the fingers touched. He had the endearing sense of wonder and awe at the marvels of nature that made him the nearly perfect man to be the first to describe the glories of the American West. 216 Grizzly story! Chapter 18, 219 Lewis describing the White Cliffs in Montana “vast ranges of walls of tolerable workmanship, so perfect indeed that I should have thought that nature had attempted here to rival the human art of masonry had I not recollected that she had first began her work.” 228 Well-led men working together can do far more than they ever thought they could. Especially if they re in life-threatening situations – which was exactly where Lewis intended to lead them. He dared to do so because he knew that they had more in them than they thought, and he knew how to bring out the best in them. 273 Lewis’ journal upon turning 31 “This day I completed my thirty first year. I reflected that I had as yet done but little, very little indeed, to further the happiness of the human race, or to advance the information for the succeeding generation. I viewed with regret the many hours I have spent in indolence, and now sorely feel the want of that information which those hours would have given me had they been judiciously expended…In the future, to live for mankind, as I have heretofore lived for myself. 280 Chapter 22 – Shoshones, Spaniards and the lack of guns – read this part if you want to see why guns are a tool of independence and with holding them makes the people better slaves, weaker individuals
