There's bodies decomposing in containers tonight In an abandoned building where A squatter's made a mural of a Mexican girl With fifteen cans of spray paint and a chemical swirl She's standing in the ashes at the end of the world Four winds blowing through her hair —"Four Winds", Bright Eyes, Cassadaga (200 7 ) What a strange, subtly troubling, idiosyncratic novel this was—not my first by Ackroyd, but the others ( The House of Doctor Dee , The Trial of Elizabeth Cree , English Music , good books all) were read so long ago that it may as well have been.... Here, if the 19C had its Madwoman in the Attic, the harpsichord pavane which we imagine the 18C to have been is revealed to contain shadows within shadows, such that the vaunted 'Dialectic' of Enlightenment is rather a stately dance toward oblivion, if I interpret all of this murk correctly—not an Allegory of Love, but of Death, Decay, Darkness, all those other capital-Ds. Nicolas Dyer (1661-1715) is portrayed as the devil-worshipping architect of an M Night Shyamalanian number of churches ( 7 ), who, as a young boy (after surviving the plague of 1665 and the Great Fire of London in 1 666 ) is taught by his rescuer/necromancer Mirabilis that "Christ was the Serpent who deceiv'd Eve, and in the form of a Serpent entered the Virgin's womb", and that only human sacrifice can summon the Great Powers. This so impresses the lad that he commits the murder of a young virginal boy to sacralize each of those churches—let the 7 trumpets blow. The actual architect of those churches was one Nicholas Hawksmoor (1661-1736), who in the late 20C is also the name of a Sherlock-wannabe-type of DCI investigating a number of interrelated murders around...you guessed it, said 7 th Seal/Sign churches—while he is completely unaware of their history, he is deeply troubled by the haunting sense of a pattern that he cannot seem to bring to...light. So intricate is the patterning that Mr. Ackroyd has accomplished here, it would take me another half-dozen (plus one!) readings to even begin to puzzle them all out. If, like Mr Dyer (perhaps) I had several transmigration-of-the-soul lifetimes (Met-Him-Pike-Hoses!), I could perchance to dream to do it... But, alas, this Terpsichorean Travesty of a review endeth here—at merely the commencement of ¶6. And it's the sum of man, slouching towards Bethlehem A heart just can't contain all of that empty space It breaks, it breaks, it breaks
