This is a fantastic, classic and very entertaining biography! I found myself marking on almost any given page an interesting passage or insight into William Burroughs, the great genius of the Beat Generation and counterculture. Not only is this biography filled and jam-packed with information on Burroughs himself but there are lots of fascinating asides and tidbits where Ted Morgan gives many 'mini-biographies' on Burroughs' friends or members of his immediate entourage or coterie. I found out lots of information on Allen Ginsberg, Lucien Carr, Jack Kerouac, Burroughs' wife, Joan Vollmer Adams, Gregory Corso, Paul Bowles, Alan Ansen and of course Brion Gysin - the only man he ever respected. What I really loved too was finding out more about other talented artists and writers I did not know much about until now such as the mysterious crippled French Jewish junky, Jacques Stern, who was famous for his tall tales about his own life, some of which turned out to be spurious some which turned out to be unbelievably true. The chapter that focused on the decline of his son, Billy Burroughs, was one of the most fascinating chapters in the book and was devastating and harrowing to read about. My heart really bled and ached for poor little Billy (I felt sad to the point of depression after finishing this chapter) - a boy who lost his mother Joan at the age of 2 due to a stupid, drunken shooting accident (which haunted WSB for the rest of his life - or did it? [see the final chapter for more details]), growing up with his grandparents in Palm Beach, Florida, and suffering from various forms of affliction and addiction, not knowing where his father was nor why he was absent with only vague memories of his mother (her heart-shaped calves and a spiral staircase in Mexico City). His complicated liver transplant surgery in Colorado, where he happened to be fortuitously located at the time, was both fascinating and scary in its detail. I did not know that Burroughs Jr. had a brief fling with Joanne Kyger! That came as news to me. The great sad irony in all of this was that here we have one of the greatest writers in the world at the time and yet he couldn't communicate on an emotional level with his son. He couldn't connect with him on that level, which can partly be traced to his insipid upbringing by his conservative father. Burroughs' father reminded me of my own father - clean, straight, almost never showed a hint of emotion or about as "communicative as a plant" as my sister once put it. The craziness of Burroughs' bunker days and the endless sycophants and junky entourage who would go out to score junk for him was new to me and indicative of what pain Burroughs was in after his son's death. Burroughs continues to lose one friend after another - Mikey and Trocchi in the early 80s, Brion Gysin who tragically died of emphysema and lung cancer in 1986, the sudden death of his brother Mort (and the guilt he feels over his brother's difficult life) and finally of course the death of Allen Ginsberg, a few months before his own, which must have come as a crushing blow. The 1980s and 1990s were not easy for Burroughs but there was a beautiful transformation that took place. Through all the hardship and loss, he managed to pen his masterpieces which are the Cities of the Red Night trilogy. Morgan offers some very informative analysis of the characters in these books and how they represent different parts of the diverse collage that made up WSB's character. Finally, his devotion and love for his cats was beautiful as it appears that Burroughs is making up for all of the fuck-ups in his relationships with others throughout his life. All in all, a fantastically exhaustive portrait and biography of the man. So why not 5 stars? Let me say, in terms of information and entertainment, this book is an easy 5 stars, I would give it 6 if I could. However, I have 2 major gripes with this book which makes me dock a star for the overall evaluation. First of all, although there is an index and notes section at the back of the book, my Kindle edition did not contain one single footnote from start to finish. Anyone serious about writing an accurate biography that can be backed up solidly with documental evidence, but decides instead not to include any footnotes whatsoever is either cocky or making a serious mistake. As a result, there were parts of the biography which sounded like Burroughs' writing but because there were hardly any quotation marks, I could not tell if it was...a) lifted from a Burroughs' book or b) Ted Morgan, paraphrasing Burroughs and trying to sound like him. This was a major flaw of the book. Secondly, I mentioned earlier that this book has some fascinating mini-biographical asides about other people Burroughs knew or who entered his life. While any details or comments on Burroughs, Ginsberg or Kerouac tended to be positive and laudatory, there were some disparaging comments about other people (two examples that immediately come to mind are Orlovsky and Sinclair Beiles) which I would classify as 'slanderous'. In fact, I wonder if that is why the author was punched by Gregory Corso (as he mentions towards the end of the book) although his comments about Corso were almost invariably positive, including his praise of how Gregory stayed true to the beat lifestyle and didn't 'sell out' as some people thought Burroughs and Ginsberg did when they joined some of the bigwig literary academic associations and let themselves be absorbed by the mainstream culture. (Incidentally, I didn't see it as selling out but as being practical - authors need a reputation and a name in order to sell books) All things considered, if you want information, LOTS of information on Burroughs' life, this is not just a meal, it's a real banquet with Naked Lunch on the table and more.
