This book is about a group of friends that do everything together. Throughout the day, they ride their bikes, they play hide and seek, they discover new things, they play pirates, they eat cherries, and they go home all together. There is nothing during the day that they do not do together other than sleeping. There are three characters in this story, the three best friends. They are Charlie Rooster, Johnny Mouse, and Fat Percy. All of them are very different animals that get along very well. They work together well and help each other in different ways. For example, while they were playing pirates, Johnny Mouse took the tiller, Charlie Rooster opened his wings to make the sail, and fat Percy plugged up the hole in the side of the boat by sitting on it. Each character had a role in the book and a role as one of the friends. The text structure of this book varied a little bit each page. The first three pages had the text written underneath the images of the page while the next one had the text above the images. This was a good change up throughout the book because it allowed your eyes to see the images while still looking for the words and finding them to continue reading along. The characterization of this book was also very well done. Each character had its own role and lived up it well considering they were each an animal which made it kind of easy to recognize their differences. They also each had a different role in the friend group with what they could help with and what they might not have been able to help with because of their size or something. The names of the characters also defined them really well. Finally, the illustrations were very well done and caught my eye for sure. They were very detailed and colorful and provided a good explanation of the story through imagery. The illustrations look like they might have been done by water colors or painting of some kind because of the brush strokes throughout the book. I really like the message of this book. It talked a lot about the importance of friends and what they do together. Throughout the book there are lines like “good friends always stick together” or “good friends always decide things together.” I think those are some good messages for children especially at a young age when they do not really know what it means to be a friend yet. Another part I liked was at the end when they are trying to figure out where they are going to sleep all together and nowhere is really working so they decide that it is okay to sleep at their separate places and said “sometimes good friends can’t be together.” I feel like that can also give a better understanding of friends to children as they are reading this. I think I could use this in my classroom to help teach my students about the power of friendship and why it is important to be a good friend. This might not be a specific lesson to a specific subject, but it could be something that is added to the end or beginning of the day as a fun little activity. I think this is a book that children would really like because it includes different animals being friends, which is not what you see often. If I were to use this in my classroom I would ask my students before reading it what it means to them to be a friend. I would allow for a little bit of discussion time and then I would read the book and after it I would maybe ask the same question or ask if they have anything else to add from what they said before. This would just be a fun activity added to a long day of learning that can allow students to feel the warmth and positivity that comes with friendships and see the different aspects that might go into it.
