I had already read the first edition of this book when it first came out in 1994 and really enjoyed it. It included two of my favourite pieces of rock journalism by Nick Kent, Brian Wilson and Syd Barrett two voyagers on the sea of drugs and mental disintegration. One of whom came back and it can still be disconcerting to see someone of the stature of Brian Wilson looking very confused and worried in performance on TV and the other, Syd Barrett, vanishing into silence. However, I didn’t much care for his book of memoirs, ‘Apathy for the Devil’, as it felt too much as though he was on the fringe of things, always grabbing at rock stars coat tails whilst saying to the reader, ‘I really was there – honest’. But this expanded and revised edition of ‘The Dark Stuff’, published in 2007, is Nick Kent at his best, writing incisively and wittily about his subjects. I have already mentioned the Brian Wilson and Syd Barrett pieces but his article on the doomed ‘Sid Vicious; The Exploding Dimwit.’ was another welcome re-read. Other highlights include ‘The Daze of Guns ‘n’ Roses;’ – whatever happened to them? – and a less than reverential assessment of Kurt Cobain amongst others. All in all there are 22 of the most talented and self-destructive rock stars featured with an afterword on self-destruction and its place in music. Kent isn’t in awe of his subjects and none of his pieces are puff pieces, kowtowing to celebrity which is refreshing these days. But is there still a place for rock journalism now in the era of blogs and online music publications? I grew up in the ‘70’s when there were several weekly and monthly music publications available. The NME at its peak sold 300,000 copies weekly with Nick Kent and Charles Shaar Murray as their star writers. They guided me through glam rock, punk rock, Brit rock and grunge amongst others. The Dark Stuff is an interesting and often entertaining selection featuring performers from each of the golden decades of rock – the ‘50’s with Jerry Lee Lewis and Roy Orbison, the ‘60’s with the Rolling Stones and Brian Jones, the ‘70’s with Sly and the Family Stone and Iggy Pop and then coming more up to date with Kurt Cobain and Prince. There’s also the unexpected inclusion such as Serge Gainsbourg, The book begins with a short introduction by Iggy Pop who describes Kent as ‘a true rock and roller; someone who cared.’ Mr Pop features twice in the book and is a real survivor unlike others. The spectacular implosion, mainly from drugs, of Sly Stone is a salutary lesson and revealed why he disappeared so suddenly from the music scene. Phil Spector’s decline is also discussed in detail. It’s amazing that performers can still produce incredible music whilst in the grip of dangerous substances and virtually lying in the gutter. Kent has a fascination with rock’s outsiders. In ‘Lightening up with the Prince of Darkness’ Kent talks to Miles Davis, discusses his drug addiction and his restless urge to change direction and take the risk of alienating his fans. This desire is exemplified in Davis’ quote ‘I’ve got to change. It’s like a curse.’ It’s the ones that don’t change that are less interesting for me. The Stones have always left me a little cold although I enjoyed reading Kent’s piece on them. Lou Reed was another highlight as was Neil Young and the Haphazard Highway that leads to Unconditional Love. The concluding piece on Self-Destruction raises several interesting points; is it best to destroy yourself and your career and go out in a blaze of glory as with the members of the notorious 27 Club? Or to redeem yourself, pull yourself from the brink of death, take the Las Vegas residency and soldier on? It can be horrible to watch a genuine talent such as Amy Winehouse shine brightly and then vanish while admiring them in a weird way. I couldn’t see Winehouse taking the Kerry Katona route of going into rehab and then hawking tales of her addiction hell. However the Stones still do their turn around the stadiums of the world – one day they will all die and will no doubt be playing from the beyond the grave via a séance link-up. But then there’s Sid Vicious. A genuine talent for self-destruction as he never felt he had a choice. But not a doomed star as he lumbered from disaster to disaster with a genius for being able to cop the right attitude and have a handy way with a fist. He certainly wasn’t going to end up promoting butter. In my opinion, self-destruction shows a willingness to take risks and for some there’s no direction home again. I really enjoyed the re-reading of The Dark Stuff and realised how rare good, insightful music journalism is these days. Whenever I read the NME now it doesn’t feel the same as it seems to be crammed with colourful bits and pieces about the music scene without any articles to really capture your interest. Must be a sign of getting old. These days music is bought online and the rituals of finding and listening to it have changed. No more the Saturday afternoon browse in your local record store to see what’s new , the hiss of a new vinyl record under the needle or the bookmarking of a life experience by a song. The Dark Stuff was a book that was well worth revisiting.
