I very much recommend this remarkable book to anyone who is pondering a theatrical or film career ... especially younger people at the beginning of their career journey. I would have this one included within BFA or other university acting programs, right up there with Uta Hagen's acclaimed RESPECT FOR ACTING. My curiosity regarding Claire Bloom was piqued after viewing the Criterion restoration of Charlie Chaplin's LIMELIGHT. I recalled seeing Claire Bloom in THE HAUNTING, but her work in the Chaplin film really stood out. So, this book seemed like an ideal resource to discover more about her life. I was very surprised to find that this was not the standard autobiography ... and definitely not one of the "tell all" variety. The information she shares relates to how the events in her life formed her approach to acting and the theatrical lifestyle. In fact, whenever she has something to say about someone that is unflattering, she refuses to mention the name ... or, in the case of extended family, refuses to go into details about the incident. While admiring her integrity, it does become frustrating at times. That said, her insight regarding her approach to acting, and specifically what she learned from other great performers, is to be treasured. She does not provide a step-by-step approach such as The Method. Instead, she explores how her genuine interest in people allows her to absorb character traits that will be used later. She readily admits when she changes a practice because an approach no longer works. Most interesting of all, she proposes reasons for why certain experiences have such a far-reaching impact on her performances. The book finishes with her thoughts about what makes certain other actors outstanding, directing styles that help or hinder, the impact of audience reactions, and the toll that the profession takes on daily life. I completed the reading far too quickly. Casual readers, desiring the inside details of a performer's encounters, will be extremely disappointed. As the subtitle would suggest, "The Education of an Actress," this is a study of her journey and her understanding of the acting craft. For the person desiring such a career, I think her thoughts would be invaluable.
