I am a devout, inerrancy-affirming evangelical Christian, and I do not believe this for on moment. It's a tricky thing when people claim to have these visions. Either they are true, or they are not. And if they are not, what then? If the person is a liar, then they are grievously sinning against the Holy Spirit (or may not even be genuine believers, if they take that attitude towards God's Word). If they are seeing false visions, that is also quite problematic. Given that her visions occurred over many nights, it's hard to say that it was just a bad dream (like in the case of Bill Weise and his dream-length visit to Hell). With such a piece of writing, I find it hard to give it anything other than either a 1 or a 5. If it is true, and it is divine revelation, then shouldn't that make it a 5? If it is not true, if it is a lie about what God says, then it has no business existing. I actually address her "visions" and other similar visions in a piece of writing I that is free to read or download from my website: http://3-ringbinder.weebly.com/ (it will be obvious which one). Briefly, I will explain a few reasons why I believe it to be false: - She says that brimstone appears in a pit of fire, growing red. Now, you don't need to be a chemist to know that sulfur (brimstone) has a very low melting point (it should melt, not be a glowing stone), and burns blue, not red. My hypothesis: she envisioned what brimSTONE would look like in fire, not knowing what brimstone actually is... - She teaches that people can be true believers, whom Jesus Himself says actually knew and had a relationship with Him, can walk away willfully, and yet Jesus would pursue them still until there is no hope. What does the scripture say? If such a person did walk away from Jesus willfully, there would be no hope, period (Hebrews 6:4-6). - The people in Hell are there now, and they have bodies. In other words, these people, whose bodies died and were buried, are not even "souls," but instead have physical parts. What about the whole, ya know, resurrection (which hadn't happened yet). - She will look at various kinds of sinners, and then recite Revelation 21:7-8, about how those sinners will be in the lake of fire, and how they are burning in it. And yet, this "Hell" is where they are now, not their future abode. The Lake of Fire is in the future, not today. That's why, in Revelation 20:13-14, Hades (the abode of the dead) gives up its dead before they are cast into the lake of fire. - At one point, she says that one of the people in hell will burn forever in those flames. That is not true - later, they will be moved out of "Hell" (Hades) and into the lake of fire (as mentioned above). - There is no mention of resurrection (who needs it anyway; these souls are in the form of bodies!). That's kind of an important thing to leave out, since it is where the dead will leave this place 9which she says they never leave) and be thrown into a lake of fire (not necessarily better, but important nonetheless). Even if you don't agree with me that the Bible teaches annihilationism, and that nobody will be tormented for eternity anywhere, you can see why her account falls apart (and its free to read online, so if you really wanna see if I'm right, just go here: http://spiritlessons.com/mary_k_baxte... ).
