"The Wicked One" is the story of Eva and Lucien. How could he explain such a complicated thing to her, when he barely understood it himself? He thought of his own childhood. A childhood childhood which had been sacrificed for the dukedom and the responsibilities that went with it, to this sibling and her brothers so that they could be young and carefree—a childhood that had ended the moment he’d found his father lying dead on the tower stairs, his neck broken. Lucien had thought he was invincible, that the world would obey his every command. But he had been unable to keep his father from falling down those stairs. And he had been unable to save his mother when she’d followed him to the grave so soon afterward. I'll be honest, I did skip forward to this book because I was too excited to read about him and my new year resolution is to read what makes me happy. This was a pleasant surprise. Here we have a controlling alpha hero repeatedly getting bested by a kickass strong heroine. They meet, they fight, they have a passionate interlude. There is a cat and mouse chase, but things change when family interferes and they are coerced into matrimony. He has issues giving up the reigns, she loves her freedom. She sat listening, never interrupting, never commenting, never mocking, never scoffing. He told her everything—something he had not been able to do with his siblings, for he was the big brother, the leader of the family, and he had a place to uphold in the family hierarchy. But he had no place to uphold with Eva. He had nothing to hide, nothing to prove, no reason to hold anything back, because she was his equal, and he knew it. I love that they were perfect ying and yang to each other. The hero was oldest, burdened by responsibilities and the heroine was the only one who understood him and vice versa. There was loads of passionate sex, angst and a bit of heartbreak towards the end. My only complaint is the amount of time taken by secondary plot and other siblings in the book, that took the focus away from the main couple. I mean, I love to read about the family but somewhere it was too much. “I do not need your trust in order to give you my own. That is not how life works, Eva. It is only when one has the courage to give, that he—or she—will be in a position to receive. Overall, an exciting read. Safe for me 3.5/5
