Good, solid story with some interesting threads and twists. Like many other people, I watched the Rizzoli and Isles TV show and quite liked it. Although it wasn't the TV show that made me start reading these books. I knew about this series before and read other books by this author. And even though I was aware that the show is very, very loosely based on the book series, it still surprised me a lot when I read The Surgeon how many differences there are. This is my second book in this series and this time I was even more prepared. And yet I was surprised again. However this time at least the book was focused on the work of Rizzoli and Isles. From reading the first book in this series, I remember that I didn't like Rizzoli very much and I generally had a problem with poor knowledge of the characters. And this problem is at least partially solved in this book. I'm not convinced that I like Rizzoli or Isles now, but at least I got to know them much better. And I can say with full conviction that they are interesting and complicated characters that add a lot to this story. And the story is quite good, though maybe not as scandalous as a dead nun in a closed order would suggest. The full potential of this thread seems not to be fully used, but when I read the book, I had no problem with it. The solutions invented by the author are interesting and not obvious. There are a few things I didn't expect. And the whole story flows smoothly and without unnecessary lengthy fragments. Everything has its purpose. The action is swift and fast-paced with numerous twists and turns. I am also satisfied with the ending, I mean solving the case, or actually a few cases. As for the events in the personal lives of Rizzoli and Isles, and especially Rizzoli, I have mixed feelings. But this is probably mainly due to the fact that I am surprised by this thread. I don't think I know Rizzoli well enough yet to be involved in her life. But it might be interesting in the next books. At the moment, I think I like Isles more, I find her more interesting. This book has definitely encouraged me to read the others in this series.
