After years of wanting to read this book I finally got the chance. This book makes me so proud and has made a profound impact on my life. The whole time I was reading this I felt so compelled and in awe at what these women did for 4 years pre Roe v Wade. It was truly legendary and groundbreaking. The organization just started out as finding women who needed an abortion safe access. The members of the organization knew how dangerous it was for women to go to certain abortionists who may put them in harms way or even demand sexual favors from women prior to them getting an abortion. They were also tired of women dying and being physically harmed by trying to self induce an abortion. Several women stepped up and Jane was started. Several things that I was surprised to learn was that: 1. The women learned how to perform abortions themselves 2. Several clergy members, including Charles Moody, a prominent Baptist minister, was involved in helping women get abortions. 3. Over the four years that they operated Jane helped about 11 thousand women abortions. 4. They performed late term abortions and the members acted as doulas in these roles during the miscarriages and labor. These women are my Sheros. They risked their lives to selflessly help women in need. They also decided that treated people not just as patients but as real people. Medial professionals at that time treated women as too dumb to even understand their own bodies and what they were going through. By the time Jane ended the group had been arrested, taught women how to do self examines and overall learn about their bodies and themselves. Several quotes throughout the book cause my attention. "Change is not a gift given by leaders and heroes, but is accomplished by ordinary people working together" "Women have always been healers. They were the unlicensed doctors and anatomists of western history. They were abortionists, nurses and counselors. They were pharmacists,cultivating herbs and exchanging the secrets of their uses. They were midwives traveling from home to home, village to village. For centuries women were doctors without degrees, barred from books and lectures, learning from each other, and passing on experience from neighbor to neighbor and mother to daughter. They were called "wise women"by the people and witches or charlatans by the authorities. Medicine is apart of our heritage as women, our history, our birthright".....
