This review can also be found at Carole's Random Life in Books . I really enjoyed this epic story! When I started reading this book, I really didn't expect the story to be quite as big as it turned out to be. This book doesn't cover just a year or two of Jake and Miranda's life. No, this is a book that covers decades and by the time it is over you want to spend more time with them. Since this is the first book in the series, that works out well for me. This story is about Jake and Miranda. Jake is an outlaw and is wanted by the authorities. He actually has quite a sizable price on his head. Miranda became a widow at a young age when her new husband was killed during the Civil War. Miranda's father is killed by a group of outlaws just before the story begins. An unexpected string of events puts this pair together and they realize that they actually enjoy each other's company. The scope of this story is amazing. It starts out in Kansas but then goes all the way to California and back during a period in time when this area could be quite dangerous and rather wild. I really enjoyed all of the descriptions of the travels and settling in these different areas throughout the story. There is something about the old west that I find really interesting. The conditions were harsh at times and there seemed to be danger everywhere you looked. I really liked that we get to see so much of Jake and Miranda's life in this story. Learning Jake's backstory really helps in understanding how his life unfolded in the way it has. I really enjoyed watching them meet and get to know each other. I enjoyed watching their relationship grow over time. Jake never seem to believe that he deserves Miranda but she refuses to give up on him. She proves that she wants nothing more than to be with him at any cost several times during the course of this story. I would recommend this book to anyone that enjoys an epic romance. I started the book out liking Jake and Miranda but by the time it was over I had fallen completely in love with them. I can't wait to read more of this amazing series! Initial Thoughts Wow! This was a much more epic story than I thought it would be. It doesn't cover just a year or two but a big chunk of time. I liked the characters from the beginning but by the end I had fallen in love with them. Book source: Purchased
