December 2023 edit: for whatever reason (a love of all-time best character, the jam-obsessed sister? Who knows) I've re-read the first book, and had to remove some mistakes from this series review. If there are any mistakes left they are the work of an evil witch. ... Alright, so, this is a review (or rather some rambling thoughts) of the entire series. This, Witch's Sister, is of course the first book and there are five more. So, if you are very concerned about spoilers for a handful of mediocre children's books that started in the mid 70s, avert your gaze. Now, while I'll stand by my rating of 'mediocre', I do think the first one is pretty good – I loved it as a kid, but it's obviously not at all scary now, and probably not worth seeking out. It works because it's about kids (11-ish) who are faced with something dangerous (a witch, of course) and while that is scary in itself, part of the horror is how they cannot rely on adults for help, and the disbelief they meet. That lack of power and helplessness in the face of problems kind of work whether it's a witch, or any other problem. The first one is also the most vague one, in a good way. The main character Lynn and her best friend Mouse realize that Lynn's sister, Judith, is falling prey to Mrs. Tuggle, the evil witch who lives at the top of the hill – the witch wants someone for her coven, and beyond that she has her eye on Stevie, their younger brother. This is one of my favourite bits, since the author did a bit of research and included an excellent (and well known) witch tradition – that in order to make a flying potion (or in this book “to grease her broomstick”, which sounds like an excellent euphemism) you need the fat of an unbaptised child. That's pretty grizzly, and fun – well, not for the kid, but you know. Or at least that's Lynn's assumption, though she does note the technically that Stevie is christened, but not baptised. Cue spooky stuff when, oh no!, the parents are going out, and guess who they've asked to baby sit? The nice old lady who lives at the top of the hill. The books after that become quite same-y, and repetitive. The witch, or her evil influence, refuses to go away and everyone in Lynn's immediate life is targeted for nefarious reasons. In the last book, the witch returns in the guise of her identical sister, whose name is an anagram of the witch's name. She has an evil rabbit for a familiar. She is defeated by the power of love. It's not great. But, of course, it's a children's book, so an iron spike through the heart might have been excessive. Still, she literally turns into a sweet little kitten, apparently the manifestation of love? The endings are generally the weakest part of the books – a sudden climax in the last five pages or so. Though, I do like the one (Witch Weed) where Lynn almost sets fire to the town because there are some evil plants growing in the neighbourhood. Yes, by the sixth book we're down to evil plants. Because a previous book features the witch's evil glass eye as the antagonist, and after that was thrown into the river, well – you all know how evil witch weeds are formed, I'm sure (it's when an evil eye is thrown into a river, if that wasn't clear). The way to read all this now is to assume that Lynn and Mouse are in fact making things up, and that the adults are right to be sceptical (something the book/series briefly toys with). What if Mrs. Tugggle is just an old lady who looks a bit witchy? That makes the dramatic bit when Lynn fight the witch's familiar, a cat, amazing – then it's just a small girl wrestling a cat, trying to drown it. Most relateable main character I've yet encountered? Possibly. A running thread about Mouse's mother is never fully explored – she has left her father, and moved away. There's a bit of an attempt at realism here that doesn't quite work, but I get the attempt to juxtapose the supernatural horror with the very real horror an 11-year-old might meet. There are lots of small ideas that aren't fully explored, but which are quite good. Lynn's sister is amazing. She loves making jam. Just a fiend for preserves. A major incident in a book is when a bunch of her jars of jam fall off a shelf and are ruined. But no worries, Judith gets back on the jam horse. She also likes boys, specifically Ken Phillips. Though, they sadly break up in the last book (which is actually a decent moment for Judith). So, just your typical girl – loves jam and boys. I think that's a line from a Tom Petty B-side? My overall favourite thing – other than the possibility that Mrs. Tuggle wants to drain Stevie's fat for a flying potion – is a running idea of Lynn's, across several books, that maybe the reason Mouse's mother left is that she disliked the father's large moustache. It just drove her away to Ohio. Amazing - especially when you remember that this series started in the 70s. Clearly some moustache trauma from Phyllis Reynolds Naylor Of course, that's actually a lie – the very best thing is if you have the Bantam illustrated edition of The Witch Return, and can turn to page 27 and see the illustration of Mrs. Tuggle's new familiar, the unusually large rabbit. It just looks so puzzled and grumpy, like an elderly rabbit who's just over all this bullshit. Anyway, if you've read this far, I question your life choices. I'm here because these days are an endless Zoom conference horror show, so I needed something comfortable, like witches and their plans to grease broomsticks. I guess I'd rate this series 2 out of 5 demons, with an extra demon for the first book.
