“‘I don’t like sending that boy off to sit up with a whore,’ [Woodrow Call] said. ‘He’s young and innocent,” Augustus [McCrae] said. ‘That’s why I picked him. He’ll just moon over her a little. If I’d sent one of the full-grown rowdies, Jake might have come back and shoot him. I doubt he’d shoot Newt.’ ‘I doubt he’ll even come back, myself,’ Call said. ‘That girl ought to have stayed in Lonesome Dove.’ ‘If you was a young girl, with life before you, would you want to settle in Lonesome Dove?’ Augustus asked. ‘Maggie done it, and look how long she lasted.’ ‘She might have died anyplace,’ Call said. ‘I’ll die someplace, and so will you – it might not be no better place than Lonesome Dove.’ ‘It ain't dying I’m talking about, it’s living...’” - Larry McMurtry, Lonesome Dove I’ve been on Goodreads for just over ten years. In all that time, I have never written a review of Larry McMurtry’s Lonesome Dove . This is a book I first read twenty-five years ago. It’s a book I’ve read four times since. It’s the best book I’ve ever read. But even though I’ve done 609 book reviews in those ten years, I have never written a thing about Lonesome Dove . It’s the literary equivalent of refusing to take a picture of your kids. But then again, it’s hard to describe the things you love the most. The heart does not translate well to the page. Maybe the most difficult thing in discussing Lonesome Dove is conveying how a novel about a cattle drive – the subject of countless B-westerns – can mean so much. This is not just an instance of an author taking genre material and doing it really well. Rather, it’s an instance of an author taking genre material and doing something totally different, while still doing things completely the same. If that makes any sense. On one level, this is a familiar novel. All the touchstones of a cowboy western are present. There are nighttime raids into Mexico, and Indian fights, and outlaw gangs. On the trail, the men of the Hat Creek Cattle Company have to contend with ornery cattle, wild rivers, and sudden storms, not to mention a fearsome desperado named Blue Duck. All that, however, is only incident to the central storyline: the platonic love story of two men. It is their co-dependent (some would argue destructive) relationship that drives the plot and gives Lonesome Dove its sometimes staggering power. (It is worth noting that McMurtry adapted the screenplay for Brokeback Mountain , a less platonic love story between two cowboys). Those two men are ex-Texas Rangers Augustus McCrae and Woodrow Call. When the novel opens, they are running a middling cattle company in the border town of Lonesome Dove, Texas. We begin with Gus McCrae, making biscuits for breakfast: It was tribute enough to sunup that it could make even chaparral bushes look beautiful, Augustus thought, and he watched the process happily, knowing it would only last a few minutes. The sun spread reddish-gold light through the shining bushes, among which a few goats wandered, bleating. Even when the sun rose above the low bluffs to the south, a layer of light lingered for a bit at the level of the chaparral, as if independent of its source. Then the sun lifted clear, like an immense coin. The dew quickly died, and the light that filled the bushes like red dust dispersed, leaving clear, slightly bluish air. Soon enough, an old compañero rides into town. (Which is an utterly classical way to open a novel). This is Jake Spoon, a garrulous, fun-loving man who likes to drink, gamble, and make love. He has tales of the Montana country, a cattleman’s paradise. This captures Call’s imagination, and soon enough, he has everyone pointed north on an epic drive. In tone, Lonesome Dove is elegiacal. It is set in the late 1870s, sometime after the death of Custer, but before the final slaughter of Wounded Knee. The west is still wild, but the writing is on the wall. The Indian tribes will soon be “pacified.” The open ranges will soon be platted and bound by wire fences. Civilization will out. An end of an era is coming. Augustus and Woodrow recognize this. They are aging themselves, and much of the time, McMurtry is taking his story in two directions. While his characters physically move towards Montana, they are also traveling back in time, to the choices they made as younger versions of themselves. Lonesome Dove is driven as much by character as plot. (The plot itself is wide-ranging, with several disconnected storylines gradually merging into climatic moments). Woodrow Call is the emotionally constipated leader, a hard, rigid man with a strict code of honor, who hates rude behavior and cannot tolerate weakness – especially his own. He leads a rag-tag group of cowboys, including Pea Eye, a sturdy hand who could not think himself out of a privy; Joshua Deets, a black tracker and scout (he is decent and loyal and just barely avoids the unfortunate “magical” stereotype); Dish Boggett, an excellent rider and cowhand, beset by lovesickness; Po Campo, a cook who pulls double duty as an insect gourmand and prophet; and young Newt, whose mother was a prostitute and whose father is a driving mystery. The Hat Creek Cattle crew is also joined by a former piano player, a couple of stray Irishmen, and some intrepid pigs. Circling the orbit of the cattle drive is a plodding sheriff, a bumbling deputy, and the terrifying Blue Duck (one of fiction’s exceptional villains). This is a masculine world, but there are a couple major female roles. The first belongs to Lorena, a prostitute in Lonesome Dove who accompanies the cattle drive to Montana. At first blush, she seems a tired type, the whore with a heart of gold. In McMurtry’s hands, though, she is much more. She does not always have control of events, yet she maintains her agency. She knows what she wants and does not want and acts accordingly. The same is true for Clara Allen, the great love of Gus’s life, the one who got away. She is a character worthy of Gus in every way, and is one of the few people who can steal a scene back from him. She is blunt and brash and caught in the tangled webs of the past, like everyone else. Her native sense makes her a bit of a Greek chorus, commenting on Gus and Woodrow and the consequences of their relationship. The amazing thing about all these characters, even the walk-ons, is that they feel real. They have depth. They do not always make the right choices. They do not always do the right things. They can be stubborn. They can be prickly. They are not always likeable. Frequently, they can be downright frustrating. (There are exceptions. Some of the characters are absurdities, because McMurtry has a bit of an eye for oddballs). Towering over them all is Augustus McCrae. He is, I am confident in saying, one of the best characters in the history of American letters. He is a raconteur, the man who always has something to say about everything. He is both hard-bitten and starry-eyed; a pragmatist and a romantic. And he is filled with wisdom. On hopes: “If you want one thing too much it’s likely to be a disappointment. The healthy way is to learn to like the everyday things, like soft beds and buttermilk—and feisty gentlemen.” On moving forward, after life's setbacks: “It’s my fault,” July said. “If I’d done what you said, maybe they’d be alive.” “And maybe you’d be dead and I’d have to tidy you up,” Augustus said. “Don’t be reviling yourself. None of us is such fine judges of what to do.” “You told me to stay,” July said. “I know I did, son,” Augustus said. “I’m sure you wish you had. But yesterday’s gone on down the river and you can’t get it back. Go on with your digging and I’ll tidy up.” On renting pigs: “If I had a mind to rent pigs, I'd be mighty upset. A man that likes to rent pigs won't be stopped.” Gus and Woodrow are two very different sides to the same coin. It is never quite clear why they became friends (and it’s something that McMurtry has attempted, with limited success, to explain in the prequels). Nevertheless, they have real affection for each other, even though, as Clara notes, they might have been better off missing each other completely. Lonesome Dove perfectly balances its tone. It is, at times, a realistic western with a mythical overlay. In other moments, though, it is pure myth, proudly brimming with archetypal tropes. McMurtry’s west is filled with legends of almost supernatural ability; it is also populated by half-wits and losers and men of average ability. This is a big canvas; still, it is never so big that two characters can’t run into each other at the appropriate time. The world of Lonesome Dove can be violent and grim and dark. It can be nostalgic. It can be funny and sly. It can be farcical. It can be plaintive and mournful. There is a hint or two of magical realism. As with many of the great epics, it refuses to be pegged as one thing; instead, it is all these things, like the world is all these things. Perhaps the best novel I’ve read in the last decade is Philip Meyer’s The Son . A spiritual cousin of Lonesome Dove , The Son ’s central character, the ruthless patriarch Eli McCullough, embodies the big themes about America’s westward expansion, and by extension, the formation of America herself. Lonesome Dove ’s themes are not so grand and sweeping. My paperback version is nearly 900 pages long, and with that kind of heft, you might expect McMurtry to say something profound about the complex arc of our national history. Instead, he centers his insights on people. Specifically, we are here to learn how to live from Augustus McCrae. Augustus doesn’t teach us about conquering the frontier, dispossessing the Indians, or the costs of forging a continental empire. He teaches us instead how to live each day with joy, taking pleasure in the smallest things, and loving the smallest things so much that they become life’s very meaning. He also teaches us to never trust a man who’d rent a pig.
