Storyline: 2/5 Characters: 2/5 Writing Style: 2/5 World: 4/5 There are some good science fiction ideas here. The kind of ideas that lead the reader to thinking about awesome possibilities and implications. The scenarios prompt one to ponder what they would do in that situation, wishing that they would get to play such a role in a great moment of human history. Sawyer has a gift for taking hard science fiction ideas, presenting them in such a way that the laity can follow along, and then branching off and doing something interesting with it all. The reader has to work harder, in fact, at experiencing wonder and understanding motivations and decisions than they do in understanding the science behind quantum computing or the tricks of factor analysis. Sawyer can explain the science to us, but the narrative is markedly shallow in other areas fundamental to a good story - things like build-up and character depth. Much like his other early-career Hugo nominated or award winning books, Sawyer clutters up the text with pointless description. I found myself embarrassed reading about our near-future society. Not that Sawyer intended it to be embarrassing, but it was just so banal as to be offensive to my meager pride in humanity. If that is who we are as a people and a society; if that is all Sawyer can find to remark on, well then television shows such as Seinfeld and Friends (which Sawyer thinks enrich this tale) probably are a good representation of human civilization. This tale again evinces Sawyer's lack of confidence in himself as a science fiction writer. Unconformable with a tale solely of science and its implications, Sawyer spends half the book on extraneous relational drama. We get backstories, flashbacks, and internal monologues of the characters in this drama, but they never build the character. Instead what they do is fill the pages. A lot of character decisions become mundane or ridiculous as a result. Too often the science fiction story got left in the background, and even when there were good moments to bring it back in, Sawyer was more inclined to introduce us to a new hard science fiction element or puzzle as a wrinkle or twist. There were far more ideas and dramas here than were necessary; the story set up by the prologue didn't need (and would have been better without) the additional flair. The science fiction community should be grateful that Sawyer put these ideas out there for us, but one can't help wishing that the actual writing had been given over to a better storyteller.
