2026 Review It is fine but I was still bored by the end. 2021 Review Weeeeelllll, I made it to the 4th read and no, I'm not contemplating 5 stars. But I did bump it up to 4 stars on the strength of the side characters. I didn't particularly like them the last time I read this one and got annoyed when they interrupted the romance. But this time around, I didn't mind as much and actually kept reading for their antics, rather than in spite of them. 2020 Review-3 stars Well, I always say that third time is the charm when it comes to reading Heyer. I bet by my fourth read I will be contemplating five stars! Braced for The Nonesuch's numerous perfections, I wasn't as thrown off by them. I also didn't feel quite as frustrated by the stupid misunderstanding that kept him and Ancilla apart near the end. Still, the story needed more moments of them as a couple and less of the annoying young people that surround them. Even the last chapter veers away from the "kiss and promise to wed" in favor of more antics on the part of the willful heiress and the weaseling cousin. 2019 Review-2 stars Unlike most of Heyer's novels, I read The Nonsesuch and did not return. I could not precisely remember why I did not enjoy it, but I did not. That was enough. As my memory grew more vague, the only thing I could account for the distaste was that the hero must be a womanizer. I didn't have much taste for womanizers at 17. But oh! It turned out to be much, much worse! He's a paragon of virtue! He builds ORPHANAGES! He pays his cousins' bills out of the goodness of his heart! He falls in love with a governess and thinks nothing of social status! He is so freaking flawless that it is no fun. Ancilla falls in the mold of the older Heyer heroines but she is much too reserved to be likable. Even knowing her heart, it is hard to love her. Pity. This is closer to Austen than Heyer with the village polite semi-gentry. Quite different from Heyer's usual environment. I'll read it again. I find it usually takes 4 reads to reconcile me to Heyer's characters. Read 2 has not done it! 2011 Review The Nonesuch by Georgette Heyer was, in a word or two, rather disappointing. It looked like a fun plot, with more of a male main character, but I was wrong on both accounts. Not that the plot wasn't fun, but it lacked what I've come to expect from Heyer. The plot was rather simplistic (dare I say far-fetched?) without the usual hilarious irony I've come to expect. The characters also suffered somewhat, more on them in a moment. Ancilla Trent, though once from a noble family, now lives as the companion/governess in the home of a wealthy widow, caring for the woman's niece, Tiffany Weild. Tiffany is beautiful, spoiled, petted, wealthy, and completely untamable. Only Ms. Trent has been able to control the ambitious brat. When Sir Waldo Hawkridge, dubbed "The Nonesuch" for his sporting abilities and the talk of London, inherits a run-down estate from a distant cousin, he decides to visit, there meeting the spoiled Beauty and her governess. What follows is pretty much a love story between Ancilla and Sir Waldo. Sir Waldo's nephew, Lord Lindeth, shows up, falls in and out of love a few times, and pretty much just adds to the "romantic" plot in general. Another cousin of even less interest shows up, flirts around a bit, and attempts to be useful. Overall, I found them all disapointing. Ancilla is not really memorable, a bit like the main character from Persuasion. She's very virtuous (which I rather liked) yet young, clever...and rather boring. She falls in love with Sir Waldo, but it really isn't quite believable. I guess the plot just lacked...something. All the romances tied up neatly, with supringly little issues. In fact, the climax was so easily overcome, I was quite suprised to find the book over. The ending was abrupt.... I'm just going to take a stagger and guess she wrote this early on. It holds hints of the wonderful work Heyer is capable of, but isn't her best. I'd much rather reccomend The Grand Sophy or Cotillion
