This is my fourth Douglas C. Jones book, and each one impresses me more. His ability to write history from the point of view of everyday life is just amazing. "Roman Hasford", the novel that preceded this one, had me understanding the hows and whys and whos of western expansion in the story of Roman, who left Arkansas as a young man needing to find his own way in the world and ends up in Kansas. He worked hard, had adventures, made friends, and eventually returned home to settle down. This book tells that story, and gets us back in touch with his parents, Ora and Martin, gives a us a brief visit with his sister Calpurnia, and shows us how the little crossroads of Gourdville, just by Elkhorn Tavern, embraced progress and became a bustling town. There's even a Greek chorus of sorts, townspeople in the barbershop and pool halls, who inform us of public opinion as the years go by. But this is Roman's story. Taking place from 1870-1899, his history and the town's are closely aligned. Because Roman is the richest man in town, and because much of the progress is directly attributable to what he does and doesn't do. Love and revenge, hopes and dreams realized and destroyed, friendship and loyalty from unlikely people; in short, everything that goes into making a life. Written by the author into a page turning tale that's hard to put down. One of my favorite genres of books are pioneer stories, but as I was reading this it occurred to me that immigrants on the great plains were not the only pioneers. So too were the men and women willing to pull up stakes and take a chance on something new in order to make a town civilized. The ones selling ties to the new railroad, opening drugstores and banks, opening mercantile establishments, newspaper offices, restaurants, hotels, etc. That's how progress happens. There's much more to say praising this book, but in the interest of brevity I'll stop here. My only complaint is that I wanted more for Roman in the end. I felt he deserved more happiness, but then we wouldn't have had a story, or at least not this one. And once again, a big thank you to Howard, who introduced me to this author through his own excellent reviews. Jones is one of the better discoveries of my reading life.
