Reading Simak is often like reading an alien author; his writing is strangely different from everything that has gone before. There are no villains; his planet Earth is very much an idyllic forest, at least the part that the main characters know, and completely prosaic… except that every time you get caught up in the normalness of it, he mentions the music trees gearing up for a concert. Except for that, this is very much just another entry in the post-apocalyptic socialist paradise genre; that is, the entire human race has left in an unknown way, leaving behind a great plenty that those who remain can live off of practically forever (in this case, robots who farm for them), while at the same time philosophizing about how great it is that they can no longer create such a surplus for others—and even getting in the way of providing for others. A Choice of Gods has very similar ideas to City , and in fact may be in the same world or an alternate reality related to it, right down to robots building a special, unknown project. Having recently read Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass , I got a sense of Douglass’s disappointment from the narrator, except that the narrator hasn’t yet learned that living under slavery rather than freedom means that even the slaveowner’s life is held back. The narration is all over the place; the narrator rages against property, and considers all of the earth his property. As a caretaker for the rest of humanity, or at least the rest of humanity he cares about, but they don’t actually care about the earth any more. He speaks not just for himself as owner of the earth, but for the American Indians as if they were his charges who need his protection. He recognizes his arrogance in one breath, and then goes back to speaking as if he owned the earth in the next. He thinks he knows everything, at one point telling someone that he can’t teach psychic powers, not because he doesn’t know how but because it’s impossible. It can’t be taught. Except that as reader we know that he knows practically nothing about psychic powers. He doesn’t know where they come from or how they’re used. But he’s adamant that they can only exist in the absence of technology. He is a very annoying narrator. That said, there are very neat ideas here, just as there were in City . The basic starting point is that almost all of humanity has just disappeared; a few people remain and are super-long-lived, but as their technology fades they develop incredibly powerful psychic powers. The narrator thinks that the two are related, although there’s a strong indication that the two events—the disappearance of most of humanity and the development of super-long life and psychic powers—are both caused by the same force. Everything important in the book is seen obliquely, from the super psychic powers to the robot search for God. We don’t actually see any of this happening, only that it has and is happening while the main characters go about their very prolonged daily lives. And occasionally listen to music trees.
