🤵‍♂️ The irony is this first Bond was published in 1953, and there's enmity with Russia or the Soviet Union, and now it's 2023 and that enmity is back after a brief hiatus during the last decade of the 20th century. So Bond doesn't seem vintage, or a ghost of the past, but relevant to the espionage realities of the 2020s as he was to the 1950s. It's a very human Bond in this first book - capable of anxiety, insecurity, doubt, depression, failure, fear, guilt, even repentance. Even romance. This side of him is barely seen in the movies, if at all. It makes for a story that feels more authentic to a real person (not a Superman) in a real world of espionage, just as you get with the spy fiction of Len Deighton (Funeral in Berlin) or John Le Carré (The Spy Who Came in From the Cold). The harshness is there, a harshness I don't care for. Sexism I don't care for. A coldness and a bluntness I don't care for. The Bond of 1953 was ice and fire, rough and soft. He did not stay completely rough and screenplays began to smooth out his most politically incorrect flaws. They would lose the soft romantic aspect found in parts of Casino Royale too. Yet here we have him in his original manifestation. This book is exciting, but it's so full, so layered, so packed with feelings and detail it reads more like a novel, like realism, than it does a spy thriller. Especially in the final quarter of the book it reads like a literary romance, almost a whisper of a romcom or a Hallmark. Almost. For the ending hits like a bullet. Ian Fleming had no idea that an empire and indeed an institution would arise out of his Bond stories. He couldn't have known there would be the books Dr. No and Goldfinger and the movies based on them, the Bond actors and the Bond women and the Bond theme songs like Skyfall by Adele or No Time to Die by Billie Eilish. For all he knew, Casino Royale might be his only success with 007. So, he poured a lot into it, on many different levels, because it could have been his one and only shot. ♠️ ♣️♥️♦️🃏A high stakes baccarat game to financially ruin a Communist agent becomes something more, something much more. Just as his beautiful assistant Vesper becomes something more, something much more. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
