Johnson writes like a dream, one Dantean page after another. As was the case with its younger sibling, Tree of Smoke , this is a flawed work of genius—and you daren't even skim the lengthier metaphysical soliloquies, episodes in finger-drumming vexation though they occasionally descend to be, simply because DJ threads them with phrases of such arresting form and subliminal profundity as to leave your eyes stickily aswim and seated-self shaking, whilst weaving them so dexterously into the logorrheic torrent that they threaten to evanesce if sequestered or pried out of sequence. But the book's genius smoothes any bumps in the road—and the crew of this Northern Californian existential inferno, lost and damaged amidst an oceanic New Age all druggy and infelicitous, are fantastically wrought. And does there exist a writer whose marescape fictive realms are more saturated with a spontaneous sexuality—alight in every conceivable situation—but whose rendering of the act is more passionless, more alienating, more a grotesquely enlarged spotlight upon ass pimples and scummy lips, frightened eyes and filthy fingernails; one which, through frenetic union, serves merely to heighten the panoramic desperation and choking loneliness that fuels that very desire? The giddy energy of happy hippiedom and suntastic shamanism has wasted away, burnt off in pallid couplings and swatch-book spending; and what remains ripples listlessly in the breezes betwixt ancient redwoods—sometimes cartoonish, and sometimes feral. Ladies and Gentlemen We Are Floating in (Dead) Space , spiritualized, melodic matrices contracting and expanding, darkness teased forth and set running with the hunters not far behind, surfacing from dream into reality or plunging from life into dream, perhaps both, in succession or simultaneously, with violence the glottal stop that brings everything to a momentary, crashing halt. It's all kinda grim, mountingly tense and temporally elastic, sadder than a spilled cone, peppered with ecstasies, and a shoreside roller coaster of (black) humour, running the gauntlet from wryly-wrung smiles to full-on laughter at the level of DFW or Thomas P or, dare I say it, even T-Burn his-own-dour-self. *************** SPOILERS IN THE FOLLOWING ************* I've been mulling over this latest read by Johnson since finishing it last Tuesday; and notwithstanding that its pointed insights and character failures worked mightily in tandem with that dissociative engine ignited anew within me in leaving me feeling like I was falling to pieces, become that corporeally-challenged shade whose rote routines have been scripted into washed out, plangent theatre—where past and future avenues of life, inside and out, are pressed into oblique angles which cast every perspective in a puzzlingly unreal and hope-leaching hue—an eerie sensation that plagues me jedes jetzt und dann ; well, I'm left assembling that which disappointed and fell short more than the episodes—and there were plenty of 'em—that grooved me right down to the bone. Frankly, Johnson fumbled the ball with Already Dead , because early on all was aligned for a five-star masterpiece. Alas, as another reviewer took note of, it is the female characters who are possessed of the most pungent potentialities, and, ultimately, they were, to a one, unrealized and/or abandoned by the author in lieu of focussing upon the more vaingloriously chaotic and spiritually ravaged and lushly verbose—and, in the end, less interesting —men. In particular, Nelson Fairchild, Jr., who eventually began to wear on my nerves something fierce. John Navarro and Clarence Meadows were well handled, while Radar Bill and Frankenstein were both furnished to provide true revelations; but, inexplicably, the latter and Van Ness became subordinated in authorial attentiveness. To a lesser degree, the same curious choices infected Tree of Smoke and held me back from loving it unconditionally. What's more, I am becoming more and more convinced that this story would have worked better with the demonic element either hinted at but downplayed, or else embraced fully and brought right into the mainstream of the narrative exposition. As it is, Johnson opted for half-measures: infusing Already Dead with a rich spiritual element but only teasing with the details, clouding the linkage between characters, floating soap bubbles around the witch, Yvonne, and her conversing ability with the spectral world. IMO, this means that the demonic walk-ins and lattices of fate ultimately detract from the story's coherence: it would have made the novel stronger—if less interesting—to allow this collection of human failure their own part in hobbling their lives, rather than excusing them by introducing opportunistic predators from an already-terminated existence— unless their introduction was more intelligibly connected to the Nietzschean philosophy and oceanside mythologies being used as fictive fuel. And an event I was highly anticipating—the showdown between Clarence and the two hilariously addled and quirkily philosophical gunmen, Falls and Thompson—was stretched out into that bizarre chain of absurdity outside of the Buddhist temple. I was so fucking peeved at how Johnson was thinning out this material so utterly ripe to be one of the most kick-ass sequences in the novel and a wickedly apt pre-climax to the unveiling of what happened to Nelson—although it must be said that I couldn't help but chuckle at the bearded duo's dope-driven banter and dick-tickling display of newfound swagger. Finally, the novel was too long. Complaints about an author needing to clip their work, particularly in the genre of fiction, can reek of arrogance and ignorance—more often than not, reflecting simply impatience with having to spend irreplaceable reading time on a story whose gist one deems to have measured to a sufficient degree—and, with that always forefront in my mind, I don't often hoe that row. However, it truly applies in the case of Already Dead , of which the final seventy pages contains somewhere in the neighborhood of a four-to-one ratio of padding to substance. Johnson is such a talented writer that I can certainly understand how difficult it might prove to attempt to stem the tide of words and images flooding his mental story-assembler; but it's a shame that he couldn't exert a greater discipline therein, for the indulgent verbosity robs this otherwise spiritually-layered and complexly-structured novel of a major portion of its narrative power heading into that final stretch and utterly etiolates the climax. By the time Nelson Fairchild Jr. finally expires (or at least as embodied in our configuration of space-time) amidst the shoreside redwoods of Northern California's Lost Coast only the most patient of readers will not be overcome with relief. The writing itself is never less than superb, inspired, an absolute aesthetic pleasure—but with all of that said, and the fours stars notwithstanding, I am coming around to the point of frustration with certain author's proclivities for marring their own creations by means of an inattentiveness to what, IMO, constitutes the basics. I'll still read any book by Johnson I come across, beginning with Train Dreams , and as the latter is but a mere 116 pages, I'm excited to discover how he performs in a much more delimited textual environment. Still, Already Dead , its considerable pleasures and successes aside, left me reflecting more upon the negatives than the positives, the missed opportunities over the brilliant realizations, and that's something I find regrettable.
