In one section, Blake is listening to a discourse by the painter Joshua Reynolds. According to a diarist of the time who was with Blake, the poet says, "I consider Reynolds's Discourses . . . as the Simulation of the Hypocrite who Smiles particularly where he means to Betray. His Praise of Rafael is like the Hysteric Smile of Revenge." And then as Reynolds goes on to state that Raphael learned from the example of Michelangelo, Blake says, "I do not believe that Rafael taught Mich. Angelo or that Mich. Ang taught Rafael. any more than I believe that the Rose teaches the Lilly how to grow or the Apple tree teaches the Pear tree how to grow fruit." I think this passage could be a summary of Blake's artistic philosophy. As Reynolds talks, Blake continues to damn him: "Abundance of Stupidity. Infernal Falsehood. Damnd Fool. A Polishd Villain. A Lie. Here is Nonsense." But he also says, "Knowledge of Ideal Beauty is Not to be Acquired It is Born with us Innate Ideas are in Every Man Born with him . . . Man Brings All that he has or Can have Into the World with him. Man is Born Like a Garden ready Planted & Sown This World is too poor to produce one Seed . . . He who does not Know Truth at Sight is unworthy of Her Notice . . . The Man who never in his Mind & Thoughts traveld to Heaven Is No Artist." Blake is described in The Examiner as an "unfortunate lunatic, whose personal inoffensiveness secures him from confinement" and whose catalogue exhibited "the wild ebullitions of a distempered brain." And Robert Southey described him as a "painter of great but insane genius." George Richmond said that before "Blake began a picture he used to fall on his knees and pray that it might be successful." And walking with Blake felt "as if he were walking with the Prophet Isaiah." William Blake: "I should be sorry if I had any earthly fame for whatever natural glory a man has is so much detracted from his spiritual glory. I wish to do nothing for profit. I wish to live for art. I want nothing whatever. I am quite happy." Patrons like John Linnell helped Blake and his wife to get along. It was Linnell who paid for the funeral.
