The Bob Whites are organising an ice carnival to help raise funds for a Mexican village struck by an earthquake. Meanwhile, Regan is concealing a ponderous secret that appears to make him very anxious and grumpy. And a sulky boy named Dan Mangan who has had brushes with the law is now living with Mr Maypenny. Is Dan Mr Maypenny's grandson? And is he behind some thefts and break-ins that have been happening? * Trixie and Honey have acquired Mexican penpals, Dolores and Lupe, whose school library was decimated by an earthquake. Donations of new books is what the Bob Whites' ice carnival is all in aid of. No sooner have they finished the antique fair from the last book when they're pumped again, working on a new project. These guys don't let grass grow under their feet, but to squeeze all the coming adventures within one year, the stories will need to be back to back like this. * Mart is apparently a very speedy skater. I wonder if he surpasses Brian and Jim, but get the feeling he never manages to trump the Mr Perfect duo as often as he'd like to. * I don't remember if the Beldens' elusive Aunt Alicia ever makes an actual appearance, but her gifts to her nephews and niece tend to bite the dust. In this book, a spotted china cat is smashed and a chunky woolly sweater is unravelled. * It seems the Beldens are a family of faith after all, for it appears Mart has recently outgrown his Sunday suit and needs a new one. Perhaps Trixie goes to pick up the newspapers from Lytell's General Store (See Book 1) after they get home from church. * I wonder if Bobby ends up getting the kitten that many people promise him. I don't remember, but I feel sorry for it if he does, having to live with both Bobby and Reddy. * Regan somehow manages to come up with a decrepit old horse named Spartan from the Wheelers' stable for the use of Dan Mangan. How come we've never heard of Spartan before? He's a handy plot device horse if ever there was one. * (Sigh) it had to happen some time, I guess. The awesome Regan goes down a notch or two in my estimation. His attitude toward Dan stinks. Basically, Regan places job security way above his family duties. He's so scared that acknowledging his delinquent nephew will tick off his rich employers that he prefers to keep it hushed up. He'll hide Dan with Mr Maypenny rather than admit that he even has a nephew. What sort of message is that supposed to give poor Dan? * The whole secret experiment thread is abysmally handled by the adults. For a start, it encourages others to imagine things are worse than they actually are. Trixie wonders if Regan himself has committed a crime, such as a hit-and-run. Little does she know he's just too churlish to own his own flesh and blood. * Trixie's antagonistic reaction to Dan from the moment she sets eyes on him is nothing to be proud of. She sums him up as a troublemaker the second he steps on the bus, and treats him accordingly. Snap judgement might be natural, but that doesn't make it right. Then when Mart points out that Trixie has had it in for Dan since Day One, she flounces off in a huff, although every word is true. * This is probably the point where readers with opinions about Trixie's romantic life may begin to diverge. Until now, Jim has monopolised the floor, but from here on he may have competition, if not in Trixie's eyes, in the readers' at least. The canon undoubtedly points toward Jim, but there is something sort of cool in Trixie's progression from haughtily putting Dan in his place to humbly requesting, 'Please don't go, I'm scared.' So is it Team Jim or Team Dan, girls? * Haha, now for the inconsistencies! Sorry to be a spoilsport but being pedantic can be fun. Firstly, let's talk about Tom and Celia wanting to buy the Robin; the red trailer formerly from the Lynches which they're living in on the Wheelers' property. The implication is that Tom dreams of paying Mr Lynch the $5000 for it. But hey, hang on, doesn't that trailer now belong to Trixie and Mart?! Mr Lynch gifted it to the young brother/sister duo for their valiant success at stopping the fake Uncle Monty in his tracks. This new anonymous author needs to go back and read The Mysterious Visitor. Trixie and Mart should be the ones rolling in dough, with $2500 apiece if the sale ever comes off! * Secondly, how did the Bob White clubhouse even get broken into at this stage? In the previous book, The Mysterious Code, a burglar alarm was connected to the clubhouse which Regan would instantly hear from the stables and his apartment up at the Manor House. Surely this wouldn't be inactivated so soon. It's only a matter of a few weeks since they needed it for the antique show. * Finally, this author contradicts herself within this one book. At one point we're told that Regan has been sending money to his only sister, (Dan's mother) to help her make ends meet. Then a little later the story changes. Mr Maypenny informs Trixie that Regan totally lost track of his sister until he recently heard that she was dead. Come on author, get your facts straight. Proofreader, you should have been onto that one too. * If I'm to award a quote of the book, it'll have to go to Dan. 'But you know all the answers, don't you, Freckles.' * Hooray, now our seven Bob Whites are complete, so bring on more.
