I needn’t tell fellow snake-lovers that it’s quite the task to find a book with a serpentine protagonist! This book instantly grabbed my attention as its main character, Sherahi, is a Burmese python. Hatched in the wild, she is captured as a youngster and taken to America, where she performs exotic dances with a young woman. When she becomes too large, she is sold to an unscrupulous animal dealer who treats her poorly. Along with a rattlesnake, a coati, a langur and a macaw, Sherahi escapes and sets out to find the fabled haven of Sandeagozu (San Diego Zoo). The author gets around the difficulty of how snakes (which lack external ears) communicate, especially with other animals, by giving them the power to read minds. Sherahi can pick up on other animals’ thoughts and project her own to them, even influencing them to do as she wishes if she so desires. The strangeness of some snake senses is also addressed, with unique words such as “fnasting” for the combined smell/taste afforded by the Jacobson’s organ and “wurping” for the heat pits picking up on body heat. This gives you a fascinating reptilian point of view. This would have been a five-star book if it wasn’t for the factual errors. Whilst the author is clearly knowledgeable about snakes, she occasionally makes basic mistakes like referring to them closing their eyes (something they can’t do), stating that the Jacobson’s organ is located in the lower jaw (it’s in the upper jaw), or using the word poisonous when she means venomous. Sherahi is also far too large for a Burmese python – by the end of the story, she’s bigger than any extant species of snake. There are various factual errors regarding other species too (e.g. the suggestion that birds evolved from crocodiles), and the animals often use human terms, phrases and place names – this can possibly be excused for Sherahi, who can dip into human minds, but not for others. On the whole, however, I thoroughly enjoyed this book. If you like snakes and animal stories, it’s a must-read. Show more
