There was a moment’s silence, and then Geoffrey spoke. ‘I think,’ he said slowly, ‘you’ve just made a serious point. How disconcerting.’ The Essence of Things by Madeline St John was a worthy shortlistee for, indeed a would have been a worthy winner of, the 1997 Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse Prize for comic fiction, even if it resorted to some unsubtle product placement ( he opened a half bottle of Bollinger ) to catch the sponsor's attention. Particularly notable was the author's own swipe at her own previously most famous novel Ladies in Black , which is indicative of the self-satirical tone of this masterpiece, with Jonathan, the male protagonist, listening to an audiobook given to him by his partner: It was a bootlegged talking book which he vaguely remembered some BBC employee friend of Nicola’s having given to her. ‘It might be handy for long journeys,’ she’d told him, putting it in the glove box. The story began, and went on: some footling tale about some shop assistants in an antipodean department store, fretting about their wombs and their wardrobes and other empty spaces – ye gods! No wonder women were for ever peering into one’s soul! They were compensating for their own innate emptiness. Perhaps, truly, they had no souls of their own. But even besides this the novel has a number of moments that genuinely made me laugh out loud such as this exchange after the man of a couple has come close to a moment of emotional tenderness. ‘Listen. Don’t ever tell anyone I said that, will you? About nothing being as serious as love. I’ll never be able to show my face on a squash court again.' ‘When did you ever show your face on a squash court?’ ‘Well, you know what I mean. It’s the principle of the thing.’ ‘Alright. I mean, when all’s said and done, what would I want with a man who had no squash court credibility?’ ‘Exactly.’ Unfortunately, the Wodehouse Prize didn't actually exist until the year 2000. Albeit fidelity to a particular historic time period (which characters who seem to act as if they are in the 1950s but live in the 1990s) is not exactly a feature of this novel ( they had been anomalies in the narrative as she understood it: ), so that is perhaps no barrier to the author having anticipated and being retrospectively awarded the prize. The author would also not live to see an inferior version of her book, novels from Helen Fielding's Bridget Jones series, instead go on to be shortlisted for and then later win the Prize in 2014 and 2017. But given the lack of a suitable award in 1997 this was instead, rather oddly, shortlisted for the Booker Prize instead ( ‘It’s an utter mystery.’ ‘Yes, it is. An utter mystery.’ ). Generally I'm not a fan of mixing overt comedy and literary fiction - the only book to win both the Wodehouse Prize and Booker Prize, Vernon God Little is much the worst ever winner of the latter prize. But approaching The Essence of Things as the comic novel that the author achieved (whether this was the authorial intent is beside the point), it was a quick and very funny read and one that very neatly skewers both the tradtional gender roles in relationships and also a certain type of quintessential Englishness, the gruesome, yet frequently hilarious, saga of the island people who had given the planet its common language and virtually all its games. 2.5 stars. ‘Well, that was painless enough wasn’t it?’ Some favourite quotes: And although she was still in a state of extreme shock, and still trembling, she was beginning now to see – to realise – to understand – that the thing which was truly wrong was not so much the dreadful scene into which she had just been precipitated, as the misapprehension (whatever it might be) which had given rise to it: she was beginning now to understand – and she became more certain by the minute – that Jonathan’s ‘conclusion’, however rational in itself, could have derived only from a hugely wrong, a wholly false, initial assumption, and that all that was now necessary was the careful discovery of this assumption and the calm revelation of its falseness. - the bravura introduction to Nicola's story, where St John demonstrates her ability to write a great and complex sentence before slipping into her more whizzy style for this novel. Later on that day Susannah gave Geoffrey a shopping list and he went to Sainsbury’s and got everything in, plus some caramels. ‘What’s this?’ said Susannah, unpacking. ‘Caramels.’ ‘What for?’ ‘For you.’ ‘Me?’ ‘Yes, why not?’ ‘Why?’ ‘A token of my esteem. ‘Oh, I wish.’ ‘And my love, admiration, gratitude, etcetera.’ ‘Oh, yeah. Want one?’ ‘Well, since you ask. Just one.’ The clever child, a boy of nine, at this moment came home from school. ‘Cor!’ he said. ‘You’re eating sweets! Cor!’ ‘Well, we’ve been good today,’ said his father. ‘So what else is new?’ said the child, whose name was Guy. ‘Give me a kiss,’ said his mother. ‘Alright,’ said Guy, and obliged. ‘Want one?’ she asked, offering the caramels. He took one. ‘Do you want to see my poem?’ he asked them. He was invited to read it to them, and did so. ‘Cor!’ said Susannah. ‘That’s really whizzy. Well done!’ ‘I wish I could write like that,’ said Geoffrey. He meant it, too: any adult might have wished as much. But there you were. - the cor, whizzy family who provide much of the comic relief I don’t think [he]’s met anyone of my age before. - the child Guy talking about Jonathan, but likely a self-satirical barb aimed at herself at the author given her interesting characterisation of his speech. ‘Would you like some more tea?’ she said. And so the subject, dark and fearful as it remained, was closed. - one of a number of very true-to-life moments where a cup of tea serves both to relieve but also avoid confronting an emotional moment. Wrong is one of those words which sound like what they signify, not by virtue of onomatopoeia, but by virtue of a more subtle correspondence: the same being true, to a lesser degree only, of right. There is right and there is wrong: the knowledge that there is right and wrong is part of one’s English-speaking birthright: these attributes could not imaginably achieve the same terrible finality in another formulation. This is right, said the Anglo-Saxon warrior, and that is wrong. And to be in the wrong is to be cast into a waste of ice and darkness which is the ultima Thule of devastation. One might nevermore return. ‘Is anything wrong?’ She could see as she uttered the word that something was, indeed, wrong. The ice and darkness filled the room. - an Englishman - or woman - 's innate sense of right and wrong with some delightfully mixed metaphors to boot. Too bad about the marmalade. The balance between bitter and sweet was the essence of the thing. - giving the book it's title, but the WI-inspired marmalade generally serving as a key symbol throughout the novel.
