yeah after reading the reviews of this i didn't have high hopes for it but it's one of Kootz books i had bought it shit over 20 fucking years ago i think at a place called Bookseller that hasn't been open for at least 20 fucking years. it's been on my list to read for that long so i thought why not? it sounded like a good one why the hell not? the characters i think were likable but they are right about that ending you don't find really any closure in the book, the girl is tricked from killing it's lead well one of the leads Carol by saying the words spiders, the book you see opens with a prologue that's about a girl who apparently takes place in (1865) we later learn and to keep it short she died in a terrible fire and was bitten by a spider that part gave me the creeps i'm not gonna lie. so while shew as dying her mother and her didn't get along and she was afraid of spiders so her mother sent her down to clean knowing that, her aunt on accident caused the fire that killed the girl and the mother. she for whatever reason blamed her mother and ever since than she was reincarnated to kill her mother but each time the mother out of self defense killed her too. not a bad idea for a book but what hurts the book is that really nothing happens in a vast portion of it the horror comes in with the opening and some nightmares and than the ending as it builds up and the ending is so fucking abrupt it's like Dean ran out of ideas, i'm a poet of sort and iv'e written some short stories that to me are like just poems that are short stories i love doing them but i know writing novels isn't what i'm good at poems are but the issues i have is i can start a story but i have trouble figuring out how to end it and my point is i think Dean did to on this one. so did she end up killing Carol in the end? was it stopped? you don't know because the ending was so shitty. i'm glad i read it and this thankfully wasn't the 1st book i read by Dean Koontz Strangers (1986) was my 1st and that one is fucking Brilliant. honestly with a good script it would make a better movie if they can fix the ending that is. even if it's a made for tv movie it's better than the book was i think if the right people get a hold of it that is i voted 1 star cause it was that bad i had to force myself to finish it cause it was that bad. i'm hoping that Dean doesn't have books worse than this one but after writing over #130 books i'm sure he does. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
