”The power to act had to be in the hands of each woman. Her decision about an abortion needed to be underscored as an active choice about her life.” Oh the terrible, horrible, agonizing irony that the day I finish this book, Roe vs. Wade was overturned in the United States. The Supreme Court case that guaranteed women nation-wide access the right to have a safe abortion was put back in the hands of the states, with an expected 26 states now set to either completely ban abortion or place severe restrictions on access to abortion. It’s a slap in the face to childbearing individuals everywhere who live in states where they could be prosecuted and charged with having an abortion. It’s a slap in the face to past and present lawmakers who worked so tirelessly to give us our right to have safe access to abortion. And it’s a slap in the face to the Janes, the fearless, resilient women who from 1969-1973, helped women get access to safe abortions and even performing them themselves. This complete, masterful account of what they did was remarkable. I had no idea such a group existed. And it’s a shame that more people don’t know that they exist and the tireless work they did on behalf of those who could bear children. They were a fundamental and instrumental part in the fight to have the right to have safe and legal access to abortions. I am so heartbroken that all their progress and all that they fought for has been snatched away. Abortion is a decision is for the person carrying the child and no other. Period. Full stop. End of discussion. By overturning Roe vs. Wade, they won’t make abortions disappear. They will just make safe access to abortions disappear. Who knows how many women and people who can carry children will die or be seriously injured because of this decision? All that the Janes have fought for has been for nought. These are ladies who risked their lives and their freedom all so they could give women this basic, fundamental right. Even this is a day to be mourned by many, this masterful, detailed account of the invaluable service the Janes did to thousands of women everywhere is something to be celebrated. I highly, highly, recommend this book as not only a way to become educated about the fight for abortion in the past, but as a reference for future generations on how to fight in the future. ”In the public discourse, the fetus has been elevated to an equal status with a living, breathing human being. More and more, women are viewed as the enemy of the children, requiring the State’s intervention to protect their developing children from them. But, in reality, women still conceive, nurture, give birth to and, in most cases, are the primary caregivers of children. Women are being reduced, once again, to the incubators of future generations with total responsibility and no power. That is the same oppressive view that the women’s movement sought to challenge. It is not just abortion, but women’s power to control their destinies that is at stake.”
