Mallory joins the cult (or is it club?) in this book, which is also the first book to feature Jessi, the token black baby sitter. Finding it difficult to live up to the older baby sitters lofty standards Mallory and Jessi attempt to strike out on their own. I read this book when I was ten or eleven, and I remember loving it. Things I remember from reading this as a kid: The older baby sitters are so awful to Mallory. As a kid around the same age as Mallory, I remember relating to her excitement at being asked to hang out with older girls, and her frustration with them for having impossible standards, and with herself at not living up to their expectations. I also remember that Mallory corrects Claudia when she mixes up soy milk and soy sauce, and then feels superior to all the baby sitters, even though it was just Claudia that made the mistake. I also remember the fights they get into, and the way Mallory storms away to start her own baby sitting club with Jessi, her new best friend. Claire, Mallory's little sister, has such a lily-white view of her cushy, privileged little world that she assumes that Jessi is coming over to clean her house. The story is written like Jessi doesn't even notice this horribly awkward moment because Mallory cuts Claire off, but of course she noticed. I can't believe she ever wanted to come over to Mallory's house again. I had read about Jessi's racial problems in other books before I read this one. I actually had a huge revelation about myself, and the world in general when I read Jessi's story in the super special Baby Sitters' Winter Vacation. Therefore I was prepared for her issues when I got around to reading this book, but I was still horrified that the girls Mallory ate with at lunch said some horribly racist things about Jessi, and I was furious that Mallory didn't say anything to them about it. Reading it as an adult though. . . Things I've considered since reading this as an adult: I actually think that the lunch room scene in this book works very well. Mallory is young enough, and privileged enough to be sheltered from having to make hard decisions before. She's never encountered an instance of racism, and although she's probably been raised to believe its "wrong" she doesn't quite get it, or have any way to speak against it when she encounters it. Therefore, although she knows its wrong to say a black girl's name is probably "Mobobwee", and she wants to "get up and move", she doesn't because she's unsure how to handle this situation. "Anyway, the girls lost interest in Jessica. They started talking about TV shows and rock stars," she narrates, indicating the persistent problem of racism. White people just think it's not that big deal, since it doesn't affect them on a persistent basis This is clear a little earlier when Mallory says that her big family sets her apart from her classmates in the same way that Jessi's skin color sets her apart from their classmates. No it doesn't, Mallory. You will never be treated any differently every single day of your life because you have seven brothers and sisters. I think this point is much too subtle for kids (I certainly didn't get it when I was a kid) but it was interesting to read as an adult, although it's naive earnestness made me cringe. She sort of challenges her friend who is angry at Jessi for no reason other than, "Well, she doesn't, you know, belong here," but she backs down pretty quickly. As a kid who was raised going to school with lots of Hispanic, and Native people, I couldn't believe that Mallory didn't make more noise about her friends comments. As an adult I can understand it, but now I am angry about it for a different reason. Although I think it's good that Ann M Martin, and the series, attempts to address the issue of race in these books, I don't think it was ever done well at all, for a multitude of reasons. First, Ann M. Martin is white, and I assume her ghostwriters and editors were too. Second, the series makes a big deal about Jessi's family being treated with suspicion by their white neighbors, but there is no mention of how the Asian Kishi family is treated by their white neighbors. Third, I very much dislike the way the series only deals with instances of overt racism. In this book, the neighbor across the street won't let her daughter play with Becca, in a very noisy, obvious way. Later in the series Jessi and Claudia baby sit for a family who are so Aryan white power that the BSC eventually refuses to baby sit for them. OF COURSE if a white power movement family moved in and treated everyone in town horribly they would be vilified. And OF COURSE if the neighbor doesn't let her daughter talk to you because you are black she should be run back into the last century. But what if there was a family who asks for only Dawn and Stacey as baby sitters because they have such a great bond with the kids, and, well, Jessi and Claudia just don't? Does Jessi's father have an equal chance for promotion at his company? Do the neighbors who eventually "get used to" the Ramseys start inviting them to their parties, or are they always conveniently left off the guest list because, well, they wouldn't really know anyone, and it might be awkward. Are Jessi's family the token family Stoneybrook takes pride in because it shows how much they appreciate diversity? Why don't other black families live in Stoneybrook, and why were there so many black families in Jessi's old neighborhood in New Jersey? THESE are the bigger, uglier issues of racism, and I don't like that the series just ignored that, or even worse, that they didn't understand that these are the real stumbling blocks of racism.
