Les Mots is probably the most personal and honest book Sartre ever wrote. A poignant look prevails from the first to the last page, as he unravels his most inner memories, dissecting to the last particle the place each of them had in forming the future author’s identity. For the most part, he had a joyful childhood living with his maternal grandparents and his mother, after his father died when was only one year old. This family situation (the word Situation echoes the philosophical term and his famous series published in several volumes by Gallimard, that constitutes some of the most original essay writing of the 20th century) proved the perfect environment to nourish his artistic talent. The figure of Charles Schweitzer, his grandfather, is crucial to his development. He was a model and a teacher to his grandson. It is in his impressive library at home that the child discovered the realm of literature early on, an encounter that would prove fundamental in his upbringing. An only child surrounded by adults in the center of family life, this prevailing devotion towards him developed into his narcissistic personality later on. In a remarkable section of compelling and organic prose, he describes his first encounter with books: J’ai commencé ma vie comme je la finirai sans doute : au milieu des livres. Dans le bureau de mon grand-père, il y en avait partout ; défense était faite de les épousseter sauf une fois l’an, avant la rentrée d’octobre. Je ne savais pas encore lire que, déjà, je les révérais, ces pierres levées ; droites ou penchées, serrées comme des briques sur les rayons de la bibliothèque ou noblement espacées en allées de menhirs, je sentais que la prospérité de notre famille en dépendait. I found my religion, he sustains, nothing was more important than a book. In the library I saw a temple. J’avais trouvé ma religion : rien ne me parut plus important qu’un livre. La bibliothèque, j’y voyais un temple. The book is divided in two halves, each representing a major and central discovery: read and write. In books he discovered his fascination with fantastic stories, a seed that would flourish later on into his writing. A lonely child, literature became his passion and later, when he began writing, the creation of his own stories offered a unique view of the world around him. Two characters are clearly present in this extraordinary work: Sartre the philosopher, writing the book in 1963 and Sartre the literary figure, that is the child discovering in the art of fiction a means of expression. This juxtaposition of the two identities explains why Les Mots is an essay of auto existential psychoanalysis. A situation (now I refer to the philosophical term), according to Sartre , is what stimulates us to make a free decision. When a situation arrives, it is through it that we choose what we will become. Following this logic, the 8-year-old Jean-Paul Sartre , of his own will and in all liberty, chose to be a writer. A peine eus-je commencé d’écrire, je posai ma plume pour jubiler. L’imposture était la même mais j’ai dit que je tenais les mots pour la quintessence des choses. Rien ne me troublait plus que de voir mes pattes de mouche échanger peu à peu leur luisance de feux follets contre la terne consistance de la matière : c’était la réalisation de l’imaginaire. This is without a doubt, an impressive literary work.
