Black beauty is one of the most sensitive and heartfelt animal stories I have read. Being an autobiography of a horse, Black Beauty exposes the suffering of horses due to the thoughtless and cruel conduct of humans and advocates the need for their overall welfare. It is said that what inspired Anna to write the only book she ever wrote was to create social awareness of the suffering of horses, and induce them to be treated with kindness, compassion, and understanding. Although the story is focused on horses, it teaches the world in general the need to be kind, considerate and sympathetic toward all animals. I read this story for the first time when I was about nine. I remember being heartbroken and unhappy for days, for I was a very sensitive child. I’ve heard that some say this book is unsuitable for children as it unsettle their mind. I’m no psychologist and cannot account for its truth, but I think this should be read by children. Kindness, compassion, and sympathy towards all beings are qualities that we have to cultivate in children's minds from an early age. The best mode to instill those qualities in children is to show how other beings suffer in their absence. Written of the world as seen through the eye of a horse, the story creates a certain sense of shame. Humans as an intelligent species to have treated their inferior beings in the manner described in this story are quite shocking. I’m inclined to think that in modern times we do treat animals far better. The story is beautifully written. From the first chapter, the reader is drawn into the life of black beauty. It is amazing how strongly the readers get attached to the main character and narrator, black beauty that when he suffers, our heartbreaks and when he is happy and content, our hearts are overjoyed. The simple and sensitive presentation and the truthful and sincere storyline are extremely touching. I enjoyed the read very much, perhaps more so the second time around. My revisit of this beautiful classic was due to a goodreads challenge that I have taken, and I'm really glad to have done so.
