In the fall of 2017 the University of Delaware expanded the scope of its required English 110 classes. Students should to be made to read, write, and cite, but all other direction was left now to the professors. I've been unable to dig up the list of offerings from that term, but memory, imagination, and this year's listings offer a suitable approximation: there was The Post-Colonial Novel, Myths Re-Imagined, and a blatantly copied over British Lit syllabus. A section covering the role of the banana in world literature seems plausible too. But I landed in John Jebb's section, and John Jebb had his heart set on ships. Loosed from his typical postings to Business Writing and Introduction to Analysis, Jebb put us through The Caine Mutiny Court Martial, The Andersonville Trial (the barren encampment simulating naval conditions on land), and finally Billy Budd, complete with a few sketches from "The Encantadas" and mutterings that we'd be doing Moby Dick if the university would only return to year-long courses. --- Here I'd written out another 700-odd words on Jebb, but it wasn't doing him justice. For another day. Some thoughts: Billy Budd Great story, great setup with the non-fiction accounts of mutinies forming the backdrop for the novella. Not too many lessons learned from this mutiny tale, other than to be watchful of your own treatment of men and women under you who you know to be more capable than yourself. "Bartleby" Ridiculous. "Benito Cereno" Once you figure out what's going on aboard, the mystery becomes trying to pin down where Melville is going with all this, what the slave trade's role is, and what he wants us thinking about. He lands the plane. "The Encantadas" Some interesting castaway anecdotes later on, but here's Melville on his favorite bird: "What outlandish beings are these? Erect as men, but hardly as symmetrical,they stand all round the rock like sculptured caryatides, supporting the next range of eaves above. Their bodies are grotesquely misshapen; their bills short; their feet seemingly legless; while the members at their sides are neither fin, wing, nor arm. And truly neither fish, flesh, nor fowl is the penguin; as an edible, pertaining neither to Carnival nor Lent; without exception the most ambiguous and least lovely creature yet discovered by man. Though dabbling in all three elements, and indeed possessing some rudimental claims to all, the penguin is at home in none. On land it stumps; afloat it sculls; in the air it flops. As if ashamed of her failure, Nature keeps this ungainly child hidden away at the ends of the earth..." "The Bell Tower" Probably due for a renewed analysis applying the themes to AI. I wouldn't read said analysis. Overall Very enjoyable. Some dry stretches (The Piazza Tales Intro, Encantadas 1-4). But even in the midst of these, Melville will plop down a banger of a paragraph to reel you back (a description of the deception inherent in mountain vistas, a blindsiding bashing of penguins). The White Whale looms.
