Story: 10 (Every important event in a focused narrative) Characters: 9 (Hail Caesars. Nay Antony) Accuracy: 10 (Basically perfect even if I sometimes disagree) The book starts with an awkward “Previously on Masters of Rome...” moment when Caesar, exhausted on the road from Tarsus to Alexandria, decides to go through all the events of the previous book to remind us all of what happened and where everyone is. It’s a poor start to a book that, unlike the previous volumes, picks up right where the last one ended. It would have been better if this had been relegated to an optional prologue. Fortunately, things do quickly pick up. It’s even a bit rushed at times. The book frequently gets ahead of itself and begins to feature characters responding to facts that aren’t detailed until future chapters. The divide between East and West is strong. This book, for all its similar length, has a lot more going on than its predecessors. The book is divided into fourteen parts and each part is brimming with significance. We get Caesar in Alexandria, Cato’s march to Utica, Caesar in Pontus (veni vidi vici), Caesar and Antony in Rome, the African War, Caesar back in Rome, the Spanish War, the assassination, Octavian’s inheritance, Antony’s civil war, the formation of the second triumvirate, the Liberators acquiring provinces, the Liberators raising an army, and the battle of Philippi. As you can see, there’s enough here to fill two books easy. In fact, given that this book is half again as long as some of the other ones, I don’t quite see why she didn’t. Having the death of Caesar happen a little more than halfway through the novel and then handing the story over to a cast of new and minor characters seems an odd way of doing it. It’s rather like she did with Sulla in Fortune’s Favorites , only here Caesar dominates the whole first half and by his death we’ve seen the climax of every other plot. To be honest, I was glad when Caesar died. I’ve gotten more than a little tired of her awestruck worship of him, or at least his abilities. Not a chapter can go by in the lives of his enemies without an authorial reminder that they just aren’t as good as he is. Or they can’t see as well as he does. At least with young Octavian such hero worship makes sense. To see it in Cicero and Cato is frustrating. And his death means the rise of wunderkid Octavian, which is always fascinating. I think he was Caesar’s better honestly, though McCullough keeps reminding us of his limitations compared to the great man. And if we’re talking versatility sure, Caesar was skilled in a much wider range of areas (Octavian was no general for a start), but if you look at what Octavian could do well there’s no comparison. He was a political and administrative genius. He started off with a weak hand (just a name in a will) and managed to play it so craftily that he was co-ruling Rome within two years and sole ruler a decade later. I can’t see Caesar pulling that off, and even if he could have he lacked Octavian’s ability to be all things to all people. Caesar made enemies though his highhandedness, while Octavian managed to rule as an even more uncontested autocrat while still seeming humble and acceptable. And better still he was able to surround himself with loyal and capable subordinates who both complemented and enhanced his considerable abilities. I’m less fond of Antony. After what I thought was a good piece of development in the last book which saw him move from hopeless hedonist to hopeless hedonist who could turn off his hedonism when he needed to, this book saw him go back a step. Antony’s lost favor with Caesar and only his close familial ties with Caesar have kept him in his inner circle. But the part I really object to is that Antony is depicted attempting to murder Caesar and is aware of the successful conspiracy. This seems to be doing an injustice to the sources. While I find the idea that Antony’s amnesty was sincere and he wasn’t secretly plotting the destruction of the conspirators (which all the sources claim, potentially in hindsight) interesting, I have a hard time believing that he was actively involved in assassinations himself. That seems like a line that Caesar would not have tolerated him crossing. Similarly, the idea that Antony wanted some sort of restoration of the Republic (albeit with him in Caesar’s place as its head citizen) but was forced by Octavian’s intense desire for revenge into a civil war that destroyed all possibility of future democratic competition seems a bit much. It seems all too close to the useless drunken wretch of the Philippics and doesn’t leave him much room for any type of forethought. I’m rather fond of Cato. He’s an easy man to admire and a hard man to love, but McCullough has found a way into his miserable, tormented soul. I’ve felt before that she can be too harsh on him (of which Cato would approve), particularly in her comments on his inadequacies and failings compared to Caesar. But here he finally gets a chance to shine as only Cato can. Not the suicide bit, but the intense dedication to duty and Republican values. Organizing a march of 10,000 men across the African desert is not something to be taken lightly, and as Cato never takes anything lightly he’s the perfect man for the job. It helps that he’s paired up with Sextus Pompeius, who should have a much bigger part to play in Antony and Cleopatra , but is currently just a cheerful sprog following adoringly alongside the man who holds the fate of the Republic. Honestly, all Caesar’s opponents are a pretty ineffectual bunch. The “Liberators” are even less impressive than the Republicans. There’s very little noble about Brutus. He acts through no selfish motive, aye, but assassinating Caesar is more an intellectual exercise for him than any sort of grand quest. What does one do to tyrants? Kills them. Caesar is a tyrant. Therefore Caesar must die. QED. While it was nice to see him come into himself a bit more in Macedonia, he still remains that hopelessly unrealistic man. Cassius is even more odd. He has no reason to oppose Caesar beyond the desire to achieve success on his own abilities rather than being granted it through an autocrat. Yet while this motive was treated as noble when it was Caesar, it’s ignoble when coming from Cassius. Because he’s not good enough I suppose. I don’t entirely disagree of course, though I suspect she’s overstating Brutus’ moneylending ties and understating his determination, but it seems to tie in again to the worship of genius over mediocrity that irritated me in the last books. A better aspect is the way she shows the unsustainability of civil war and reminds us of the failings of the Republic. Both sides have severe cashflow problems since their armies are absurdly expensive and everyone’s bidding against everyone else. The triumvirate solve this the Sullan way: through proscriptions of everyone who opposes them and a few who just have too much money to live. The Republicans solve this the even more traditional way: by raping and pillaging their own provinces. It was sickening to see Cassius and Brutus going from town to town and slaughtering people for nothing but their wealth. A pleasant reminder that for all the talk of liberties within Rome itself, Republican governors are nothing more than bloodsucking leaches. This has been commented on before, but we’ve rarely seen it done so ruthlessly. It’s not a surprise that most people outside Rome rejoiced at the creation of the Empire since this meant better treatment for their cities under closely monitored imperially-appointed governors. And with both sides now so radicalized and cruel the days of Caesar start to look positively idyllic. The constant round of civil wars need to end. At any cost. This book represents the true end of the Republic. We saw a similar circumstances in Fortune’s Favorites , but Sulla at least left behind a functional (if shrunken) Senate and a coherent faction in charge. After Caesar where are people supposed to turn? The Liberators? Not really a faction, just assassins. Caesar’s men? Does that mean the potentially disloyal Antony, the unknown and inexperienced Octavian, Plancus, Lepidus, Dolabella, or the host of other minor generals pulling in every direction? The Senate? With what army? There’s nobody of sufficient clout to keep the whole thing running. And who’s going to keep the armies under control? With the ultraconservatives dead and all sides fighting for superiority using unconstitutional means, there’s nobody left to stand up for the Republic.
