Reviewed by: Mary Lou Codman-Wilson, PhD., Pastoral Psychology, Psychological Anthropology, Christian Education and Buddhism. Review: It has long been an intent of this reviewer to love God with all my mind as well as my heart, soul and strength. Having resonated with luminaries like Mark Noll in his The Scandal of the Evangelical Mind, I eagerly picked up James Sire’s classic Habits of the Mind. Intellectual Life as a Christian Calling. However, I must admit that Sire’s lengthy descriptions of John Henry Newman’s theology seemed dry and a bit pedantic. I discovered as I continued on in the book, though, that Sire had many very significant things to say about the intellectual life as a Christian calling. As an author, apologist and senior editor of InterVarsity Press for over 30 years he has applied his keen intellect to how good thinking can work into positive action for the sake of others. I give the book a 5 star rating, with the caveat that this book requires one’s total attention to each word and phrase and the exercise of one’s critical thinking capabilities throughout. It also requires the reader’s desire to grow and learn, developing the kind of mind Sire advocates. 5 stars Excerpts “I am most interested in encouraging Christians to think and read well. Christians, of all people, should reflect the mind of their Maker. Learning to read well is a step toward loving God with your mind. It is a leap toward thinking God’s thoughts after Him,” (p. 13). “An intellectual is one who loves ideas, is dedicated to clarifying them, developing them, criticizing them, turning them over and over, seeing their implications, stacking them atop one another, arranging them, sitting silent while new ideas pop up and old ones seem to rearrange themselves, playing with them, punning with their terminology, laughing at them, watching them clash, picking up the pieces, starting over,. . .changing them, bringing them into contact with their counterparts in other systems of thought, inviting them to dine and have a ball but also suiting them for service in workaday life.” (pp. 27-28). [Doing all to the glory of God] means “having a passion to be like Christ” (p. 90)…, a passion not only to know the truth but to do the truth: (p. 91) It means having one’s mind set on what the Spirit desires (Rom.8:5). It is “doing what one claims to know” (p.105). It is a “yearning for knowing more so that we can obey more” (p.113). “To pay attention first to God in Christ; this is the first task of the Christian thinker. Too many of us are thinking these days as the world thinks because we do not begin our thinking by thinking about God. Only by paying attention to God will we experience the ecstasy that leads to wisdom,” (p.135). “[Reading] ‘worldviewishly’ [means] reading books in terms of the worldview they primarily embody.. . .[This kind of reading] is a vicarious experiential participation in the world of the book and a standing over against the work and asking the critical questions that must be considered as a reader takes on the task of searching for the truth,” (p.166).
