3 Angsty Stars This was kind of a sad story. It tells of a couple in love that had their relationship torn apart by a vindictive third party. Paige met and fell in love with Nikolas after meeting him at an event she attended with her father. She thought that he felt the same and willingly gave her virginity to him. A few days later, she learned from her father that Nikolas was just playing a game with her, and using her to get back at him. Distraught, she flees and returns to London, where she tries to put her life back together. Four years later, Paige is in debt. After her father’s death, she learns that he abused his clients’ finances. Using their money to invest in failing schemes, and losing everything. She also learns that he took out numerous mortgages on their home, leaving her and her younger sister, Sophie, not only poor but homeless too. Forced to live with her aunt, Paige is looking for work when fate brings her Nickolas back into her life. He tricks her into meeting him for lunch and offers her a job in Greece, to become a companion to his 17-year-old ward, Ariadne. Paige is dismissive of his offer until she learns that her sister has started dabbling in drugs, and realizes that she needs to get Sophie out of London. Paige and Nikolas are both still attracted to each other but are fighting against. They both resent the other for things they believed the other did. These perceived wrongs are not true, and as the story unfolds, they learn the truth. Paige’s father, resentful of the fact the Nikolas refused to back him in a losing scheme, destroyed their relationship with lies. He made sure that Paige and Nikolas were kept apart so they would never learn the truth. It wasn’t until his death that Nikolas, wanting revenge, contacted Paige once again. During the entire book you felt Paige’s pain and could tell that she was hanging on by a thread. Her sister is a spoiled brat, only out to make herself happy. Her charge, is a confused, sometimes vindictive girl with a serious crush on her ward, and Nikolas goes out of his way to make her feel small. So it’s no surprise that she is barely keeping it together. Nikolas had his moments of being the biggest bully on the block. He ran hot and cold with Paige, leaving her confused and flustered. Fighting his need for her was harder for him than he thought it would be, so he took his frustration out on her. I am a fan on the older Harlequin Presents and this one was no exception. While not my favorite, it was still an interesting story and the characters had just the right amount of angst to make it a good story. As the story unraveled, and I learned of Paige’s father’s deception, I began to sympathize with the characters and how this deception destroyed a budding love, and took so much away from Paige. It also spoke volumes about her, that she was able to forgive her father for his weakness. This was a good read with a lot of the typical HP plot twists. But, that’s why read HP, it is comfortable, entertaining, the characters are all like old friends and they all get their HEA.
