‘Being Committed’ is about Hannah who turns down her boyfriend, Jason’s marriage proposal and is then given a second chance, provided that she agrees to his terms and conditions. Hannah wasn’t likeable to me. I didn’t like how she was indecisive and seemed to jump back and forth between two guys. Her problem with commitment stems from an incident in her childhood as well as her failed marriage at the age of twenty. At that time, she was married to Jack and cheated on him. Basically she doesn’t understand the concept of intimacy in terms of emotional openness. I would even go as far as to say she doesn’t understand love and relationships. She thinks distance is normal. I really couldn’t stand how she still wanted to be with Jason despite her inability to commit. Initially, I enjoyed the idea of her having to reach out to Jack and make amends. However, the fact that she’s still attracted to him after approximately ten many years (and vice versa) annoyed me. It’s possible but at the same time, somewhat unrealistic. Ten years is a very long time. By then, you would have changed in some ways, whether physically or in your perspective etc. Therefore, I couldn’t buy into their feelings for each other. It was ridiculous. It would make more sense if Jack had already moved on or found someone. Considering what she’d done to him before, I found it very strange that he still wanted to be with her especially after she cheated on Jason by sleeping with him and he thought it was okay because he ‘knew’ she’d break up with Jason. What? . Jason’s terms for Hannah seemed to mostly revolve around resolving past issues with Jack and that disappointed me. It could have been more than that and therapy. More importantly, I couldn’t understand how two guys could find Hannah so appealing. I found her inability to commit and stick to a decision terribly grating so that overshadowed any other of her personality traits. Plus, she liked both Jack and Jason and took forever to realize who she really wanted to be with. Jason and Jack weren’t particularly interesting especially the latter. Jason’s a nice guy who’s somewhat OCD and likes to keep to a schedule. Apart from his constant stomach problems, he was actually okay. As for Jack, all I seemed to get was that he’s good-looking and successful and not to be messed with. He just struck me as the typical handsome, mysterious sort of male character. Even when he was with Hannah, I felt like they didn’t have chemistry. It felt unnatural. Perhaps if the author had delved into how being cheated on affected Jack throughout the years, he would’ve been a better character. Hannah’s transformation into a nicer, more feminine girl was just unconvincing to me. All of a sudden she changes the way she dresses, puts more effort into her appearance and tries to be nice. Once her past is revealed, her behaviour towards her mother completely changes and that happened too fast to be believable. I would expect more doubts and confusion rather than instant change of mind and heart. Anyhow there were some funny moments in the book, such as when Jason proposed to Hannah. The humour helped to redeem the book. Overall, the book was average and could have been better if it was more realistic.
