OK book, I thought it was pretty boring and not very helpful to me. Maybe it is better for people just starting their career. My notes below: Basic idea: “Star” performers are made, not born. Somewhat random notes and key ideas Ordinary people can learn to do extraordinary work by applying the same key work strategies star performers use. Everyone has the potential to be a star producer in one field or another. The key to realizing these results in real-world situations is founded on the principle of ongoing productivity improvements. Improvements in performance based on the key work strategies enables workers to change how they perform their jobs, not who they are. Advantages of becoming a high performer in the current business environment are clear and compelling: * Star producers have a sustainable competitive advantage over workers who are less productive. * High performers are given more opportunities for advancement within the business organization. * High efficiency workers can spend their free time pursuing their own interests rather than trying to meet work obligations. * Star performers add prodigious value to their organizations, and can expect their compensation programs to accurately reflect that fact - or they will move to another career opportunity which does The nine key strategies star producers use to out perform average workers are: * Personal initiative - being prepared to blaze new trails in the organizations unspecified white spaces. * Networking - carefully nurturing an array of people who can provide expert knowledge in specific applications * Self-Management - managing career choices carefully to stay centered on the organization’s critical path to the creation of added value. * Perspective - getting and keeping in focus the bigger picture in all areas. * Followership - being prepared to put personal ago aside and work effectively to help managers and others succeed. * Leadership - being able to effectively influence others in the company towards achieving goals. * Teamwork - forming and participating in teams which are productive and effective. * Organizational savvy - using street smarts to navigate the corporate power zones. * Presentation skills - being able to effectively influence the right audience. If you are a messy-desk person, you are better served by learning the strategies of messy-desk stars than by trying to continue as an average worker with a clean desk. The point is that you need to remain true to who you are and retain your basic nature in the workplace. Star performers use their initiative more selectively to: * Seek out added responsibilities which are directly applicable to work projects they are involved in. * Find additional projects which will help coworkers. * Follow a project all the way through to completion, rather than assigning it to the ‘‘too hard’’ classification. * Take some personal risks in accepting new assignments that will require new skills to be bought to bear. They create an environment in which new initiatives can be undertaken firstly by learning how to perform their current duties as efficiently as possible. That leaves them with the time to pursue new initiatives. Star performers build networks of experts who are willing to share knowledge, particularly worthwhile knowledge about critical path tasks. In other words, a star performer’s network isn’t simply the office grapevine - it is a carefully nurtured group of people with varying skills and backgrounds who can provide specialist knowledge for specific situations. Stars build their networks before they need them Stars do their own homework first before going to an expert source. They give credit fully and generously Stars find ways to put more back into their networks than they take (super key take-away. Also, add value first and generously before you attempt to take) Expect to contribute to their network of associates far more often than they receive. Star performers, however, use self-management to increase their productivity by focusing on critical path activities that generate the greatest amount of added value to their companies. star performers take responsibility for their own productivity seriously. They don’t have to be managed, Following and Supporting Management: Being able to help your managers succeed Develop persuasive communication skills. Realize there may be times to act courageously, especially if there is a crisis of conscience with your manager. If you think an action is seriously wrong or criminal, you may have to be prepared to take your case to a higher level of the company or an outside authority. "The brave carve out their own fortune.’’ -- Cervantes, Don Quixote (And every man is the son of his works) Ensuring the team’s objective is clearly defined for every participant. Ideally, this mission statement will also include the criteria by which results will be evaluated, and ways to monitor progress on a regular basis. The very best star performers also manage to downplay their own roles, and credit every accomplishment to the team effort. Star producers tend to be more accomplishment motivated, and view workplace leadership responsibilities as an opportunity to bring a group together, to secure the necessary resources and to guide a project through to completion. Star producers tend to gain leadership roles through voluntary agreement of their coworkers. Knowledge Quotient People-Skills Quotient Momentum Quotient Star producers look at organizational savvy as the ability to manage competing workplace interests to promote an idea, to resolve a conflict and, most importantly, to achieve a goal. To develop organizational savvy: Get to know the lay of the land within the corporate organization - first, using formal organizational charts and then finding the unwritten but real power relationships workers always develop amongst themselves. Develop a feel for the organization’s personality - the day-to-day quirks that every organization follows openly or subconsciously. That enables star producers to work without confrontations or internal dissent. Actively take advantage of any opportunities to work temporarily in other parts of the organization. This is an excellent way to broaden perspective and form alliances throughout the organization. Build value-for-value relationships throughout the organization with people in key positions, or who work on key projects. These relationships have to be cultivated over a period of time, and should obey all the rules of organizational etiquette that are applicable. Star producers tend to be better than average workers at resolving internal conflicts within an organization. Resolving conflicts is almost always more productive than forcing an opinion. High performers even go so far as to work towards creating an environment in which internal conflicts are less likely to arise. Star performers tend to create a niche for themselves that distinguishes them from everyone else in the organization, and that they can use to market themselves internally. The final pieces of organizational savvy are integrity and credibility. Star producers realize the ability to articulate a viewpoint persuasively and with impact is an important way to become associated with high visibility projects, both internal and external. Therefore, they work hard at complimenting superior technical skills with cutting edge presentation skills Know your audience. Star producers focus on the core process - taking information, selecting key points and organizing them in a logical way so they can be shared with others. They then learn how to mold this process to the make-up of the group they are speaking to - whether it’s two people or hundreds of people, the process remains the same. Craft your message to that audience. Make your message relevant and interesting. at all possible, convey the message in rich, human terms rather than in purely technical terms. Star presenters frequently convey information with stories rather than lectures. Use props and other presentation equipment to enhance the message, not to replace an effective presentation. Always keep both feet firmly on the ground while you reach for the stars. Don’t stay locked into a situation where your personal star can’t shine brighter even if you produce ten-times more than you ever did before. Find somewhere else to work so you can move forwards instead of treading water. Realize increasing productivity takes time. Keep in mind all nine strategies are interrelated. Anytime you change companies, careers or departments, you have to start at the beginning again and earn star performer acknowledgment. Never confuse effort and results. Keep looking for supplementary ideas and resources.
