Finally, I have finished reading this 500 page long, historical romance. I had tried to read it once, but I admit that I abandoned it midway because I was apprehensive that I will ever finish reading the book. But the book haunted me enough to make me pick it up again, and I gave it another shot. So here is my review of the book: 1) As always, my recommendation is that ONLY if you are a history buff, pick it up. It is a detailed documentation of Mughal, Hyderabadi, and English era, and you don't want to be embroiled in a story that takes you deep recesses of unchartered territories of history, especially if you are not fond of it. 2) You need some patience and focus to read this one. Unlike Dalrymple's The Last Mughal, this book weaves in and out of the principal story. Because it is not just a romantic novel, it is a factual repository of historical events of the 1800s. You can't blame the author for not 'spicing it up'. Because there is no physical evidences that vocalize the turbulence of the times. However, Dalrymple has done enough justice to piece together scraps of information from various parts of the world to make it a veritable story. 3) The book reveals the other side of English connection with India. We Indians have been brought up with the staple diet of poker faced Britishers who spoke Hindi, as if they were abusing someone. I had always felt that something was amiss. It is nice to know that India impacted the British in unimaginable ways and the cross-pollination of cultures did happen. As Dalrymple puts it, "India has always had a strange way with her conquerors. In defeat, she beckons them in, then slowly reduces, assimilates, and transforms them." 4) There were some sections that tested my tenacity. I must say that the book left me enriched and educated; because I no longer feel that history is what you read in textbooks. History is what you perceive based on your own intelligence. I never take history at face value again. To me, this book opened doors to a forgotten era, and shattered existing myths. Once again, Dalrymple, you enchanted me!
