Shauna Singh Baldwin brings to life India before and during WWII, and most especially after the war has ended, during decolonization and the making of divided India. This moving story centers around two women, Satya and Roop, wives to the same man, beautiful characters who made me feel all glowy and proud to be a woman. The story has left me somewhat enlightened on the differences and similarities among Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims. And it sent me rushing through my highschool and university history textbooks, wondering "why wasn't I taught this? Why didn't I know that the forming of Pakistan tore people, of all religions, from their homes, tore babies from their mothers wombs and left them to die in the ditches of the Grand Trunk Road?" All that I could find on my bookshelf was one paragraph on one page that tells me: "The obstacle posed by conflict between India's Hindu and Muslim populations was resolved in 1947 by creating two sites predominantly Hindu India and Muslim Pakistan." Astonished, I now know, definitively, that history books lie. 1947? Resolved? like hell. This is when the British involvement ended, but when the effects of their involvement continued. When the British gave "independence" as if it was a gift they had the choice to give, when they drew a line blindly across a map and called it a rational division. I lived among Sikhs through my upbringing, I drove by their temple, but never imagined what was held within. We called them East Indian. We noticed they smelled different from us. Spicey. Daring. I loved the flowing layers of color that enveloped the ladies: saris, chumees, kameez, words I didn't know then. I had some vision of a country on a map, a mis-shapen inverted triangle, dusty and sweltering hot. I sat with my Sikh neighbours at school, laughed at our shared jokes, and thought I honoured them by ignoring our differences. I have been so wrong. I have never known their, my neighbours', deep history, and it is only now that I am seeing them for the first time with both eyes. This book has done for me what all good stories should do: it has forced me to look at myself, what I thought I knew, to excavate, to purge the mis-knowledge, to peer deeper in to the shadowy areas and acknowledge that which I have ignored, and then to temporarily rebuild, to ask for more. And I will do it again and again willingly.
