If one is a science buff, this is a reasonably easy to understand overview of the various ways that quantum mechanics experts explain the underlying reality of our universe. This is a fairly old book as far as books are concerned, but the science hasn't changed all that much. For an up to date view on the same subject, I suggest reading " Spooky Action at a Distance: The Phenomenon That Reimagines Space and Time—and What It Means for Black Holes, the Big Bang, and Theories of Everything " by George Musser. He adds a few ideas, but the basics remain in this book, "Quantum Reality". The book presents 8 ideas on what is really happening at the quantum level of reality. All of this is a build up to the author's opinion that Bell's Theorem holds the key to deciding which quantum reality idea is NOT correct. Bell started out trying to support Einstein's idea all attributes at the sub-atomic level are local (that is, somewhere close to where we would expect to find such attributes) even if they are hidden from us. They are there. Bell proved that this is incorrect. Some attributes of sub-atomic particles (or fields) are non-local. That means those attributes could be anywhere in the universe and are connected to the particle/field in question at instantaneous speed (that is, faster than light). Given the experimental data, Bell's Theorem is confirmed unless one believes that reality itself does not exist. I hope I represented those ideas correctly. The author repeats these ideas at least twice, first in summary and then in detail, without math, but with a few corny illustrations. Any problems with this book? Remember that this is a book for a popular audience with some interest in science. Although the author went into detail later in the book, it seemed more like repetition to me. I understood him the first time, and I didn't want more detail. On this other hand, some people do want more detail, so rest assured that he provides it. I'd read this book again, but there are other books with more recent ideas that I recommend: " Spooky Action at a Distance: The Phenomenon That Reimagines Space and Time " by George Musser. " Reality Is Not What It Seems: The Journey to Quantum Gravity " by Carlo Rovelli.
