In 1967 and 1968, as the presidential campaign that would eventually pit Dick Nixon and Hubert Humphrey against one another was revving up, newspaper columnist Joe McGinniss embedded himself within the Nixon campaign to see how the candidate was relying on television to reach the electorate. Television was still fairly novel at the time – particularly as it related to presidential politics. In spite of the efforts of the Brinkleys and Cronkites and Murrows, it was still seen a largely unserious medium and beneath the level of presidential dignity. Things have changed a bit over the past 50 years. Television contributed to Nixon's defeat in the 1960 campaign – his performance in the first televised presidential debate was fine on substance, but poor on visuals. In 1968, he reluctantly leaned into the medium once more, but this time he put himself in the hands of experts in the field. Waiting there to receive him was one young TV expert – Roger Ailes – who did more to guide his media strategy than any one else during that campaign – and in so doing, he created the modern playbook for presidential media relations. As you would expect for a 49-year-old book on presidential politics, McGinniss's book is both startlingly prescient and shockingly dated. Prescient: "Television seems particularly useful to the political who can be charming but lacks ideas. Print is for ideas ... on television it matters less that he does not have ideas. His personality is what the viewers want to share. He need be neither statesman nor crusader; he must only show up on time ... the TV candidate, then, is measured not against his predecessors – not against a standard of performance established by two centuries of democracy – but against Mike Douglas ... style becomes substance, the medium is the massage and the masseur gets the votes." Also prescient: "'This is the beginning of a whole new concept,' Ailes said. 'This is it. This is the way they'll be elected forevermore. The next guys up will have to be performers.'" Dated: Roger Ailes, filling out a TV panel for a Nixon TV special: "On this one, we definitely need a Negro ... the press will make a big deal out of why no Negro.' 'I know one in Philadelphia,' the local man, whose name was Dan Buser, said. 'He's a dynamic type, the head of a self-help organization, that kind of thing. And he's black.' 'What do you mean, he's black?' 'I mean he's dark. It will be obvious on television that he's not white.' 'You mean we won't have to put a sign around him that says, 'this is our Negro'?" The highlight of the book for me is the description of an interview that Nixon's team filmed with running mate Spiro Agnew. In the pantheon of poor vice presidents, Agnew ranks in the trifecta of the worst – Aaron Burr and Dick Cheney being the bookends. In the book, three of Nixon's TV braintrust gather to review the Agnew film. They are underwhelmed. "It had been shot in color, with sailboats in the blue bay as a backdrop. Agnew was squinting in the sun. 'All life,' he said, 'is essentially the contributions that come from compromise.' His voice was sleepy, his face without expression. The questions fit right in. 'It must really have been a thrill to have been picked for Vice President. Were you happy?' 'The ability to be happy is directly proportional to the ability to suffer, and as you grow older you feel everything less.' He stopped. There was silence on the film. The the voice of the interviewer: 'I see.' 'Jesus Christ!' someone said out loud in the dark little theater." I have a metal trash can with Agnew's face on it. It's a prized possession.
