this is my first time reading this book! stacey's parents announce that they are getting a divorce. stacey's dad decides to move on up to the east side while stacey's mother decides to return to stoneybrook. though they will have joint custody of stacey, they ask stacey to choose which parent she would like to live with primarily. unsurprisingly (based on the spoiler title) she chooses stoneybrook and moves into the house behind the pikes where the weird french people that the pikes thought were spies in Good-bye Stacey, Good-bye used to live. highlights: -stacey makes a star trek reference (saying that she wishes she could beam herself to school). I love imagining that stacey is a trekkie! -dawn is almost tolerable in this book with her divorce advice. -there's a chapter where stacey concocts a lot of parent trap-style schemes to get her parents back together. it's cute and naive. -stacey's dad calls his new apartment his "new pad" -- seriously, is he kirk van houten ? does he have a racecar bed ? lowlights/nitpicks: -stacey's quote about race: "when I'm with the walkers I don't think of them as black , just as people ...I have never understood the big deal about black or white, Jewish or Christian, Irish or Polish or Chinese or Mexican or Italian or who knows what." stacey, a white gentile who is presumably of scottish or irish descent based on the last name mcgill, IS ABOVE RACE. she is so enlightened that SHE DOESN'T SEE RACE. oh my goddddddd. -nobody in the bsc would call it a hoagie. they would prob either call it a grinder, a hero, or just a sub. (stacey narrates the word hoagie, then claudia says it out loud) -call it something like "changes for stacey" (or something similar that doesn't sound like an american girl book) and make the picture be her looking sad while her parents fight. as it is, this book title is a huge spoiler, and the cover is both a spoiler AND dumb. see the bottom of this review for a picture of this book and Good-bye Stacey, Good-bye together. claudia outfit: - "Her hair was flowing down her back, pulled away from her face by a headband with a huge pink rose attached to it. She was wearing a long, oversized black-and-white sweater, skin-tight black leggings, pink-and-black socks, and black ballet slippers. Her jewelry was new, and I could tell she'd made it herself...Her necklace was a string of glazed beads that she'd probably made in her pottery class. And from her ears dangled an alarming number of plastic charms attached to gold hoops." other outfits: -laine: "Like, right now, she was wearing this amazing black pants suit. It was made from stretchy cotton. The bottoms of the legs were cuffed, and the top was short-cropped. She was wearing a leopard-skin leotard under the top...From her ears dangled teardrop-shaped blue and green stones, and on one wrist were about twenty silver bangle bracelets. -stacey: "I put on one of my better outfits--short red pants with purple suspenders over a bright yellow and black sweatshirt. On my feet I put my purple push-down socks and a pair of red hightop sneakers. I added jewelry--a big necklace with wooden bananas and oranges strung on it, and dangly earrings shaped like sunglasses...Then I rolled up a red scarf and tied it in my hair like a headband." jackie disasters: -rode his bike into the garage wall -skinned his knees -broke a flowerpot -dropped a pizza on the floor -bit into his hot dog and the hot dog squirted across the kitchen -fell over a packing carton and cut his lip snacks in claudia's room: -oreos in her closet -lifesavers (n.s.) -fruit-and-cream twinkies (n.s.) -- discontinued 80s twinkie flavors! -taco chips (n.s.) --PREVIOUS REVIEW-- are you kidding me with these freakin' identical book covers?
