A Gift from Earth is the second full-length novel to be set within Larry Niven's "Known Space" universe. I recently resolved to work through all of the Known Space novels and, having decided to proceed chronologically, it's only my second encounter with Niven's writing. I'd now say that I'm fairly likely to get through most of the series. Not only is A Gift from Earth a major improvement over its predecessor, World of Ptaavs , but its more bizarre setting plays directly to my interests within the science fiction genre. An engaging mix of hard science fiction and human drama that's also a far breezier read than most hard sci fi of its era. A Gift from Earth might not be a classic, and its probably a less-than-ideal entry point to Niven's work (most readers seem to prefer Ringworld , but I'd still strongly recommended it to fans of Asimov, Heinlein, and the like. Whereas World of Ptaavs was set entirely within the Solar System, A Gift from Earth takes place on the distant human colony known as Lookitthat. It's a fairly unique setting where the only habitable patch on the planet has been transformed into one large settlement. Even more distinctive is the fact that human society on Lookitthat has been divided into a strict caste system, with an aristocratic "Crew" asserting near-totalitarian control over the more numerous "Colonists". The Colonists are deprived of most technology, and if they're non-complaint they're arrested and unceremoniously vivisected for use as organ donors. A brutally efficient system of oppression that's believable enough to be truly frightening. As for the underlying plot, A Gift from Earth revolves around an introverted Colonist named Matthew Keller who inadvertently becomes involved with a group of Colonist rebels known as the Sons of Earth. Personally, I found the world of Lookitthat to be extremely interesting. Niven has an obvious talent for incorporating technical, hard science fiction elements in a way that doesn't distract from the plot, and I'd actually say that you don't need to be a devoted science fiction fan to enjoy A Gift from Earth . The primary strength of the novel still lies in its underlying plot, which strikes a perfect balance between action, suspense, and speculative discussions. Niven's characterizations are also vastly improved. Matthew Keller is a likeable everyman protagonist, whereas security director Jesus Pietro Castro (the book's other primary POV character) is an understandable albeit less-than-sympathetic antagonist. My only primary criticism of the plot involves the treatment of Matthew's "supernatural" abilities, which are never adequately explained and more-or-less function as a recurring deus ex machina. But what about the prose? If you've read my review for A World of Ptaavs , you'll know that my primary criticisms of that novel were the sudden POV shifts and the confusing scene transitions. Well, Niven's POV-jumping style is back, but the scene transitions are much smoother and I was rarely confused about whose perspective I was currently inhabiting. I suppose it helps that the most of the book is split between Keller and Castro, and that all of the POV characters are vastly different in station/temperament. It might seem like a small thing, but Niven's decision to divide the novel into a series of actual chapters (with chapter titles!) made the book much easier for more to read. Overall, A Gift from Earth directly addresses all of my major critiques of its predecessor. The underlying plot is also pretty darn good, even if it isn't quite momentous enough for the book to obtain classic status. More than enjoyable enough to comfortably earn a 4-star rating.
