One thing I didn't learn in Kindergarten is that you can't tell a book by its cover. Actually I never learned anything in Kindergarten, because I never attended one. Back in the dark ages when I was 5, it was the rare child in my neck of the woods who did. Therefore, when this book came out and caused a minor stir in the late 80s, I actually snatched it up. I used to read self-improvement books, and was foolishly taking the title at its word and looking for some little life lessons illustrated by episodes lived in an environment that I never entered. I'm not one to reject life tips, no matter how humble, no matter how schmaltzy. My parents' bookcase contained a thin Readers Digest volume entitled "Getting the Most in Life," and I confess without embarrassment that I have reread it a half dozen times over the decades for life lessons and life tips. I always come away inspired. Not so much with "All I Really Need to Know, Etc." First of all, I was put off because this Kindergarten wisdom business was encapsulated in a set of fourteen rules, encapsulated in less than a page, on the back cover, including "flush" and "Warm cookies and milk are good for you." Clever, apt, cute. But not what I was looking for. My bad. Too great expectations. Putting that aside, taking into account that the subtitle of the book was "Uncommon Thoughts on Common Thinggs," I read Fulghum's little book from cover to cover almost 25 years ago. This was not hard because the volume of 196 pages consisted of about forty totally blank pages plus many others with extraordinarily generous margins to expand the thin contents of the covers to respectable book size. I didn't hate the book then but I didn't much like it, I certainly didn't love it. I didn't find most the thoughts all that uncommon, just pleasant and self-consciously folksy. Passably written for the most part, but sometimes cringe-worthy, often over-cutesy. The anecdotes didn't make me chuckle and they didn't make me cry (something which always happens when I read something artfully crafted). I can't say that I found in them any profound thoughts or any life-changing guidance. Reading the book was sort of like listening to Andy Griffith, maybe when he was playing Sheriff Taylor, maybe when he was Matlack, but maybe when he was cynical Lonesome Roads. But I think Andy's thoughts were usually more uncommon. I reread AIRNTKILIC in the last month, to give Fulghum the benefit of the doubt. I didn't change my mind. It's a semi-good read if you just want to pass some time, smile a little and go away no better than you were.
