This hasn't aged well, I think. The romance has some problematic moments. But there are a few redeeming features. You can almost hear the stiff swish of shoulder-pads in the description of the ice-blue suit. Everyone types on typewriters (and, ok, I know some writers like to be retro, but you'd get fired if you did your high-pressure, deadlines/demands job on a typewriter). But the really dated thing is the general attitude in the first part of the book that a successful career-driven woman is a ball of nerves that needs a man to complete her life. And apparently all the man can see is her fragility under the mask of poise. I lost count of the number of times "fragile" came up. Ugh. And the author didn't do much to explore either why she might be fragile or why this man is into that kind of thing. And when the prospective couple gets near one another, the woman's fear and indications of refusal are screaming red flags of non-consent. There's some very murky waters for a few chapters until he finally decides to back off until she comes to him. Oh, and after hanging out for just two weeks (I think they'd only been sleeping together for 4 days), the man basically tells the woman to quit her career and come live at his house if she wants a relationship. And then doesn't call her. All the compromise on the woman's side. There is a bit of justification on the "man can't move" front since he has a daughter and wouldn't want to upend his kid's life.... but I feel like a modern woman would be less interested in being told what to do and getting zero flexibility on that. On the positive side, I really enjoyed all the exploration of why and how writers write, the different kinds of writers, and the tension of aspirations vs. reality of getting published, genre fiction writing not getting enough cred, what it means to be a story teller. There's even some great sketches of wannabe writers at a conference that just charmed my socks off. The prose was quite lyrical at times, and I feel like the author really had fun writing this ode to the soul of a novelist.
