Why did I read two of these? Why are there so many good reviews? Surely the Antichrist is to blame on both counts. I hate to leave reviews this brief and snarky, so I had to come back and elaborate. 20 years ago, when these books first came out, I was working in an office in Lexington, Ky, with a large number of evangelical type folks. They were nice guys, but given to starting arguments about evolution (it's all made up, have you heard?), singing Gospel songs at top volume in the office, and one of them once told another one that a recently deceased family member would "burn in Hell" if she hadn't been saved. Honestly, that last bit even shocked the other evangelical guy. Anyway, they were all reading these books and digging on them hard. I guess they thought, "Hey, let's recommend them to that Heathen girl." (<--that's me, your humble narrator.) The first book was no great shakes and nothing was going to onboard me with the End Times philosophy, but it did have a certain compelling flow. I did have to get through to the end to see what happened, even as I'm still embarrassed to admit it. They loaned me the second one then, this book. At this point, I noticed a disquieting sort of joy at this upcoming tribulation business emanating from the text. Maybe I was imagining it, but it sure seems like Tim LaHaye (the half of the writing duo that provided all the Rapture intel) was positively gleeful over the shitstorm in store for all those non-believers. I did finish the book before I returned it. I don't know where exactly I'm going with this. I guess that the series is supposedly a conversion tool, but why would you want to woo people to your beliefs just by terrorizing them? Are they really going to be sincere practitioners of the faith, or just terrified that the Anti-Christ is hiding under their beds with a bunch of Ozzy Osbourne albums? (and if he is, does he have a spare copy of Bark at the Moon , because my version is really scratched up.) Also, there's the small matter that the Rapture is hardly universally accepted amongst theological scholars. In fact, almost no scholars-real ones-believe in it. I remain an Atheist, so mission not achieved. I doubt in reality many minds were swayed by these books though. The series was not only a tool, it was a serious cash cow. It spawned 16 books in this series alone. There is also a "Children's" series which sounds hideous. And there's a video game series where the players can either pray at or shoot non-believers. See? I was right. This whole phenomenon is offensive as shit.
