I always approach late 70's/early 80's fiction (especially if it comes with stark covers with big words and little-to-no ornamentation) with trepidation. Somewhere in the back of my mind I am always imagining these to have been written by some slightly-tubbied, largely-moneyed, grossly-mustachioed, tinted-glasses-wearing-cigar-smoking-Playboy-reading-middle-aged white dude. They never are. With little to go on besides a tacky cover and an excited “ romantic thriller” designation, I admit it was my amusement at the one-word author appellation (Travanian!) that pushed me past my caution. I was sincerely expecting douchebaggery. Once again, I'm happy to say that my (patronizing) preconceptions were wrong. The SoK ended up being one of those stories that flirts with a handful of genres without ever committing to one exclusively. It starts slow and feels like a fictional memoir, a “last steps toward adulthood” type of tale. Our main dude Jean-Marc is recounting his first summer as a full fledged Doctor, apprenticing in a small town to a colorfully quirky mentor, still flush with his own innocence, arrogance and dreams. As Jean-Marc is a writer in his spare time, in love with the idea of art and embracing his fascination with the workings of the inner mind, we assume that this is going to slide into some dramatic reflection of the upcoming war (wwII) and how it contrasted with this last idyllic and innocent summer. But then our rock-star Trevanian introduces Katya, and it becomes an intriguing romance. Her innocence and her family's reclusiveness add an element of curious mystery that starts fresh but darkens as the summer deepens. And Jean-Marc's innocence is suddenly ruined before we expected, as Mystery quickly becomes Thriller and then Tragedy. This all happens smoothly rather than ditheringly and the progression feels remarkably natural. There is a notably considerate treatment of mental health issues and the effects of trauma that is worth mentioning. The Summer of Katya was a quietly impacting and engrossing read. A nice surprise.
