I first read this book nearly 30 years ago...probably late 1985 or early 1986. The reason I remember that so clearly is I was expecting our first son...and fell in love with the name of the lead male character so we ended up naming our son Nicholas. At that time I was a young, busy working mom of 2 and military wife so the fact I even managed to find the time to read was unusual. But this book resonated with me so much that even though I couldn't necessarily remember all of the details (eventually even the title and author's name faded away) I would think of it from time to time over these many years. Now the kids are grown and while life is full and busy I love being able to indulge in my passion for reading. Coincidentally I was just trying to remember the name/author of this book about a week ago because a current book I was reading (Who Do You Love by Jennifer Weiner) reminded me of it. Even more randomly, after finishing that book I started another Jennifer Weiner book and she happened to mention Susan Isaacs as a favorite author - and it instantly struck me that it was the same author who'd written that long ago book. I immediately went out and found it (yay for eBooks!) and in less than a day I had completely re-read Almost Paradise. It is every bit as powerful as I remembered it - I can't believe how well it has stood the test of time. Jane and Nicholas are great characters - flawed and human, but funny, loving, interesting and achingly real. The depth of the history that Ms. Isaacs shares in setting up their story provides layers and layers of emotion and context so that by the time you are reading about Nick and Jane you feel as though you've known them both for years. Their life together is filled with joys and sorrows, challenges and achievements. There are some absolutely hilarious moments in the book as well as some really tough ones. Having just re-read this book there is a scene between them that I have not been able to shake for days. It's so heart wrenching and brutal but beautifully written that I felt not just like I was there in the room with them, but living their pain and rage. And having read it again, I suspect this as well as the conclusion of the book are the reasons why this book has always stayed in the back of my mind. Heartbreaking but at the same time a fascinating saga about the power of love and the consequences of our choices. It's a poignant, emotionally draining read but given the fact it has popped up in my thoughts off and on for 30 years I think it speaks to the power of the story and the beauty of the writing. This one is a definite 5 very moving stars.
