The Mask is an overwritten supernatural story involving two married doctors, Paul and Carol Tracy, who are trying to adopt a child. One day, Carol hits a teenage girl with her car at slow speed, and afterward the girl has amnesia and is unable to remember even who she is. But did the accident cause the amnesia, or was it already there? What is the story behind this mysterious girl? And what is causing the mysterious events happening around town? Strange, violent lightning storms, pet cats acting strangely, mysterious loud hammering sounds in various character's homes, bizarre nightmares with common scenes that multiple characters seem to be having. The answers to these questions and more are revealed painfully slowly to the reader in a novel that is about 90% build-up and seemingly pointless filler events added to the narrative to pad the word count, and 10% "very light" suspense at the very end of the book. I'm not exaggerating when I say this book only started to get interesting about 20 pages before the end, and it's 305 pages long. And after all that, the ending was very anticlimactic, to the point where one could say it has no real ending. The reveal of who the girl with amnesia is was something I predicted very early on in the book, so that wasn't really a plot twist at all when Koontz finally dropped it. He actually indirectly tells the reader throughout the book who she is, so maybe he just thinks his readers are stupid or something? But he dropped it like it was this big deal that was supposed to make my jaw drop. It was awkward. In addition, some supernatural elements, like the poltergeists that permeated the entire book, weren't really explained by the end; it seems like Koontz just threw them in to make the story more supernatural. I didn't understand why they were there by the end of the book, or whose ghosts they were supposed to be. Overall, this was a really disappointing, painfully boring read that has no payoff whatsoever at the end. Wikipedia says this is a thriller novel, but it wasn't thrilling in the slightest. It was just really clunky and boring. Definitely don't recommend this one. On to the next one. The Koontz-a-thon continues with House of Thunder ... CAWPILE rating: Characters: 6.0 Atmosphere / Setting: 2.0 Writing Style: 4.0 Plot: 2.5 Intrigue: 5.5 Logic / Relationships: 3.0 Enjoyment: 3.5 = 26.5 total ÷ 7 categories = 3.78 out of 10 = 2 stars
