On the way home she wondered why he hadn't kissed her again, now with a sense of regret, now with the feeling that in not kissing her again he had been really sweet and considerate. And this was the feeling she ended up with. I felt the homesick servant girl lucky to wake up on this side of the daydreaming bed. I think that's what tugged at my wistful side the most about Knulp. How the people Knulp meets in his new leaves catch themselves in the misgivings and the envy and looking at yourself outside of yourself. That nose to the hunger glass in envy of someone who is looking beautiful walking away. The old friend he knew him when he was free, smiles pulling down all the girl heartsleeves, music like the best song you only ever once. I did that all of the time when I was young and couldn't buy my own music. I'd hear the best song I've ever heard and I'd try my little heart out trying to do the whole thing in my head. Knulp's friends will do this. Dream music longing. The old friends he's always meeting again. He's looking at them now, and they are looking at him then and now. Maybe some uncertain steps alone beyond that. So the father who loves his kids and they have the inner grace that's so lucky to envy Knulp without taking anything away. (That the father says he especially loves the oldest made me want to follow his other children in starving windows fashion. I'd want to love them to make up for it.) This is what I loved: Knulp tells his friend about the unanswering whistle he can give to his orphan. It feels like grace they have, the something inside to sidestep a worse fate, to miss too hard what they cannot have. So when he is forever meeting again friends, friends who will not know him at first. When he's no longer young and falling on their side. It isn't worth it to Knulp in Early Spring. The favored glances from knowing eyelids of the tanner's wife. Something was meant in her looks, her special liver treats. It's someone's stretched out days in their house. Already he's giving the sad servant girl a reason to smile at the end of the day. He's going to be on his way. It already meant a lot to me that the tanner was so happy to hear him again. What it must have been like when they had run around together. It meant a lot to me to see the youth on the tanner's wife, once upon a time a maid in an inn. Maybe they would look for Knulp out of the window instead of the end of a long winter. If they were lucky enough inside to think kindly of him.... That meant a lot to me, that kind of warmth. If I were there I'd surely be the bump on the log of the second part "My recollections of Knulp". I would hope not to be my dripping wet blanket self and not go "Oh please!" that he knew whatever the right thing to say to everyone be the breath of air. I think Knulp would understand, though. His friend of "recollections" recognizes in him on waking what will be a good day for Knulp. Maybe a great dream and a mind unstalked by some ominous cloud (the cartoon kind for one poor sad sack) is responsible. Maybe the conditions weren't right and it's time to move on. This happens to Knulp a lot and I felt this too. You couldn't hold onto your halo that day. Maybe you threw away your charms, security blanket and the stuffed toy with the really understanding eyes to spite yourself. My copy split between parts one and two as if they were separate books. The three parts felt to me this understanding of what could have gone right (and wrong, but not wrong, if you think about it). So Knulp gets old, and everyone does, and yeah I had been thinking the whole time without thinking I was thinking it about what if Knulp missed something. You know how his friends were happy to see him again, as if they knew him and he wasn't the stranger tramp he appeared to be? What if there was a time he didn't know how to get to the lucky part? When he was young he didn't know how to get over not needing anybody and nobody needing him? When he's told what he had, when he knows that everyone does die, and if you weren't happy that way what if you could have been happier another way? It meant a lot to me the way he gave to people without knowing he was giving them anything. The blown seeds wherever they will go. I know all of that too and it's that lonely knowing that doesn't feel like you know anything unless something happens you feel like you lived it. I loved how Hesse did that in Knulp. How happy his friends were. Knulp, could it be you? Remember when we...? During my awful period of not being able to read anything or anything at all.... Well, when I could read again I realized there was nothing I missed more than that dreamy between feeling. You could live off it. Besides what Knulp talks about his life out loud and his friend says he knew what it was to miss.... I knew how the friend felt when Knulp was talking about the things he had thought privately to himself. The recognition felt like that, without having to be said. He wanted him to go on more than anything, maybe you could reach that alive almost then, and Knulp would already be restlessly moving away. There's this flip side of what they always wanted/what's not good enough. The spirit's greener other side. The place that can't settle anywhere. There was something about this book that had that in the in between because of how he pulled their luck in the three parts. When it is enough to bridge and then you don't know where you even dropped the thread. (I loved that Knulp was begrudging in his center of the world childish longing that his doctor friend be the adoring twelve year old boy again so that he could be where he could remember he was happy. But remember when....? Yeah, those were great times. Sighs.) "To me there's nothing more beautiful than fireworks in the night. There are blue and green fireballs, they rise up in the darkness, and at the height of their beauty they double back and they're gone. When you watch them, you're happy but at the same time afraid, because in a moment it will all be over. The happiness and the fear go together, and it's much more beautiful than if it lasted longer. Don't you feel the same way?"
