I enjoyed this book. A lot went on and I had many assumptions while reading. The book takes place in the late 1800’s-early 1900’s. Davina lives in Scotland and is from a highly respected family in Edinburgh. Her mother has died, so she is very close to her governess, Lilias. But when a pearl necklace is gone missing and found in Lilias’ room, she is dismissed and a new governess is brought in. Zillah Grey is not anything like a governess, and soon Davina realizes she is actually her father’s mistress. They soon get married. Davina meets Jamie on her walking excursions to get away and explore the city. Jamie is a university student studying to be a lawyer. Zillah invites him to dinner but Davina’s father is not impressed since Jamie does not come from a wealthy family. Instead, he wants Davina to get to know a colleague of his, a wealthy widower. When Davina tells her father she’s engaged to Jamie he threatens to disinherit her. In the meantime, the coach driver, Hamish, complains to the housekeeper about having to kill rats he’s finding in the stables. Ellen, a parlourmaid, asks Davina if she could buy some arsenic for her because rats have been seen closer to the house. Davina agrees and gets her the arsenic. This is a set up. Davina’s father has been ill on and off for a while. Soon after Davina buys the arsenic, her father dies. The household is questioned and Davina is arrested. Zillah gets a lawyer for Davina, Ninian Grainger. He feels the most important thing for them to do is find Ellen who asked Davina to buy the arsenic. But she left, claiming she had to go back to her home to see her sick mother. She is never found. The murder trial takes place and Davina is found Not Proven, since the jury couldn’t find evidence that she killed or didn’t kill her father. She is left with the stigma of her innocence not being able to be proven. Jamie has his doubts and that relationship is over. Davina decides to go away to visit Lilias in her home and changes her name to Diana Grey. Diana stays with Lilias and is happy for a time until her old maid from home, Kitty, accidentally calls her by her right name in front of Roger Lestrange, a visitor from South Africa who works in the diamond industry. Ninian, who has been keeping in touch with Davina, suggests she go abroad to get a start on a new life. Lilias would love to go abroad too. They make arrangements with the company suggested by Ninian. In deciding where to go, Roger suggests going to South Africa with him and his new wife, Myra. There’s a school in Kimberley, where he lives, that needs a teacher. Perhaps Lilias and Diana could help get it running again. It’s too good of an opportunity to pass up and the girls make the trip. There’s something about Roger though...he paid for the girls to have better accommodations on the ship, and Davina feels Myra is never comfortable around him. Davina and Lilias get the school started successfully. Lilias and John Dale, a member of the council who looks after Kimberley, become very close friends. Lilias gets close with Myra, and visits often. She gets to know Roger’s step-son, Paul. Davina thought Paul was Roger’s biological child, but his father died in a mine accident after finding a huge diamond called the Kimberley Treasure. His mother married Roger, but she died when she fell down a flight of steps, supposedly due to drinking too much. Ninian wants Davina to come home because of the war going on in South Africa. The native people are not happy with the British people who have come looking for diamonds. Soon a siege occurs and food is scarce. Roger leaves on a secret mission. Myra has been sick, and Diana promises to visit with her as much as possible. She also promises to make sure she takes the tonic prescribed for her since she’s been talking about seeing ghosts, homesick, and nervous. Lucky thing Davina accidentally knocked over the tonic because it just so happens Roger was actually putting poison in it! Soon things come to light...no wonder Roger always seemed creepy...he was trying to frame Davina just like she was back home. Roger has had wives in the past that have died. He wants their money. He tried to poison Myra, and in the meantime a housekeeper found a handkerchief belonging to Davina under Roger’s bed. Then the housekeeper showed Davina newspaper clippings she got from Roger showing that they knew who she was. Thank goodness the siege is over and Ninian comes to South Africa. He asks Davina to marry him. She accepts, but is afraid to go back home and face people again. But everything works out. They get married. Lilias and John get married. Myra stays in South Africa as well. Roger has been killed and she wants to take care of Paul. Back home, Zillah has been ill. When she is close to dying, she gives Davina a letter explaining what happened when her father died. Zillah had no intention of Davina getting arrested. But she admitted Hamish the coachman and her were having an affair and the prospect of killing Davina’s father for his money was a good idea at the time. The written confession frees Davina of questionable innocence and now she knows the truth. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
