The first mystery in the series (at least the first one that refers to itself as a mystery), this one finds Mary Anne and the entire BSC overacting to a meangirl prank. I borrowed this book from the library when I was about 10, and I loved it so much I didn't want to give it back. This book is probably the reason I became interested in witch culture, and why I studied to become a solitary practitioner. Things I remember from reading this as a kid: The spells the BSC reads about in the library. I desperately wanted to go to a library and look up spells to counteract bad luck. Unfortunately, the little library in the town I lived in at the time refused to carry any books that had even a hint of witchcraft about them. I suspect if they knew the plot of this book they wouldn't have carried it either. The girls sneaking into the graveyard to scare Cokie, Grace, and their friends. I wanted to scare a pack of meangirls at midnight on Halloween! Actually that sounds like fun, even now. I remember being really, really confused about the chain letter Mary Anne receives. I think in my mind, they were connected in some sinister way. I didn't know much about chain letters (having never received one) and I thought (based on Mallory and Jessi's reactions) that getting one was terrible, and doomed one to death or something. I couldn't understand why it was sort of forgotten about as the plot got more complicated. Even as an adult. . . Things I've considered since reading this as an adult: How did shy, mousy Mary Anne receive an anonymous chain letter? These days, with companies buying email lists and scammers phishing all over, it seems like something that would happen pretty easily. But in the days of snail mail did people who got chain letters just go through the phone book and randomly send a chain letter off to strangers? That seems creepy, almost like Mary Anne has a stalker. She never finds out who sent her the chain letter. As a kid I was just confused by the relation of the chain letter to Cokie's letter with the bad luck charm. As an adult I'm bothered that a thirteen year old girl is receiving creepy chain letters in her mailbox. This book has some interesting points about cliques in middle school. In the first chapter Mary Anne says that she feels bad because she knows that the BSC spends all their time together instead of with the friends they had last year. She mentions something about feelings being hurt, and people thinking they're stuck up because they always sit together, but she doesn't know what to do about it. "I guess the twins and Rick and Dorianne and everyone will have to be their own groups" she decides. As an adult I can see an easy solution to this: SIT WITH OTHER PEOPLE ONCE IN AWHILE, OR INVITE THEM TO SIT WITH YOU! So obvious. However, I completely understand that the dynamics of middle school doesn't allow for that type of thinking. If you're lucky you have a group of friends that you spend every free moment with, and you force yourselves to all think the same, and act the same. To deviate from your decided group is to invite the possibility that you will be removed from this group, leaving you with no group at all. "It's better to be in the plastics, hating life, than not in at all. . ." Later in the book, the pack mentality comes out when all the BSC members decide as a group that the bad luck charm is more than just an stupid prank. Mary Anne is almost ready to write the whole thing off, until all the other girls are like, "You better wear it if you don't want bad luck, you should do what the letter says, your luck will be worse if you don't." Teen girls banding together is a frightening thing. I found it very funny that it costs 15 cents to make a copy at Stoneybrook Library in 1988 (when this book was published). That is exactly how much is costs to make a copy at my library today. Also, Mallory says, "Librarians are always suspicious of kids in the adult section." Maybe some libraries are different than mine, but I don't really notice if kids come over to the adult side of the library. I think in this day and age, it is much more suspicious to have a lone adult hanging out in the children's section. As a kid I completely understood why Mary Anne wears the "bad luck charm" without question, but as an adult I couldn't believe it. Because some anonymous, creepy note, written in cut out letters tells her to wear it she does? This is why teens shouldn't be tried in court as adults -- they're nothing but stupid sheep. Logan not only agrees to sit through the musical Cats, the most boring, pointless musical ever, he also agrees to dress up like a cat with Mary Anne. This is stupid on levels I can't even get into. This is partially why I am constantly creeped out by Logan. Throughout the book he makes a fuss about having to sit with girls all the time, running off to sit with his guy friends whenever the girls get too girly. And then he agrees to dress in fur for a middle school dance, and there is no mention in the book of Mary Anne having to cajole him to do it. But he refuses to wear tights and a leotard, and then he won't go to a sewing store by himself. I can't figure this guy out. The girls hold a meeting to figure out how to sneak out of their houses, which is dorky, but is a believable thing for young teens to do. I wish more of this typical teen sneakiness would have come across in later books. Even though they eventually decide not to bother sneaking out, they are still lying to their parents about where they are going and what they are doing, and asking Charlie to lie for them. I'm surprised they didn't pester Charlie to try to buy them beer also.
