Bunker 13 is a deft combination of military action novel and mystery/thriller. The protagonist of the novel is MM, a former military man and undercover reporter who has been trying to break into a case involving Indian Special Forces units in volatile Kashmir. High ranking officers are purportedly seizing captured arms and drugs, selling them to the highest bidder. MM is an edgy sort of anti-hero with a penchant for drugs and kinky sex. His military skills, cynicism, and habit of mainlining during free-fall parachute jumps gains the admiration of Major Rodriguez, who MM is sure will lead him to the source of the illegal smuggling. His involvement grows deeper, both in the dangerous military underground, and drug-fueled escapades of his new-found accomplices, on the battlefield and in the bedroom. This turns into murder, political corruption, and international double-crossing that dwarfs anything he has seen in his career. On a top-secret Special Forces operation in Kashmir, a huge bunker containing arms and drugs is uncovered. The plot escalates to an unprecedented level of mayhem which involves guerrilla fighting, espionage, terrorists, Russian mobsters, and nuclear missiles. The reader is never quite sure whose side MM is on, or if he has his own twisted agenda. The action never stops, and the ending is shocking and completely unexpected. Bunker 13 is written in the second person, which may feel awkward to readers unfamiliar with it. The dialogue is stilted at times, and there are virtually no references to Indian culture that one might expect. But for me these are off-set by the excellent descriptions of the Indian military. Paratrooper training, Special Forces operations, weapons, tactics, and the Indian army command structure are written into the plot in great detail. There are many military action novels which deal with other military forces. Few deal with the Indian armed forces, the fourth largest in the world, so Bunker 13 is a welcome change. This is not a novel for the fainthearted, but for readers who like offbeat characters, military detail, action, plot twists, and surprising conclusions, I highly recommend Bunker 13.
