Series: Standalone Publication Date: August 19, 2019 Number of Pages: 340 What a phenomenal read! I was absolutely gobsmacked. This book focuses on the lead-up to World War II as well as events during the war. We have three couples – four if you count the one who lost her husband and remarried. The main couple is American stage actress Alyssa Lambert and French underground operative Philippe Michaude and their tale is a heartbreaking and intense one. The secondary focus is on Jessica Townsend and her husband Alan – and then after Alan is killed, she falls in love with Stephen Marek. The tertiary and less featured couple is Claire Stanton and her Polish love Casimir Andrzej Dubrowski – also known as Ky. Just as a note, this book was originally published in 1988, but the story is timeless and I believe there have been some edits and re-writes in this new release. This story is set in a period that is much later than I normally read, but I thoroughly enjoyed it anyway. As an American, I don’t often think of what our dragging our feet before entering WWII cost our friends in England and other European nations. This story definitely brings that home – perhaps that wasn’t the author’s intent, but it was certainly an outcome of the story. Alyssa Lambert has arrived in London for a visit with her best friend Jessica before another friend, Claires, wedding. It is her plan to visit with her friends in England and then head over to Paris to visit with her father who is a political advisor to President Roosevelt. Upon her first arrival, she is amazed that England doesn’t seem to be taking the German threat seriously. It seems to be business as usual even though there are many who are trying to convince the powers-that-be that Germany fully turning on England is just a matter of a short time. In Paris, Alyssa discovers a complacent French population as well. They pride themselves on having the worlds best military and don’t fear the Germans getting through their defensive lines. On Alyssa’s first night in Paris, she meets Philippe Michaud who is very rich and owns a factory that makes trucks, tanks and other equipment that can easily be used in war. Philippe is one of the few in Paris who can see what is coming. He’s made a commitment and plans to defend his country even when the Germans have invaded. What he didn’t count on was meeting and falling hopelessly in love with Alyssa. This story is filled with so very much intense heartache, intrigue, suffering, and great love. You’ll laugh. You’ll cry. You’ll cheer. You’ll hold your breath. You’ll jeer. Your emotions will run the gamut. I definitely recommend this read. I voluntarily read and reviewed an Advanced Reader Copy of this book. All thoughts and opinions are my own.
