"It is by the failures and misfits of a civilization that one can best judge its weakness" ~Unknown Was it civilization which led to colonization or was it the other way? Trying to find answer for this question would like trying to answer the ever puzzling question "Which came first: chicken or the egg? I am sure that there are apparently acceptable answers for the latter but not the former. Because civilization and colonization are confederates encroaching on the foreign lands, enslaving the natives, shattering the simple lives, corrupting the dreams, belittling the believes, obviating the originality and instigating the inequality. Inequality which gradually and unobtrusively grows, runs its roots deep into our paradise ruining our hope and harmony, giving rise to supremacy which makes what is worse even worse. This is one of the stories along similar lines. The grass is singing : .::Songs of the disrupted solitude::. "It is terrible to destroy a person's picture of himself in the interests of truth or some other abstraction." Mary, disillusioned by marriage and disconcerted by distasteful encounters, has little or no interest in marriage or any romantic affairs and she likes going out with all those men who treat her comradely . What her mother had to go through has been enough for her for not thinking of getting married, but the unfriendly reminders from the 'society' made her think, and later, even believe that her life is incomplete, when all her friends are married and seemingly happy with their lunch affairs, movie nights, and exotic holidays. But ‘She'd make someone a good wife. She's a good sort, Mary.' Reminders have grown into rude remarks and she has become the subject of 'their' gossips, when her marriage remains as an unaccomplished social mission. "If she had been left alone she would have gone on, in her own way, enjoying herself thoroughly, until people found one day that she had turned imperceptibly into one of those women who have become old without ever having been middle-aged: a little withered, a little acid, hard as nails, sentimentally kindhearted, and addicted to religion or small dogs" She halfheartedly looks for a different life and a suitable or any guy, just to see that what she has been missing or what others said that she has been missing. It is true that any thought of sex or anything which put her close with any man in any sort of uncomfortable situation scared her, as she is haunted by her past life. "In this age of scientific sex, nothing seems more ridiculous than sexual gaucherie." .::Songs of the oblivious rage.:. 'What is madness, but a refuge, retreating from the world?' She is rescued from the mouth of social animals, but only to be brought into a secluded farm by her new husband Turner who, with his 'natives' run ('down', most of the time) the farm. When Turner with his unrealistic goals and foolishly ambitious ventures keep letting the roof (which is never there, but figuratively) of the house collapse and the burden Mary felt in all the heat and turmoil building up in her as an unfathomable wrath. As rivers always flow from higher to lower elevations, her anger always finds 'natives' to be easy targets, for which 'apart-hate' they had no other options but mutely bear what befalls them. .::Songs of the locked loneliness::. 'For even daydreams need an element of hope to give satisfaction to the dreamer.' The uninvited daydreams of the life which, otherwise, she might have had, keep coming to her during her lonely hours, while daydreams of Turner keep shrinking him. Whenever there is any altercation, Turner always left the room 'inarticulate with irritation', leaving Mary to drive herself mad against the 'natives' (who works at her house as 'houseboys', and often, gets replaced) and keep herself tight and go bad. Mary has again become a gossip fodder to the people around. But, she continued to live silently as she is queen of sorrows and martyr of 'this' marriage, 'facing her future with tired stoicism and inner disintegration'. 'Loneliness, she thought, was craving for other people's company. But she did not know that loneliness can be an unnoticed cramping of the spirit for lack of companionship.' .::Songs of the awaited ending::. 'It is difficult to tell with women how they are.' When the new houseboy, Moses, who once felt the whip of sjambok by his 'madame' in a heated situation, and always acts as 'an object of abstraction and a machine without a soul' starts showing his kindness during her hard-times, Mary bleakly remembers his existence in this world as human-being, though of different color and culture. Unable to bear the burden of 'Color Bar', Mary drives out Moses from her estranged comfort and her collapsing house hold and continues to frightfully wait for his return knowing what he might bring to her. Doris Lessing's writing is so vivid when she explains the inexorable things: the brutal and the ugly things, and the broken and the fragile things. This is the first book of Doris I have read and I must say that there are some resemblances between Lessing and Woolf.
