Another masterful story from one of the greats (in my opinion) of classic science fiction, probably more properly classified today as 'speculative fiction'. In A Choice Of Gods, Simak starts the reader off with a future world scenario where,when Earths population was more than eight billion, suddenly one day, most of them were gone. Not dead, no wars or catastrophes, just most people vanished. Slowly, over time it became obvious that in addition to the reduced population a major change had occurred in that disease had virtually vanished and lifespans were increased - incredibly increased. Technology slowly degraded since there was not the know-how to keep it going, quite a few people of first nations background (this book was written long ago enough that they are called American Indians - don't be offended, it is from 1973 and I don't think the phrase 'first nations'even existed) went back to a lifestyle similar to that their ancestors had lived. But the remaining people lived a comfortable life in the large family home due to the fact that the robots had not vanished, and more kept flocking to their home to serve the remaining humans. The point of view shifts from the first person to keep a chronicle, starting 50 years after the disappearance to his grandson, keeping it still, sporadically,thousands of years later -lifespans increased to biblical proportions- when most of the family had developed the spontaneous ability to travel to the stars, so Earth is practically empty. But then, one star traveler returns, with worrying news about what lies in the center of the universe, where all the people might have gone, and what might happen of they return. I have a long seated addiction to the old, classic science fiction novels, outdated as they are ( only 8 billion in 2130?how cute...). The speculation side of it, what the future might hold, how things could happen, what responses would be, these were so fresh, new and exciting. Sci-fi today, which I still adore, is often exciting, frequently technically creative with top notch science and logistically well thought out. In other words the solid literary background and amazingly open minded "What if" attitude that the early sci-fi writers has evolved into something very good - but I still love the old anything goes style of the early adventurers in the genera. Antiquated (almost none of them for saw computers as they have come to be) misogynistic and racist as some of them are (let's not even start on that), but still exploring a world of literature and speculation that was brand new, boundless and exciting. Thoroughly loving Simak's writing in general as I do, I think this is one of the better ones, posing questions, as it does, about what social evolution really is, and how society would change under unusual circumstances.
