2.5⭐ This is a very odd book. Full review tomorrow. ------------------- James Tiptree Jr. (whose real name was Alice Sheldon) has for years been one of my favorite science fiction authors. Her work, mostly short stories, was edgy, often grim, unromantic and highly imaginative. And she almost always had something to say. This book, one of her two novel length works, is something else. First off, it's a full blown space opera, complete with interstellar wars; science fiction style royalty; a space patrol; mysterious aliens and a "Federation." I'm not sure if Tiptree is writing a parody of the genre or if she's saying "if this is what you want, here it is." I suspect there's some tongue in cheek because of her use of terms like "spacers" and having cabin boys and cabin girls on space ships. She just seems to be laying it on too thickly. The novel is set on a remote planet (on the "rim of space"-there seem to be more than a few nods to A. Bertram Chandler in the book) where a group of humans are gathering to watch the spectacular effects of a nova wave front. The nova is the remains of a star that was "murdered" by humans, in an act of war that wiped out an intelligent race. The planet is also the site of historic atrocities against the native, avian race, who were cruelly exploited in the production of an incredibly valuable drug/liquor. Secrets abound among the group and of course dark deeds are soon under way. One of the things I've admired about Tiptree was her effective and unaffected prose. In this book the dialogue is flowery and melodramatic. The main villain speaks in a mincing and contrived fashion that immediately brings to mind Dr. Evil, from the Austin Powers movies. You want to scream at the oblivious heroes "Of course he's up to no good! Listen to him talk!" One element some readers found off putting was the inclusion of the character of an interstellar pornographer with a heart of gold. And not just any pornographer but a child pornographer; his troupe of performers are all described as being well under the age of 18. I think what Tiptree is doing here is extrapolating the adult film industry of the '80s into the future, as already it was increasingly focused on the young and nubile. The character's home planet of "Gridworld" is clearly a caricature of Hollywood, where aspiring young people are consumed and destroyed at a fearsome rate and where it's perfectly legal to sign anyone over the age of five to a binding contract. When an iron jawed captain of the space patrol remarks it might be time to shut down Gridworld through a boycott, our producer/pornographer (who secretly longs to make documentaries) glibly says "It's been tried," and goes on to explain the rest of the universe simply demands the content. It seems like satire to me. Whatever Tiptree was trying to do her florid dialogue, and over the top melodrama got in the way, imo. My main problem with the book, I suppose, was my expectation of the author. I kept wondering where James Tiptree Jr. was. I dithered between 2 and 3 stars for a long time but I realized anyone else would have gotten 3 stars for the space opera weirdness. For Tiptree it was a two star book, but I gave her the benefit of being "anyone else." -30-
