"I have participated in two wars and know that war ends when it has rolled through cities and villages, everywhere sowing death and destruction...Mr. President, we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied. And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot, and what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our countries dispose. Consequently, if there is no intention to tighten that knot and thereby to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot. We are ready for this." "We no longer live in a world where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute maximum peril. Nuclear weapons are so destructive and ballistic missiles are so swift, that any substantially increased possibility of their use or any sudden change in their deployment may well be regarded as a definite threat to peace." The Crisis Itself * Castro did not want nukes and said that any deployment should be made publicly instead of secretly as if they had something to hide * In contrast to the idea that the Kennedy's were obsessed with Castro, they did not use this seemingly Heaven-sent opportunity to get him out * Historical influences * Deterrent or Defense taught JFK to be patient and to give the other side many chances to back down * Guns of August: restrict military to avoid stumbling into war * Stupidity, idiosyncrisies, misunderstandings, inferiority complex, grandeur complex, security, pride, face * Bay of Pigs: the military professionals may not know what they are talking about * Almost everyone who first saw the pictures were unable to discern much of anything * Crisis came after repeated assurances that USSR would not do exactly what they did. * Intel said it would not happen based on history and that it wasn't a rational act * In retrospect, there were some suggestive reports, but none that would have been good enough to act on * Meeting with USSR ambassador: "Astonished, with admiration for his boldness," listened as he lied to his face * Throughout, Ambassador seemed to be totally out of the loop, had no knowledge of missiles * Crammed into cars to avoid long line of limos * Airstrike vs Quarantine * Airstrike * +: removes missiles and sites, US responsible for security of world * -: CAN'T GUARANTEE 100% elimination, needs followup invasion, civilian casualties, moral argument of big attacking small and would wreck winning the argument * Quarantine * +: limited pressure (could be increased, advocated by McNamara later to his irony in Vietnam), dramatic * -: did not eliminate threat, didn't stop progression of threat, needed to confront USSR and not Cuba, invites blockade of Berlin * The NYT had the story but JFK called to stop it, and the NYT listened! * There was relaxation after taking the first step - we 're not dead! The feeling didn't last long * JFK supervised all - we made the same errors they did lining up our planes wingtip to wingtip Decision making * "[ExComm] were men of the highest intelligence, industrious, courageous and dedicated to their country's well being. It is no reflection on them that none was consistent in his opinion from the very beginning to the very end. That kind of open, unfettered mind was essential. Fro some, there ware only small changes, perhaps varieties of a single idea. For others, there were continuous changes of opinion each day,; some, because of the pressure of events, even appeared to lose their judgment and stability." * Statements of truisms as questionable validity * Proposing the easy way out like a trade may be ridiculed, but still courageous, not cowardly * Should you stop a tanker? * Yes: show will and intent * No: probably no contraband, give Khruschev time to thin * "...there was no obvious or simple solution. A dogmatism, a certainty of viewpoint, was simply not possible. For every position there were inherent weaknesses; and those opposed would point them out, often with devastating effects." * ExComm ability to discuss and formulate decisions with luxury of time and without being publicized was crucial * A wide range of opinions are needed at all levels. * Diversity of opinions with Devil's Advocate * Change of opinion based on what they think the person in power wants to hear * New players: SecState only vs SecState, Defense, CIA, AID, etc. each with their own information and opinions * Unfiltered information is best as it can be filtered through the layers * Diplomacy and alliances are important * Very important for Stevenson v Zorin to show the photos to the world * "...I discern a feeling of isolationism in Congress and through the country, a feeling that we are too involved with other nations, a resentment of the fact that we do not have greater support in Vietnam, an impression that our AID program is useless and our alliances are dangerous" * Strength of alliances led to unanimous front among North America (with legal support) and among allies in Western Europe and even West Africa (USSR planes could have landed to refuel there and carried nukes to Cuba). * Full support of France then contrasts with tension now * "We cannot be an island even if we wished; nor can we successfully separate ourselves from the rest of the world." On war/military * "Any belief when I went to Havana was that we had overemphasized the danger....this complacent view did not survive the conference. Going to war is not a rational process" * "You are in a pretty bad fix, Mr. President." "You are in it with me." * "It isn't the first step that concerns me, but both sides escalating to the fourth or fifth step - and we don't go to the sixth because there is no one around to do so." * Responses could easily be locked. If A, do B, in an unstoppable chain of individually logical steps that could lead to insane conclusions. Discover missiles, send planes for recon. They shoot down a plane, we bomb their aircraft sites. We bomb their missiles, they bomb our Turkish missiles, we follow NATO obligations and bomb their bases, they follow by attacking us or Berlin, we attack them. * Military reacted professionally, but most military leaders (except for Maxwell Taylor) did not seem to contemplate implications of their actions * They thought the USSR only understood force and were not surprised when nonforce initially failed. * They seemed unable to look beyond their narrow field. Good because they were willing to do the unthinkable, but this reemphasizes civilian control * Don't force the other person into a corner, by disgrace or humiliation, because they may choose the choice that results in an outcome that no one wants. * Up the pressure in ways that don't cause direct confrontation (e.g. stop non-Russian ship) * After crisis, JFK instructed that no victory should be claimed * Hostilities come when someone wants war, when national interests collide (lack of limited objectives), or a failure to understand the other's objectives On the experts and the weight and consequences of decision: * "The 10 or 12 people who had participated in all these discussions were bright and energetic people. We had perhaps amongst the most able in the country and if any one of half a dozen of them were president the world would have been very likely plunged into catastrophic war." * Change in views of Acheson: lucid, convincing, clear, brilliant, never want to be on the other side (from both Berlin advocacy to air strike)...."with some trepidation" * When it came time to face the blockade line, it was the worst. JFK had started the events but no longer had control over them. "The moment was now. not next week, tomorrow or even 8 hours (which all presented options), but NOW, and all anyone could do was wait." * The pressure of having to make decisions that could have global mortal consequences made strange results of seasoned professionals. Some drew on strength they didn't know they had, others caved. * "These hourly decisions, necessarily made with such rapidity, could be made only by the President of the United States, but any one of them might close and lock doors for peoples and governments in many other lands." * "the responsibility we had to people around the globe who had never heard of us, who had never heard of our country or the men sitting in that room determining the fate, making a decision which would influence whether they would live or die" * "During all these deliberations, we all spoke as equals. There was no rank and in fact we did not even have a chairman. It was completely unrestricted and uninhibited. Everyone had a chance to be heard. Rare especially in rank-heavy executive branch." * Helped by JFK decision to not attend many meetings - people present what the boss wants to hear * Contrasts with: "It was not only for Americans that he was concerned, or primarily the older generation of any land. The thought that disturbed him the most, and that made the prospect of war much more fearful than it would otherwise have been, was the specter of the death of the children of this country and all the world—the young people who had no role, who had no say, who knew nothing even of the confrontation, but whose lives would be snuffed out like everyone else’s. They would never have a chance to make a decision, to vote in an election, to run for office, to lead a revolution, to determine their own destinies. Our generation had. But the great tragedy was that, if we erred, we erred not only for ourselves, our futures, our hopes, and our country, but for the lives, futures, hopes, and countries of those who had never been given an opportunity to play a role, to vote aye or nay, to make themselves felt. * Our allies were fully with us, but were they fully aware of what was going on? * "He had not abandoned hope, but what hope there was now wrested with Khruschev's revising his course within the next few hours. It was a hope, not an expectation. The expectation was a military confrontation..." Nuclear War * What gives the government the moral right to bring the world to the brink of nuclear war? * JFK might say, "I didn't start this crisis" * Some downplay the situation: once we had strategic and conventional superiority and held firm, the rational choice for the USSR was to back down. * But what if the USSR was, like the US, not a totally rational actor, working off incomplete information, prone to human failings? * Nukes change the situation: the ability to bring unprecedented destruction, at unimaginable speed, that takes the "victory" out of war because you no longer have to defeat armies to destroy populations. * Because both the US and USSR can launch unacceptably destructive second strikes, it seems no one would choose war. This makes nuclear war very unlikely. * However, unlikely =/= impossible. Crisis greatly illustrated that. See chain of logical choices leading to insane conclusions * Nuclear paradox: no one can win, but both must be wiling to bluff to take that risk. * US could not simply allow the placement of USSR missiles. Rules of the status quo had been violated, trust had been broken, and a line needed to be drawn. Problems of the modern US presidency * "The president believed he was president and that his wishes having been made clear, they would be followed." * Unlike the old checks and balances, previously decision making was made in a circle of officials who, through elections, had legitimacy and accountability as elected representatives, Now they are largely appointed officials. * Congress was informed of the series of actions to be taken and not very involved after * They were furious at the lack of air strike, but JFK had perspective, said they reacted like the ExComm did in the first few hours * Crisis came just after JFK had spent a lot of time and energy trying to reduce tensions and convince the public that the USSR was not placing nukes in Cuba * Opinions of advisors varied * McNamara thought that the missiles, while close, represented an inevitable closing of the missile gap. However, they did show that there was no difference if one was killed by missiles launched by Cuba or by the USSR in a retaliatory strike. * McGeorge Bundy argued for first confronting the USSR in private to minimize humiliation (and maintain proper order of diplomacy first, public court later). * RFK was haunted by nuclear war, by the political wall, and by the fear that the crisis would blacken the moral high ground of the US * Ted Sorensen felt anger and betrayal (JFK) but also disaster (RFK) * JCS wanted to finish the job of Cuba left incomplete at the Bay of Pigs * Acheson, Nitze, DIllon, McCone and Rusk favored attack to maintain the security of the US and the leadership of the Western Hemisphere and Western Europe * What prevented the initial air strike * McNamara was all out against air strike * RFK pushed the moral argument of a sneak attack * McNamara, RFK and Sorensen, in which JFK trusted, formed an anti-airstrike coalition * Coalition that supported air strike mattered less than who they were than how much they supported it * Air Force stated they could not guarantee the success of a surgical strike (later proved to be viable) Roles of Congress and the Presidency in fighting war * ExComm isolated out 2nd level functionaries to the point where they almost burst * Cross connecting bureaucracy means no one department can really function without the cooperation of the others, but no one really has an incentive to do so. The president and his aides also have competing interests * Congress is supposed to declare war and the President is supposed to command troops * As in other crises, JFK acted unilaterally * For secrecy, flexibility, uncertainty of USSR intentions and racing against time * Thus, ability to consult others was limited * Truman didn't declare war because it would have implied a total conflict to be ended by peace treaty, when he had more limited goals. Truman consciously didn't seek Congresional approval to avoid setting precedents that would limit future presidents, but that meant he shouldered the blame * So did LBJ in Vietnam * So the question becomes maybe the president should not have to consult Congress in times of extreme crisis, but what about the less urgent ones? RATING: 5 stars (Wait, it's WHAT time already??) Absolutely superb. A sparse, eminently readable and quick summary of the US's response to the Cuban Missile Crisis from one of the key players. RFK knew how to write and to seamlessly convey lessons learned in the text, so much so that the roughly 150 pages of text contain a bevy of nuggets. I was also delighted by the little tidbits and revelations (both sides focused on the moral high ground), and how the movie was able to incorporate so many little lines and moments. If there are flaws, it's that some lessons can be repeated too often (the weight of decision) and that the afterword is dry academicese. But those are niggling flaws. Absolutely recommended for everyone as a case study of grace under pressure and lessons of history. TL;DR A fantastic summary of a complex and consequential crisis with easy to access lessons
