I'm a sucker for novels about dystopias ( Nineteen Eighty-four , The Handmaid's Tale ), the end of the world ( Lucifer's Hammer , The Road ), or how humanity continues to scrape by several generations after the "end" of the world (as we know it, anyway). The first book I read, long ago, that fits into this latter genre was John Robert Russell 's Sar , which was engrossing to a pre-teen but, if I'm being honest, mostly because of all the sex the main character was having. The second, and far better, book in this genre that I read was Leigh Brackett 's The Long Tomorrow . The ultimate example, of course, is H. G. Wells 's The Time Machine . Most recently, I read Jack McDevitt 's interesting but ultimately unsatisfying Eternity Road . I learned of Simak's A Heritage of Stars through yet another book, Albert Goldbarth 's The Kitchen Sink: New and Selected Poems, 1972-2007 (Goldbarth uses a phrase with a typo in it from the first printing of A Heritage of Stars as part of his book's epigraph), which I'm still poring through as I write this. So where does A Heritage of Stars rate in the "long after the end of the world" pantheon of books? Far better than Sar , somewhat better than Eternity Road and Andre Norton 's Daybreak 2250 A.D. , but probably not quite as good as The Long Tomorrow or Walter M. Miller's A Canticle for Leibowitz (though on par with other, less easily categorizable books such as Larry Niven 's A World Out of Time ). Like many of these types of a books, A Heritage of Stars is about the protagonist's quest to find some remnant of the long-dead technological age. In this case, Tom Cushing is seeking the Place of Going to the Stars, a possibly mythological city perched on top of a butte in the American West. Along the way Cushing is joined by an old witch, the last surviving robot, a man who communes with plants and trees, and his daughter, who seems to be immersed in a perpetual trance. This set-up may sound a bit corny in 2012, but Simak tells a good story and rounds out his characters in a way that elevates them above their cartoony labels. What I was happiest about was the payoff. The Place of Going to the Stars is, of course, not exactly what Cushing was expecting, but what it turns out to be is even more interesting than a defunct interstellar launching pad (or at least it was to this reader). For a pulpy novel written in the late '70s, I enjoyed this one quite a bit.
