Celebrity culture, modern technology, and sexual fetishes have never collided (haha, sorry) like this: Ballard's wicked masterpiece shows a group of people who get off from being involved in car accidents, they dream of crashing into Elizabeth Taylor and having an orgasm while becoming road kill. Apparently, becoming sexually aroused by staging and witnessing catastrophes and accidents is a real thing, because real people are indeed fucking perverted, and not only in a good way. It's called symphorophilia and tends to result in criminal behavior like, you know, intentionally causing car crashes. In the novel, narrator James Ballard (again: haha) and his peers of fellow former crash victims turn their trauma into, well, let's say: sexual pleasure by re-enacting celebrity car collisions (e.g., the ones that killed James Dean and Jayne Mansfield) and adding some sexy time. And you thought orgies and BDSM were kinky. Ballard called "Crash" the "first pornographic novel based on technology", and sure, you could argue that he turns cars as a pars pro toto for technology into a sexual fetish, merging flesh and metal in a deathly amalgamation of sex and death - with the combination of sex and death being a real classic in the field of transgressive literature (hello, Georges Bataille and the Marquis de Sade ). In his major work Simulacra and Simulation , Jean Baudrillard pondered how Ballard shows damaged bodies and damaged cars as equivalent signs, and points to the language that employs expressions rooted in technology and biology. But there is more: Celebrity culture is added to the mix of out there fantasy, with a focus on the death of the glamorous human commodity - there is a reason that fictional Ballard is a director for commercials, and that the most important driving force (I can't help it!!) in the group, Dr. Robert Vaughan, was a former TV scientist who now takes pictures of mutilated bodies and car wrecks (yes, this aspect is The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility, and Other Writings on Media on speed, again: haha). Vaughan dies right at the beginning, the rest of the text is a long flashback depicting not only fictional Ballard's sexual obsession with Vaughan, but also his open relationship with his wife, and his affair with a man who died in a collision he was involved in. So there is a lot of depth to be found with theory and references and layers of meaning, but more than anything, this plot is absolutely insane, surprising, and radical. This is a high-concept fever dream that lets you wake up from your own laughter. The world depicted shows no nature or trees, everything is glass, concrete, steel, while the text refrains from explicit moral judgement or social critique - and the atmosphere this evokes is unsettling and suspenseful. Great, great stuff. Of course, the cult movie "Crash" by David Cronenberg ( trailer ) is based on the novel, plus the movie "Titane" by Julia Ducournau, winner of the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival ( trailer ), borrows strongly from Ballard's ideas. You can listen to our podcast gang discuss the German translation here: https://papierstaupodcast.de/podcast/...
