With one of the most hardcore opening chapters of any murder mystery I have ever read, I Was Dora Suarez is a disturbingly brilliant novel, and the strongest entry into Derek Raymond's Factory series since the soul-gutting first novel, He Died With His Eyes Open . In one night, an elderly woman is smashed face-first through a grandfather clock, a slimy club owner has most of his head painted across a wall and a mysterious beauty named Dora Suarez is mutilated and then molested by an insane axe-murderer. Yanked out of suspension by his higher-ups, the Unnamed Detective is ordered to dive headfirst into this orgy of violence. And as he wades his way through all the gore, UD becomes more and more certain that all three atrocities were committed by the same madman. An autopsy and the obsessive reading of Dora's diary reveals that not only was she dying of AIDS but that she may have been in love with the psychopath who ended her already terminally short life. Soon the UD finds himself investigating a seedy nightclub that housed acts of inhuman depravity, and what may be the link which tied Dora to her killer. Legend says this novel was rejected by its first publisher who vomited upon reading the aforementioned, notorious opening chapter, and admittedly I Was Dora Suarez is not a novel many readers will enjoy. Raymond is unrelenting with his depictions of vileness, and the mercifully few chapters told from the killer's point of view are acts of linguistic and scatological extravagance. But what keeps this from being an exercise in shock value and the durability of one's gag reflex is the depth of pain UD feels for Dora Suarez. Her writings take on the weight of scripture as UD slowly realizes that he is profoundly in love with the woman who once was Dora Suarez. It's this which keeps the UD from being an almost cartoonish mouthpiece for Raymond's own particular brand of nihilism. The deep woe he feels for the unfairness of her suffering is harrowing to read. Add in an unforgettably disgusting wretch for a villain, and you have what will probably go down as the blackest of all noirs. But for all the filth, cruelty, violence and greed which permeates through every page, I Was Dora Suarez isn't a hearltess read. What it is is a troubling investigation into love, suffering and the strangeness of mercy.
