I picked this book up randomly at a book fair in the next town over a few weeks ago and I felt it was ironic that I picked it up right before the war between Russia and Ukraine. My boss at work was even surprised I was reading such a political book. The reason I read travel memoirs isn't just to sate my wanderlust, it's to also get a chance to learn about other cultures. I do think the author does a good job of talking about the small things that no one thinks about. Like how facial expressions and even tones of voice are interpreted differently depending on the culture. I also loved that she included some terms from the languages. The author is a journalist who went to these countries not only to study and work in journalism but to find a story as well. My issue was that to me, it seemed like the author cared more about a story that fits her narrative as an American than actually getting to know these people and their culture. Throughout the entire book, she is constantly disappointed that there weren't people starting or fighting in a revolution. While this book was written in 2004, that still doesn't give the excuse to push your ideals onto other people. Especially, when you don't fully understand their politics and economy. I'm nowhere near an expert myself but the whole book kind of screamed American and privileged. The author is American with a deep Mexican heritage. She never got the chance to connect with her Mexican heritage and I enjoyed reading her insights about herself. She did make a point to reflect on her actions and her thoughts. One thing that bothered me a lot though is that she lied about her nationality a lot throughout the book just so she could avoid being hated. Which I get. I have traveled abroad and people definitely showed distaste when they found out I was American. I found that fair. They don't have to like me, but I never felt the need to lie just because I wanted to be included. I would say my favorite section in the book was when she wrote about her experiences in Beijing. I felt like she made more of an effort to get to know the locals and found her experiences really enjoyable to learn about. I felt that her time in Moscow and Havana felt a little superficial at times. Especially, since she spent very little time in Havana. Overall, this really was an enjoyable read. I do think it's worth the read just for the commentary of how we as Americans tend to act when going to another country. The author definitely did give more of an effort since she actually tried to learn the local languages. The end chapter really did tie the whole book together by talking about what she learned and how it changed her way of thinking. If you're looking for a book that is entirely immersive in other cultures, I would pass. However, definitely give it a read if you're looking for a good thought-provoking discussion book. Like my review? Check out my other reviews at https://samthebookdevotee.wixsite.com...
