”I am entering on the history of a period rich in disasters, frightful in its wars, torn by civil strife, and even in peace full of horrors. Four emperors perished by the sword. There were three civil wars; there were more with foreign enemies; there were often wars that had both characters at once...Never surely did more terrible calamities of the Roman People, or evidence more conclusive, prove that the Gods take no thought for our happiness, but only for our punishment.” – The Histories, Book I. The Histories are an account of the “Year of the Four Emperors” (69 AD) by the Roman Historian Tacitus. Unlike most Roman histories, including Tacitus’ own Annals , the book doesn’t cover a broad slice of history, instead diving deep into a specific period of crisis. This is partly by chance – the Histories originally covered the entire Flavian Dynasty (69 to 96 AD), but only the first few books have survived down to the modern era. Still, the heightened focus on a smaller period probably makes this Tacitus’ most inviting book for modern readers. An Empire Divided Tacitus has an excellent eye for detail and a great sense of the dramatic, and he’s at his best in the Histories . The story itself is naturally compelling. After the death of Nero, the most powerful empire in the world underwent a period of crisis where three pretenders fell in quick succession, before Vespasian seized power and was finally able to stop the bloodshed (sort of like A Game of Thrones with togas). His writing is famously fun to read, thanks to the knack Tacitus has for inserting memorable little aphorisms and moral judgments (on Licinius Mucianus: “he was the sort of man who found it more congenial to make an emperor than to be one.”) Ancient historians considered it acceptable (even necessary) to insert speeches into the mouths of their subjects in order to liven up the narrative, and Tacitus was one of the best at this. Take this speech he shoves into Otho’s mouth: ”So the state takes its stand here: over there, against us, are the enemies of that state. Do you really imagine that this most beautiful city depends on mansions, buildings, and piles of masonry? These are dumb, lifeless things, and one or all can fall or be rebuilt. The survival of our empire, peace between the nations and your life as well as mine find a firm support in the continued preservation of the senate. The senatorial order was solemnly instituted by the patriarch and founder of our city. From the regal period up to the principate it has survived in unbroken continuity. We received it from our fathers. Let us as surely transmit it to our sons.” Book IV.73 Good stuff. Tacitus also has a way of conveying the horror of civil war; his description of the decapitation of political victims, and the way the victim’s relatives would pay a ransom to recover the heads in order to keep them from becoming trophies, was particularly chilling. Tacitus language can be naturally disapproving, even cynical (on the Germans: “they use 'liberty' and other fine phrases as their pretexts [for invading Gaul]. Indeed, nobody has ever desired to enslave others and gain dominance for himself without using this very same language.”) This fits in perfectly with his choice of subject here, which offers up plenty of examples of human folly. The Histories are also notable for Tacitus’ controversial description of the Jews. Before winning the principate, Vespasian was fighting Jewish rebels in Judea, which leads Tacitus to a discursion on Judaism early in Book V. Tacitus’ opinions are not particularly well informed in this area, and he comes across sounding like a bit of a bigot. But the passage is valuable as a window into how Romans perceived Jewish culture, and helps shed some light into why the two peoples butted heads so fiercely in the 1st and 2nd centuries. Overall, this book is ancient history at its finest. The Annals is generally considered Tacitus’ masterpiece, but for my money the Histories is the author’s best surviving work, and the second best ancient history I’ve read behind Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War . 4.5 stars , highly recommended.
