When Satan's not in the mood, virtue triumphs. Hasn't even Satan a right not to be in the mood once in a while? The Tin Drum ~~ Günter Grass GRRRRRR The Tin Drum ~~ this damn exasperating book. It’s one of the best written, most difficult, utterly amazing, truly frustrating books I’ve ever read. I don’t even know where to begin with this review. For starters, The Tin Drum is brilliant. Wait, no, it’s maddening … wait no it's ... A nearly 600 page novel may badly wear you out, but the marks it leaves in your mind, as well as your soul, are profound enough to take all the pains of reading it. The Tin Drum is a very difficult novel to read; but it is also a fascinating one ~~ one of the most fascinating novels I've ever read. Producing great literature in a time of massive turbulence is a challenging task. Most of the time the writings during a war or massive political change appeal to the current age; eventually they decay with the passage of time ~~ Parade's End comes to mind ~~ but not so with The Tin Drum . The Tin Drum is a strange, big novel, an epic satire and farce; it is also a provincial, magical realist, picaresque tale. This is the story of Oskar Matzerath, who tells his life story from a German mental hospital in 1954. Having deliberately stunted his growth at the age of 3 and capable of shattering glass with his voice, Oskar is a force of chaos, torn between the teachings of the mad faith healer Rasputin and the poet-prince Goethe, and between Satan and Jesus, both of whom Oskar impersonates. He’s certainly a bit mad, even monstrous, which is why his unique vision of a monstrous era ~~ 1930s & 1940s Germany ~~ is an essential one. Armed with the titular drum, Oskar, an incorrigible aesthete understood by no one but loved, at various times, by many, uses his instrument to drum up memories of his perfectly remembered life, beginning with his birth in 1924. It is through this compulsive devotion to rhythm that Oskar is able to produce his personal image of German history. And through his telling, we learn about the first days of WWII, when Oskar’s presumptive father reluctantly joined in the defense of the Danzig post office and became equal parts martyr and coward. There are tales of Kashubian potato farmers ~~ Kashubians being one of the many quasi-stateless European cultures trampled in the WWII maelstrom ~~ and Nazis who blithely value animal rights more than human ones. There is a postwar, German jazz club where patrons cut onions so as to force themselves to cry and reckon with the past. We travel, with Oskar, to Paris, Normandy, Dusseldorf, on refugee trains besieged by partisans, and to a mental hospital that proves to be a kind of sanctuary. Oskar is a fine chronicler of his era because he simply does not belong; his very rejection of it is embodied in his refusal to grow and in his decision to lead a gang of youths who fight against parents and all grownups, regardless of what they may be for or against. The Tin Drum is filled with German folk tales ~~ one of the triumphs of Mitchell’s translation ~~ one of the best translations I’ve ever read ~~ is his attention to local culture and history. Half a century after its debut, The Tin Drum remains a unique, irreverent exploration of a deranged and crumbling society ~~ Oskar compares Germans’ loyalty to Hitler to believing in Santa Claus ~~ a Santa Claus armed with poison gas . Shocking in its time, the book established the author as one of Germany’s preeminent moral authorities, warning, in the voice of Oskar, against the ignorance that was just then coming into fashion. Through its verbal complexity, its use of fabulist images, and its daring choice to invest an absurd, amoral character with equal parts monstrosity and artistry ~~ Oskar’s expert ability to singshatter glass is juxtaposed against Kristallnacht ~~ Grass’s novel earns its stature. Ultimately, The Tin Drum is a whirlpool of persons, events and emotions. Often, it's difficult to figure out where reality ends and Oskar’s fantasy/insanity begins. Memories, plans, dreams, thoughts ~~ all intertwine into one entity. There are more than a few complicated relationships here, a little bit about the war, a little bit about a theater, a little bit about love. But in all of these bits the main character is Oscar, he is always at the center of everything, even when he’s not. So, who is Oskar? Or better yet, what is Oskar? He is a reflection of the society, of the time, of the people who surrounded him. Oscar is a terrible reflection of war and those vices that people hide so carefully in themselves. Oskar is a man who has absorbed all the evil of the world around him. The Tin Drum is a challenging read ~~ one the most challenging reads I've ever taken up ~~ but it is well worth reading. In order to make the most of The Tin Drum you must willing to let Günter Grass lead and just accept that world as a world of the horrors of living in and through World War II in Germany.
