Disclaimer: no dragons were stolen or otherwise harmed during the events of this novel. The plot: When Rilla was a child, her Trader family were targeted by slave traders from Darran, with the men killed and the women and children taken into slavery. Rilla was trained as a dancer and forced to perform for her master for years before she was finally able to escape to the small mercenary nation of Sianim. Now a Darrian nobleman seeks an alliance with the neighbouring country of Reth, which may put an end to the slave trade once and for all, if he isn't killed first. Rialla is sent back into Darran to prevent the assassination of Lord Karsten and perhaps see the slave trade that killed her family destroyed. This was a decent story, just not one I enjoyed especially. It's a fairly modest fantasy story, possibly more sword and sorcery than epic. Rilla is a nice enough character, tortured by her past and desperate to play the part of a slave without slipping back into the old ingrained habits of slavery - bearing in mind that she still has nightmares of her time as a slave, you can appreciate how difficult this is. The lore of the world was interesting, particularly the different magics practised by the different races, but I would have liked a map so we could see where all these different countries were. So in the end, I'd mark this as a story competently told; I didn't mind it, but I'm unlikely to ever read it again. Minus one star for the title (there are no dragons of any sort in this book - stealing the dragon is the name of a game seeming like chess), and minus another for the main character. Rialla is a decent female character, but a little too full of convenient skills (she knows her to pick locks because her trader kin all teach their children this skill - how fortunate) and a little too similar to the other female characters in the other books in this series. I've read the Aralorn duology and read the third book in the series When Demons Walk in my pre-Goodreads days, and the MCs of both stories are so similar they could be a series of books featuring one character. It's perhaps unfair of me to mark the book down for that - there's nothing wrong with strong female characters - but I've read the other books too recently to feel anything but slightly disappointed about that. That said, it isn't a bad book at all. If you like fairly light fantasy in the style perhaps of some of the better Forgotten Realms novels or some of the other modest fantasy novels of the 1980s or 90s such as Barbara Hambly's Sunwolf and Starhawk trilogy (which I strongly recommend, by the way) than you may enjoy it more than I did. Worth reading, but not outstanding.
