I pasted this review from another one I wrote on the general works of Hardy and I haven't included this novel as one of those I've read for 2018. That would obviously be double counting and cheating. This novel has been termed by many to be Hardy's finest, but it's not my favourite. Hardy's prose is as eloquent and rich in imagery as ever but I could never quite get over my personal sadness at the death of the wonderful character Giles Winterborne. He was a solid, upstanding guy who is very similar to Gabriel Oak from Far From The Madding Crowd By Thomas Hardy in the way that he loves a woman so unselfishly - even when the female in question is unworthy of such loyal devotion. Unlike Gabriel Oak, however, the poor woodsman Giles dies tragically when he gets ill because he sleeps in the cold outdoors and gives up his little cottage for the annoying heroine Grace. Hardy's portrayal of the H's tragic chivalry is a recurring theme in his novels and it is repeated in Jude the Obscure by that title character. The author's continued fascination with the rural splendour of the landscape is seen in this novel. One of the strangest things I've also noticed about Hardy is his comic preoccupation with women who wear wigs. In this novel there's a wealthy woman called Mrs. Charmond who buys hair from a young peasant girl named Marty. There's another woman called Arabella in Jude the Obscure, who wears wigs that fool the H of that story into thinking she's an incomparable beauty. In both novels, Hardy highlights the eventual embarrassment that both women deal with when their hair is revealed to be fake. I have no idea why this amuses me so much but I guess it's the fact that a male author finds so much significance in it that he feels the need to write about it twice. Hardy also deals with the issue of marital infidelity in this novel and the difficulty that a wife faces when she wants a divorce based only on the fact of an adulterous husband. There's also the tragic peasant girl called Marty who suffers from her unrequited love for Giles Winterborne. That poor guy would have had a happier life had he loved Marty instead of the fickle Grace who dumped him to marry her rich but unfaithful husband. I guess it's Hardy's way of looking at the age old issue of love and how one cannot predict or control the object of one's heart and desires. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
