Wow. Wow, wow, wow. I had thought that William Gibson’s Neuromancer was the alpha male of the cyberpunk genre; the template upon which all others would be drawn. Turns out, Gibson was the prophet, but Stephenson was the barbarian, breaking ground with a riveting, relentless new age thriller. Snow Crash by Neal Stephenson is a wild trip. A fun conglomerate of Hunter S. Thompson, Philip K. Dick, Anthony Burgess and John Brunner, written 8 years after Neuromancer and 19 years before Ready Player One this is a bright light on the cyberpunk literary landscape. Set in a near alternative future, Stephenson introduces a world where governments have collapsed and societies are held loosely together by anarcho-capitalism. The book was nominated for a Prometheus Award but what could be a libertarian dream may also be seen as a laissez-faire nightmare. This is a blitzkrieg of ideas, a cacophony of sci-fi, techno-socio-economic observations, a kaleidoscope of theological and philosophical concepts thrown together in a Mark Twainian fantasy hopped up on Red Bull and amphetamines. Above all this is an intelligent, modern adventure that expertly weaves in elements of pre-history and archeological thrill seeking. If Bladerunner led to The Matrix, then this is what’s next. And, if Stephenson had not boiled it all together enough into a steaming cup of Have At You!, then he also has the best name for a lead character of all time: Hiro Protagonist. A very, very Goodread, five stars, two snaps and a bag of chips. ** 2018 addendum - it is a testament to great literature that a reader recalls the work years later and this is a book about which I frequently think. As great a hero as Hiro is, the scenes between Raven and YT are those that I recall the most and Raven is a character about whom more could be written. The casting of Ravinoff by Jason Momoa would be a good one. *** 2023 reread - Love this book, truly one of the great science fiction novels of all time. This has lost none of its potency in the 30 years since its publication, if anything its message has renewed relevancy with the inclusion of its cautionary message about centralized information gathering and dissemination. While the most organic comparisons will be to Neuromancer and Ready Player One, this has been wildly influential on many works since and a consequential legacy of many works before it, Snow Crash is a high water mark in this genre. Actually, when I think of this book in terms of other works like Catch-22 or Slaughterhouse Five, this is not just great SF but great literature and we can find that Stephenson, writing in the early 90s, has provided to us a work unique for its time and place. The anarcho-capitalist setting and socio-economic observations subtly screaming out on most every page also made me consider a comparison with Howard Chaykin’s work on his American Flagg series from the 80s. Stephenson’s characterization was delicious, making this work on many levels; Uncle Enzo and Raven, and the man with the glass eye teaming up with Hiro and YT to make this so much fun. I did not realize it last time, but this is told from the perspective of an omniscient but chatty storyteller so we can hear Stephenson’s own voice mischievously breaking the fourth wall here and there, and again with the comparison to Chaykin. This can also be funny and with a long list of humorous elements scattered throughout the narrative that made me consider an oblique comparison to Trevanian. Reverend Wayne’s Pearly Gates franchise is as much fun as the Fosterites from Heinlein’s Stranger in a Strange Land. Finally I will add this great book to my list of all time favorites. As of this addendum I have published over 1800 reviews and this makes the tenth book on that exclusive list. It’s that good.
