This is one of the older EJ and I definitely liked it and preferred it to the most recent ones. - first of all the story is focused on the main couple and their interactions. EJ is very fond of secondary characters, female friends of the heroine, other couples, other subplots and similar and she often loses her main focus on the couple of characters, recently it happened so much as to be almost impossible to stay centered and interested on their story. And the same happened in some past books, as in desperate duchesses. Too many stories means no story, IMO. - the story is very well written and the plot is interesting with a fast pace. Sometimes EJ wastes pages and pages of useless descriptions of scenes that do nothing for the story. Here it doesn’t happen. - there’s angst. Much angst especially towards the end. I like when there’s angst. - the hero is besotted with the heroine since the very first pages. He was quite the libertine but as soon as he interacts with the heroine there’s no other woman for him. - miscommunication and misunderstanding aplenty. The heroine has a father who’s always been unfaithful to her mother and she doesn’t want to love her husband because she thinks all husbands are unfaithful. So she rejects the hero in the beginning because there’s too much passion between them. And she gets engaged with a safe dumb man. The hero compromises her and they get married. Both think their love is unrequited. The heroine accepts him even if thinks he has a mistress. He’s jealous because she meets her ex and thinks she loves him. The worst happens when she gets pregnant and he tells her he doesn’t want children. Because he’s terrified that she can die in childbirth as his mother. Bit of course he doesn’t tell her so she thinks he’s tired of her. Ok, I won’t spoil the end but it was heartbreaking and I cried a river. I loved both characters because they both have emotional scars and are afraid to love someone and to be hurt. The hero was the more determined because he decided to force the heroine’s hand a bit. The lack of communication was heavy and could have solved many troubles but we wouldn’t have a book so it was all understandable. Celibacy was ok. The hero was faithful after dancing and kissing the heroine even when she was engaged to om. Of course she was a virgin.
