Girl Missing is the first Tess Gerritsen book I have ever read, and I must say I thoroughly enjoyed it. To be completely honest, it was much better than I expected. In the introduction to the book, Tess Gerritsen refers to this book as a bridge book between romance and crime. Having not read any of her other books I cannot compare this but I am willing to say that I am happily going back for more, to see what else she has to offer. The story is highly addictive, so much so that I sat and read the book in one sitting. I kept telling myself to put it down and do something else for a while but each time I reached the end of a chapter I told myself ‘just one more’ until I reached the end of the book. Admittedly such a thing was aided by the fact that the book is short, but that does not remove the fact that it is a truly gripping story – if anything, it just makes it a nice quick read that you can complete in a couple of hours. Both the criminal aspects and the romantic aspects were addictive – each in their own way. There is much to find out in relation to the crime, with Kat wanting to get to the bottom of the mystery even though the police seem somewhat unwilling. The deeper she looks the more to the mystery there appears to be. The romantic aspect seems like a somewhat cliché topic but it was much better written than many I have seen and whilst I’m not the biggest of romance fans I was certainly engrossed and there were no groans of protest when something overdone came to light. It is your usual rich guy finds girl who grew up in the lower income part of town who has made something for herself, but with more to it than you will find in many other books. Now whilst I hate working out who is behind the crimes in book, and I did work this one out, I was not at all disappointed. Information, the links between events, is slowly given to you throughout the book. By the time you realise who is to blame the reveal is just around the corner meaning you are not working your way through another hundred pages of the characters being ten steps behind you. As it was not a case of working things out two chapters in, I can say that I’m glad to have found a crime book in which the answers were not screaming at me from the start. Overall, I loved it!
