I remember this novel being published in 2002, and can only think that I didn't read it at the time as I didn't feel its subject matter would've been of interest to me, my Irish history interest kicking in more in the 20th century. I have been thinking about reading it for a while though, and took the opportunity to pick up a second hand copy to read, as a book group I plan to attend is reading 'Redemption Falls', the novel which follows this one. I have to admit that while I liked the book, I didn't love it. The novel takes the form of an account of the voyage undertaken by the steamer in 1847, primarily 'written' by American journalist and aspiring novelist, G Grantley Dixon, returning to his homeland after witnessing the horrors of famine and eviction in Ireland. While depicting some of the harrowing scenes of everyday life in steerage on the ,'coffin ship', the novel tells the story of three main characters-Lord Kingscourt, David Merridith, a Galway landlord emigrating with his wife and two sons to USA to set himself up as an architect, Mary Duane, his nanny, and Pius Mulvey, a shady character sent onboard by a secret society to murder Kingscourt in revenge for the treatment of the population at the hands of his recently deceased father. Through testimonies, flashbacks and witness statements, in addition to normal narrative, we piece together the pasts of each of the characters, and their links to each other, while, through the captain's log, follow the progress of the ship with its prevalence of death and disease, as it makes its way toward New York. There's no doubt that the novel is extremely well crafted, and the narrative is pieced together very well by O'Connor, but I think that for my tastes, it was just a little too intricately done. I've also no doubt that historically speaking, the scenes portrayed both in Ireland and on-board are accurate, and they were upsetting to read at times. I enjoyed many of the small touches, like Mulvey's meeting with Dickens, and found the medical treatments of the time very interesting. I was, however, constantly looking forward to see how many pages I had left to read, wanting to finish the book, without having that feeling of wanting to find out what was going to happen. Perhaps my initial hunch on the book on publication was right? Go by the main body of positive reviews for this novel, but to be honest, this wasn't really for me.
