This book got under my skin but not in a good way. Meursault, the main character, is indifferent, unemotional. He didn’t move me. However, as an introvert I understood the pressures of being told to externalize feelings to people that he doesn’t know, to being judged unfairly as being cold. I was listening to some commentary about who was The Stranger or The Outsider, and the “answer” was Meursault. However, I strongly disagree with this. Just because Meursault is detached does not necessarily make him strange. Because the world *IS* cruel and detached! “I opened myself to the gentle indifference of the world.” – Albert Camus in The Stranger Everyone believes that he or she is the hero of their own story, but even when the chips are down, most people don’t care. After living in Troy for 13 years, not one person has come to visit me since I became sick. My voice is hoarse from disuse during the week. Have you ever visited a doctor who could have helped you but doesn’t care, who treats you with gentle indifference? Recently, there was a prisoner released from confinement after 23 years. For decades, he pleaded his innocence, but it didn’t matter. The world treated him with indifference. Meursault just received a jolt to his system, an awakening as to his importance in society (which is practically nothing). These are the books that I don’t enjoy because I am not casually indifferent, and I want to feel and be moved. I want to feel alive inside before I’m dead. When Meursault is talking to Marie, she asks if he will marry her, and he responds that he will. He further clarifies that he would marry anyone who asked him. People aren’t interchangeable. At least not to me. I want to be seen as I truly am, kissed by greatness, and this book just made me depressed. You might like The Stranger if you enjoyed On The Road by Jack Kerouac because that character also was essentially the equivalent of “hey man, everything is great. Everything is groovy. One chick is as good as another. Don’t worry about anything in life.” As for me, I want extraordinary, and this wasn’t it. What I Paid – Softcover Text – I don’t remember but I bought it for 40% off at the Barnes and Noble Going Out of Business Sale Connect With Me! Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango
