The main character here isn’t Athena, Matty, or even the Jersey Devil: it’s the Pine Barrens. Should they have a Board of Tourism, I assume that board will not be writing Robert Dunbar any thank you letters, since anyone who reads The Pines will do their best to stay as far away from the New Jersey Pine Barrens as humanly possible. When stories warn you not to go into the woods, it’s Dunbar’s pines they’re talking about: dark, unsettling, and full of “monsters” both human and (possibly, arguably) inhuman. Wild dogs roam. Children are born without eyes (or even eye-sockets). And the Jersey Devil, leathery and animalistic, stalks through the trees. The characters who aren’t also setting are inarguably the product of their setting, and firmly grounded in it. One of my favorites was Pamela, a lonely and not especially bright woman living in a trailer so inaccessible that no car can take her to it, who cares fiercely for her disturbed nephew while effectively erasing her own institutionalized son from her memory, who longs for intimacy with her oft-imprisoned husband, and who at one point commits an act of almost-offhanded rape (the consent is dubious at least) out of lonesomeness and a desire for connection. She’s a warning to the smarter but sometimes less-functional Athena (“crippled,” black, and not a “piney” by birth) of what can happen to people who grow too rooted in this environment that breeds monstrousness, if not outright monsters. Because Pamela is sympathetic—at least frequently so—her brief slip into darkness is tragic and frightening, like the rest of her life, with too few avenues for connection and escape available. It’s the kind of trapped, hopeless life that allows people to dismiss the continuously mutilated bodies as being from attacks by wild dogs, and nothing else. The heroism in the novel, therefore, is hard-won—it has to struggle against the miasma of the Pine Barrens and the more mulish pineys to even exist. Athena’s always being told that she “thinks she’s better than” her neighbors, and for much of the novel, she arguably isn’t—smarter, yes, but just as trapped in the boundaries of her life. Her difficult, crawling arc is one of learning to be, at least, stronger than her neighbors, and more willing to accept things beyond the boundaries of the world. If you’re interested in an unsettling, atmospheric horror novel with an almost claustrophobic sense of dread and tremendously flawed, damaged characters—and if you’re sick of the usual threats and, like me, are relatively unfamiliar with the Jersey Devil—then I highly recommend picking up The Pines . But after you finish, you may want to take a long walk around outside, somewhere with no trees and plenty of sky, just to make sure you haven’t slipped into the book’s world.
