I read this because it contained Mrs Warren’s Profession, and I’d recently read Ann Veronica by H. G. Wells, in which there were several allusions to it. Then because Mrs Warren’s Profession was so good, I read the other two plays as well: Widowers’ Houses and The Philanderer. I wasn’t very familiar with Shaw. I had the vague idea he was stuffy and didactic, but based on this volume, nothing could be further from the truth. Despite being more than a century old, these plays are startlingly modern: shocking, cynical, funny. There are some great parts for actors, and the brilliant dialogue is highly quotable; as Sir George Crofts, co-investor in a chain of European brothels, remarks to Mrs Warren’s daughter, who has been unknowingly brought up on the proceeds of the business: As long as you don’t fly openly in the face of society, society doesn’t ask any inconvenient questions; and it makes precious short work of the cads who do. There are no secrets better kept than the secrets everybody guesses. Very, very occasionally there are moments where a present-day director might opt to sidestep the theatricality of Shaw’s choices; for example, in Widowers’ Houses, when Blanche Sartorius, insufficiently gentrified daughter of an unscrupulous rack-renter, physically attacks the family’s doting parlourmaid, the action feels too obvious and melodramatic a demonstration of her ineradicably low nature. Something might also need to be done for the ending of The Philanderer, which peters out in a tableau of the cast surrounding a fainting woman. Overall though, these plays are tremendous: I especially liked the fact that nobody ‘wicked’ is ever really punished, at least not publicly (since they are behaving in accordance with society's precepts); privately, they may suffer for their decisions after the curtain falls, or then again, they may not. Shaw is criticizing the immorality of society, so it would make no sense to subject his characters to its self-serving notions of justice and morality. He writes in the Preface: A word as to why I have labelled the three plays in this volume Unpleasant. The reason is pretty obvious: their dramatic power is used to force the spectator to face unpleasant facts. No doubt all plays which deal sincerely with humanity must wound the monstrous conceit which it is the business of romance to flatter.
