543 pages 4 stars Mr. McLynn goes into great detail the items recommended for the pioneers on their journey to the West. (California and Oregon mostly.) In spite of copious information available, most travelers took treasured items and even furniture with them. Most ran out of food and had to wind up eating their livestock. Planning and/or listening to good advice was not their strong point. The parties were quarrelsome and bickered almost constantly. There were those who wouldn’t be told what to do, those who were lazy and those who were uncomplainingly generous. These differences in personality types often caused conflict and even caused deaths. Mr. McLynn takes the reader on several of the journeys. Starting about 1840, the yearly trips usually started out well, but managed to quickly deteriorate into divisive factions. The groups would splinter and come back together. Grudges were fomented. Hard feelings and frustrations ran high. Then there was the environment itself. The weather, the terrain, the fragility of the wagon trains and the local natives were all additional hardships. While some of the Natives were friendly and helpful, others begged and dogged the travelers, while still others were warlike. The author beautifully describes crossing rivers and the barrenness of the Great Salt Lake area and the desert. The awful time the pioneers had going over the mountains with their wagons. Many were to leave their wagons behind and ride mules or horses the rest of the way to their destinations. The scenery must have been beautiful, however. And to give credit to Mr. McLynn, he describes the surroundings well. Of course, the author includes the sad saga of the Donner Party. Convinced of a “short cut” that had not been explored or travelled, they broke off from the main body of the wagon train and set out to the mountains by themselves, along with a number of other people. Trapped by feet of snow, they starved and some were to resort to horrible lengths to survive. Many died and many went mad. The Donners spent far too much time lazing about and not traveling hard like they should have. They waited on departed members and just sat around. They would find a nice spring and just waste time enjoying themselves there. Several relief parties were sent from California to locate and aid the stranded, but some would not go and others were too weak to make the journey back in the deep snow. Only forty-seven of the large party were to survive. The author gives a grief description of what happened to them. He also includes a bibliography for those who would like to further explore the subject Mr. McLynn writes a very good, descriptive and rousing tale of the various journeys westward. I went to Amazon to check out his other books.
