William Marantz has written a mystery thriller set in Winnipeg. The prologue, while intriguing, focuses on a thief, plying his trade, on Christmas Eve. In our story, the main character Val Virgo (his radio stage name) aka Izzy Miller, is a call-in radio talk show host. The beginning is slow to warm up to Val, who is of Jewish decent, as his internal dialogue has the reader going in many directions. The story continues with much character building, and it became difficult for the reader to follow where this story was going. One day, on his talk show, someone calls the Outside Caller Line and threatens Val Virgo’s Life. The Control Room squashes the call from going on the air because of time delay, and now we have a story. I am sorry to say, I found the beginning agonizingly slow to get into, with the author’s ruminations and internal dialogue making me squirm. We are made painfully aware of the bigotry in Canada of their own Native Indians. We are continually reminded of this through the storyline with their history being editorialized more than once in different scenarios and characters. I sometimes mention to other readers and authors about humor in a book. Sometimes joking is not as funny as the author would think. Ethnic humor is even worse to measure, as some people find it offensive because they possibly do not understand it. The author is of Jewish decent as I am, Val Virgo is also, but some of the humor and choice of words made me squirm. Maybe I am the bad Jew… I did give this book a 3 Star, because after the author got going with the story and we got to know Val, the detective work was amazingly entertaining, and interesting. The new characters I was comfortable with, and so I enjoyed the last third of the book immensely. I am sorry to say I might have been given too much information to discern at the beginning of the book. Possibly starting the book from the Control Room and The Threat could have separated the storyline to be able to go back and give us characters as needed… I thank Mr Marantz for giving me the chance to read his book, and look forward to his other endeavors. Review by Gloria Lakritz Sr Reviewer and Review Chair for the Paranormal Romance Guild
