Jan Morris is one of the preeminent historians of the British Empire, and so it was with a little bemusement that I learned that she is actually half Welsh, and in many ways, seems more attached to her Welsh ancestry than her English. Her book, The Matter of Wales is a sweeping history covering just about everything you could want to know about the country: religion, politics, artistry, geology, animal husbandry . . . you name it, its in there. I purchased the book some time ago,"For I am Welsh, you know," as Shakespeare had Henry the Fifth proclaim after the Battle of Agincourt. My grandfather emigrated from Wales, as a young boy, alone on an ocean liner, after his parents passed. My unending interest in Wales stems from my enduring affection for him. Ironically, he dived into the history of his adopted country with total zeal. He loved to read about the American Civil War, and the Old West. It was on his lap that I developed my own love of history. He used to read me the old Time Life books on World War II. I found the photos endlessly fascinating. But of course, I was always fascinated by the history of Europe and the United Kingdom in particular. Like most Americans, I suppose, I found the distinction between the different parts of the UK a little hazy. Their dedication to separate "nationalities" always seemed a bit arcane and fussy on this side of the pond. Slowly, I developed an appreciation for the Celtic peoples and why they resist total assimilation by the Anglo-Saxons to this day. But ironically, I had never gotten around to a full book on Wales, and so here it is. An imminently readable history that covers virtually everything Welsh. The central gimmick of the book is that you are traveling through Wales with Owen Glendower -- the last truly Welsh "Prince of Wales" and my son's namesake. So each chapter begins with some semi-mystic dialog with the great Welsh hero, and serves as sort of an introduction to the topic. The book had an enormously important impact on my understanding of Welsh history. Sadly, my grandfather died before I was sufficiently knowledgeable to really delve into Welsh history with him. But my grandmother (also of Welsh extraction, but born in Ohio) passed along what she knew of Welsh history. One bit that always stuck with me was that the Welsh were never conquered by the Romans. There may be elements of truth in this statement. It may be true that the Romans never fully pacified Wales (has anyone?). However, that misses the point. The Romans did settle into Wales, so much so, the legions intermarried and Roman culture flourished amongst the Welsh. Some attribute the relatively swarthy coloring of the Welsh to the fact that Iberian Legionaries were dispatched to conquer the country, and later settled in. But the magnificent thing about Welsh in the Romans was not that they resisted, but rather, while the rest of Europe descended into the Dark Ages, it was Wales that kept the fires of civilization ablaze. Arthur, of ye olde sword and the stone, is the product of this hybrid Welsh-Roman culture. The Arthurian legends, in fact, reflect the light that Wales was shining in the Western world during very bleak times. Interestingly, this hearkening back to some golden age, somewhat lost in the Celtic mists, is apparently a very Welsh characteristic. Whether it is Owen Glendower and his ill-fated kingdom, or Camelot, or the Druids, the Welsh have a romantic melancholy for a past long remembered. Yet Morris also notes that this is not some sort of revanchement. There is no greater Wales, the Welsh have no desire to command all of the sceptered isle. Rather, the Welsh have largely sought to be left alone: sovereign within their borders, which have been understood for millennia. Morris is a bit more dogmatic about the relationship between the Welsh language and its people. Clearly, Welsh is a font of culture, and that the language survives at all is a bit of a miracle. However, she seems to take rather a dim view of Welshmen who do not speak Welsh, and for probably two hundred years, that means a majority of the Welsh. She seems to feel that to be disconnected from the Welsh language is to be disconnected from Welsh culture -- and ultimately, to have been assimilated by the great beast to the East. I think that may be a little unfair. Heaven knows the English do not view the Welsh as an assimilated province. Even with the vast use of English as the idiom of Wales, the distinctions in the cultures, politics, religions and history persist between the two peoples. Its probably fair to say that the Welsh have been the most collusive with the English on Britain's journey to greatness. The Scots and Irish held to their notions of independence much longer. But, like many subject peoples, the Welsh faced the prospect of accommodation or destruction. I think they were wise to make the choices they did. Nevertheless, if you are looking for a good general history of Wales. It would be hard to find something more readable and complete. I certainly enjoyed this jaunt around a small country. If you have interest in the subject, I suggest you check it out too.
