Sexy. Well Researched. And Brilliant. Those are my thoughts on Judith Bennett's book "Sex Signs" and I was sad to hear about her abrupt passing in a plane crash. I was told by someone close to me that a good career for me might be to become a psychologist that specializes in women and children. That was before I read this book and it was at a time when I expressed interest in psychology because I so deeply enjoy "personality". I came across this book in a google search just randomly one day. Google gave me a preview of the book and I read the preview and that preview made me want to buy the book very badly. Judith Bennett did something new. She blended true science (psychology and psycho-analytical stuff) with pseudo-science (astrology.) This book was based on the many patients she knew and she used astrology and what she knew of psychology as a tool for teaching women about themselves and how to have healthy relationships. I thought if I were to get into this type of work writers like Judith Bennett and the writers of "enneagram" and the MBTI and all that would be great role-models for me. At one point, I wanted to do exactly what Ms. Bennett did and even though I've never seen a picture of her to this day, I would've considered her a role-model. She really knew the signs. She knew about phases and charts and all of that. I will admit that she tried to entertain, so at times her writing could get a little too sexy, but that's fine. I was twenty one when I read this book for the first time. I wasn't a baby. I thought I hated Leo people when I was in elementary school. But I love Judith Bennett's description of the Leo female. A drama queen. A showy actress. It really helped me understand the sign and come to like it more. She is ruled by the heart, thinks from the heart and acts in love. That's the truth about Ms. Leo. (and Mr. Leo). When you don't know all the facts about something you cannot judge it. I love how she relates her research to women she's known and really I love how she bring up historical people, movie and book characters and so forth. So... Marilyn Monroe was a Gemini with a sneaky smile. Scarlett O'hara was a true Aries fireball! Scorpio is Rizzo from "Grease" and she needs to marry Richard Gere. And other cool stuff. And it makes me think of things like the wonderful zany way that Rosalind Russell dressed and marched through the office in "His Girl Friday." I think she reminded me of the wacky Aries or Aquarius type woman. I cannot remember which... It's fun to read. It's quite honest. And I wish Judith hadn't died. Maybe she would have finished her own book and written more. I'm a fan and whoever puts this book down is LAME! (not to insult anyone lol)
