Of all the Sagas of Icelanders, Egil's Saga , reputedly by Snorri Sturluson , differs from the others I have read in two respects. First of all, it shows one reason why Iceland was settled: Many Norse were fed up with the high-handed rule of King Harold Fine-Hair. Egil Skallagrimsson, his father Skallagrim Kvedulfsen, and his father Kvedulf all ran afoul of the king who, with his reliance on lies told by informants, outlawed them. Secondly, the hero of the saga, Egil Skallagrimsson, spends most of his time in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, England, Friesland, and Ireland. Only a small fraction of the tale takes place around Egil's farm at Borg i Myrum in Borgarfjord, and that mostly at the end, when the tale moves from Egil to his son Thorstein, who has a feud with Steinar, who decides to allow his livestock to feed on the former's land. Like many of the figures in the Sagas of Icelanders, Egil Skallagrimsson was a historical person, a poet and a warrior who frequently butted heads with the kings of Norway, and who escaped numerous attempts to kill him. At one point, he fights a Swedish berserker named Ljot and kills him. Then, being the poet he is, he memorializes his own deed: Let's strike with a sword-flash To shatter the shield; To batter the blade Till the enemy bleeds; Play with the pale man [Ljot], Then pitch him to earth; Stop his mouth with steel, And serve him up as carrion. In general, Egil's poems in this edition are far more readable than other Viking poems that are full of kennings , those annoying (to me, anyway) circumlocutions for such simple words as "man," "woman," and "ship" that tend to predominate. After one battle in England, when Egil fought alongside King Athelstan, he ends one of his verses with the grim line: "No ravens went hungry." Perhaps the most touching chapter is the one about Egil's old age, stumbling about the farm, blind, and being razzed by the old women of his family. It's odd to see a warrior die of old age in any Icelandic saga. This is one of the five essential sagas that are critical for an understanding of the genre. The others are, in descending order of excellence, Njals Saga (perhaps the best of them all), Grettir's Saga , Laxdaela Saga , and Eyrbyggja Saga . All are available in Penguin editions and deserve a read.
