“[He is] otherwise mildly studious in his observation of human nature, on the whole a benignant philosopher not disposed to be severe upon the follies of mankind”- from "Bleak House". This is the third full length novel I've read by Charles Dickens, and one of the most intricate. Set during the 1830s within the Court of Chancery, it is a book that is an indictment of the British judicial system. Dickens sets up the novel using the legal case of Jarndyce and Jarndyce as a satirical take on wills and probates, "the day begins to break now; and in truth it might be better for the national glory even that the sun should sometimes set upon the British dominions than that it should ever rise upon so vile a wonder". It is fascinating to know that this novel led to legal reforms in the UK- something that I did not know about. All I knew about this novel is that it's Dickens' longest, next to David Copperfield. As the endless lawsuit between Jarndyce and Jarndyce is established, a grand soap opera unfolds. We are introduced to Esther Summerson who is being raised by the nasty Miss Barbary. After she dies, John Jarndyce becomes her guardian and moves into Bleak House. John is also the guardian of two others: Richard and Ada Clare, who are both John's cousins, and they fall in love with each other setting up the novel's love story. Enter a cast of colorful characters such as the mysterious and haughty Lady Dedlock who seems to be much more involved in her schemes and designs towards Esther; Jo, the street sweeper, and lawyer Mr. Tulkinghorn; there's Mr. Bucket, Mr. Guppy, and many others. With an observant eye, Dickens writes of images that are cinematic in scope: foreboding fog and mist circle around London's densely populated communities where the poor take center stage, suffering in poverty and a lack of means, “I felt as if my heart would not hold the triumph of having heard those words. My first wild thought had died away. It was not too late to hear them, for it was not too late to be animated by them to be good, true, grateful, and contented. How easy my path, how much easier than his!” (940). Then the setting shifts seamlessly into grand halls, drawing rooms and the wealthy manors that divide the British class system, “Like man in the abstract, he is here to-day and gone to-morrow—but, very unlike man indeed, he is here again the next day. This evening he will be casually looking” (803). Episodic and always engaging- it's no wonder that Dickens' legacy as one of the greatest novelists has endured. The long chapters first published as serials were similar to that of HBO and Netflix shows that dominate today. If only more folks out there read more than they watched!
