After the media caught hold of the presumed origins of the COVID-19 virus, out came the conspiracy theorists with their tinfoil hats. One rumour that began circulating was that Dean Koontz (writing as Leigh Nichols) penned a 1981 book that predicted the virus decades before. While Koontz denies that Wuhan-400 was a prophetic notion in his piece of fiction, those with too much isolation time seem to be holding firm. Always liking to dive into a controversy, I decided to read this book to decide for myself. Tina Evans has been struggling for a year since her son, Danny’s, death. Having perished in a bus accident while on a Scouts trip, Tina allowed her marriage to fall apart and has barely been able to function. She thinks that she can see him passing on the street and went so far as to almost break into a vehicle when she saw a boy who bore a striking resemblance. While working on a Las Vegas production, Tina uses her down time to finally box up Danny’s things. She has an eerie feeling and notices odd things happening, occurrences that lead her to wonder if Danny might not be dead after all. In a panic, Tina begins to wonder if her son is communicating to her in some telekinetic manner and she engages the services of a local lawyer, Elliot Stryker, to help her get to the bottom of it. They devise a plan to exhume Danny’s coffin to get some answers, hoping that this will put everything to rest. However, once Elliot seeks to have the order signed by a judge, both he and Tina find themselves visited by men who threaten them. Elliot is forced to kill a man to save his own life and barely helps Tina escape her house before it explodes. Surely, someone is trying to block any discoveries about the accident or Danny’s body, but why. Following what little they can, Elliot and Tina make their way out of Las Vegas, hoping to get to the root of the issue and determine if Danny is still alive, as well as what might have happened to him. Could the accident and the death of all these Scouts be a cover-up for something bigger? Meanwhile, a covert agency is working off the grid to keep Tina from learning the truth about Danny. Away in a mountain laboratory, answers await, as well as work surrounding a horrible virus, Wuhan-400. A well-developed piece but surely not as scandalous as some in the social media world tried to make it seem. Recommended to those who love a good thriller, as well as the writer who enjoys some government intrigue alongside their medical thrills. I’ve never read Dean Koontz to the best of my knowledge, though this was an interesting way to introduce myself to the bestselling author. His work is both well-written and held my attention throughout. It’s sometimes hard to read books where the female lead is less than cutthroat, seeking a man to help her, as this was surely the case with Tina Evans. Her trying to come to terms with the loss of a child goes through some of the same sad events as occur in other novels I have encountered, with the same reliance on a man to help love her and pick up the pieces. The reader learns much about Tina throughout this piece, as she shares the details of her divorce and the love she has for Danny, even if she cannot let go of him. Other characters fill the book and help complement the plot, adding interesting flavours where they are needed. The story was decent, if a little supernatural at times. Nichols/Koontz is able to keep the reader interested and connected to the plot without too much trouble, though there is something a tad ‘light’ that does not challenge the brain as much as one might hope. The narrative keeps the story moving along and most of the plot points are quite strong. The Wuhan-400 angle was a decent addition to the story, though the COVID-19 conspiracists are surely grasping at straws here. I will allow anyone wishing to read the book to draw their own parallels, but for me, Nichols/Koontz does not appear to be any prophet here, as the differences between COVID-19 and Wuhan-400 are vast. Then again, some people are happy to call a red ball turquoise in order to keep their lives interesting. To those people, I offer a pat on the head a slice of pity pie! Kudos, Mr. Koontz (Nichols), for delivering a decent novel as my first foray into your work. I will likely come back for more, one day. Love/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at: http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/ A Book for All Seasons, a different sort of Book Challenge: https://www.goodreads.com/group/show/...
