Five years after Philip K. Dick’s death in 1982, Underwood-Miller (US) published a definitive five-volume hardcover series containing a collection of all but three of his short stories, put into order of their receipt by Dick’s agent (not the same as order of publication). That year, Gollancz (UK) also published a trade paperback series of the same five volumes, but with retitled volumes 4 and 5. Unfortunately for the collector or completist, there are also other multi-volume series of his collected short stories, in other order, but with similar subtitles. If you are looking to complete the set, be sure to stick with the same series. If you are looking to read in order, I recommend the Gollancz series. To help you recognize those, here is a summary of The Collected Short Stories of Philip K. Dick, Gollancz Science Fiction, Orion Publishing Company, 1987. Volume 1 “Beyond Lies the Wub”, 1947, 1951-1952, Introduction by Roger Zelazny Volume 2 “Second Variety” 1952-1953, Introduction by Norman Spinrad Volume 3 “The Father-Thing” 1953-1954, Introduction by John Brunner Volume 4 “Minority Report” 1954-1963, Introduction by James Tiptree, Jr. (original Underwood-Miller title “The Days of Perky Pat”) Volume 5 “We Can Remember It For You Wholesale” 1963-1981, Introduction by Thomas M. Disch (original Underwood-Miller title “The Little Black Box”) This review is of Volume 5 of the Gollancz series, subtitled for “We Can Remember It for You Wholesale”. In 1990, Gollancz also republished Volume 5 as a stand-alone trade paperback collection under its original title “The Little Black Box”. There are enough good stories here to make the collection worthwhile singly, but it is just sad to see the evidence of the deterioration of PKD’s mind and writing in the last decade of his life. I describe and rate the individual stories from * to ***** below… The Little Black Box (1963) – A new religion is being introduced throughout the world using a device known as an Empathy Box, that channels the experiences of Wilbur Mercer, and converts anyone who grips its handles. Perhaps this is a form of alien mind control of humans. It is investigated and opposed by US government telepaths, who are themselves especially susceptible. Note that the Mercerism religion re-appears in PKD’s novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? (1968) *** The War with the Fnools – An inept CIA contends with an invasion of aliens two feet tall. Not as comical as it was apparently intended. ** A Game of Unchance (1963) – An agrarian community on Mars cannot help itself from winning a carnival prize that is trouble. A vision of Mars as American frontier, where lessons are not learned. **** Precious Artifact (1963) – A war was fought between Earth and the Proxmen over the right to send their own overpopulation to Mars. Earth won, and Milt Biskle is one of the engineers hired to terraform the planet. But he suspects he has been fooled and is sent to Earth before he has a chance to disclose his theories to his fellow engineers. *** Retreat Syndrome (1963) – John Cupertino seeks the truth behind his memory of killing his wife. All levels of his reality are drawn under suspicion, as he may have false memories induced by his own mental illness, or by manipulation by legal authorities on Earth, or by Ganymedian rebels. The reality is even more ironic than any of those. ***** A Terran Odyssey (1964) – I’m not sure which was written first, but this story is made up of sections of PKD’s novel Dr. Bloodmoney (1965). It is a post-nuclear holocaust Earth with rearranged geopolitics, and genetic mutation. It is a very complex setting, better conveyed by the novel than in this short story. *** Your Appointment Will be Yesterday (1965) – PKD later expanded this into his novel Counter-Clock World (1967). Time is moving in reverse for most of the Earth, but things have backed up nearly to the point where Ludwig Eng created the Swabble that enabled time reversal. As his work is eradicated, will time go forward again? It is an interesting thought piece, as only events outside of the human mind itself are reversed – people see cause and effect reversed, without reversal of their minds and memories. In novel form, the novelty of this device wears out, so I prefer the story. ***** Holy Quarrel (1965) – It is possible construct sentences of English words that are not meaningful statements, or even that are self-contradictory. Only someone who is completely clueless about how computers work, would think that entering such sentences into one would have any effect on its “reasoning” or its developed “faith”. This is that kind of story. ** We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1965) – Douglas Quail leads a boring life with an office job, and dreams of being a secret agent on Mars. One day he contracts with Rekal Inc. to implant that experience into his memory. During the procedure, it is discovered that this would conflict with some repressed memories he already has. While the two “Total Recall” films (1990 and 2012) that were adapted from this story further develop the action around that basic concept, the story further develops the concept itself. I prefer the story version. This was one of many stories on first ballot for 1967 Nebula Award. The footnotes of the book describe it as “nominated”, but because it did not make it to the final ballot, that would be inaccurate. ***** Not by Its Cover (1965) – Books published in “living” bindings are found to have been edited. *** Return Match (1965) – A pinball machine is an instrument of alien invasion. *** Faith of Our Fathers (1966) – This novelette was included in Harlan Ellison’s landmark anthology Dangerous Visions, and was nominated for 1968 Hugo Award. It concerns a rising partisan official in the global revolutionary government, who must choose whether to see the truth concerning the Absolute Benefactor. Mind altering substances may help or may hinder. Truth has multiple layers, and the evidence of his senses is untrustworthy. It is a theme much repeated in PKD’s writing, but this is a particularly outstanding piece of it. ***** The Story to End All Stories for Harlan Ellison’s Anthology Dangerous Visions (1968) – one paragraph * The Electric Ant (1968) – Garson Poole finds that he is actually a humanoid android, programmed to avoid any considerations that would have revealed that. Playing with his own programming could lead to disasterous consequences. It’s easy to see how this overlaps with the concept of a human replicant in his novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep (1968). **** Cadbury, the Beaver Who Lacked (1971) - Simplistic metaphorical story about a self-centered male beaver who wants out of his marriage. This was written in a time when PKD was abusing amphetamines and exhibiting extremely erratic behaviors in his personal life. Previously unpublished, for good reason, I think. * A Little Something for Us Tempunauts (1973) – Time travelers stuck in a loop upon their return to the present. The point of time travel stories is often the confrontation of a character with himself. In this story, the three tempunauts come near their deceased selves, but are unable to confront. They face depression and consider the desirability of suicide as a way out. **** The Pre-Persons (1973) – In the near future, abortion has been made legal up to the age of 12 years. Several personal stories of terrified or captured children illustrate this future. Then the story continues into an explicitly misogynist rant about how selfish women will control men. Wretchedly bad story. * The Eye of the Sybil (1975) – A citizen of the Roman Republic is able to see into our own time through the eye of a Sybil. Now is described as a time of secret police and mind control. PKD was suffering from hallucinations during the time this was written. Previously unpublished. ** The Day Mr. Computer Fell Out of Its Tree (1977) – Joe Contemptible leads a meaningless life, but meets the beautiful Joan Simpson. Previously unpublished. ** The Exit Door Leads In (1979) – Bob Bibleman wins a trivial contest and is sent to a military college. There he meets Mary Lorne and gets involved in a conspiracy *** Chains of Air, Web of Aether (1979) – Leo McVane is assigned to live alone in a dome on a frontier planet, where he watches for disasters, and manages the import of music videos. He reaches out to a woman living alone in the next dome over, because she is dieing. He resists getting involved, but falls again into the traps of personal relationship. One of the few stories written in PKD’s last decade that I actually enjoyed. **** Strange Memories of Death (1980) – The Lysol Lady is being evicted, and the first-person narrator ponders the meaning of money. Auto-biographical? ** I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1980) – Victor Kemmings is in cryonic suspension for a ten year trip to another star system, but his automatic unit is malfunctioning. He is awake, but unable to move, and so the master computer struggles to find a way to keep his mind alive. It succeeds, sort of. *** Rautavaara’s Case (1980) – Aliens reanimate the brain of one member of a crew who has died in space. ** The Alien Mind (1981) – A space travelling pilot should have taken better care of his pet cat. PKD’s last story before his death in 1982 **
