Really great book about the founding of eBay and it’s early culture, I was a little out of by the fact that it is 20 years out of day being published way back in 2002, 5 years before the first iPhone! But surprisingly it does exactly what it set out to do. Chart eBay’s origins and culture through its early years and past the Dot.Com bubble burst and a great book for anyone who wants to know how it all started. It is funny to see how somewhat arrogant the eBay team was towards the start of the new millennium, going so far as to say they were better than Amazon because focused only on one thing. Especially since it was doing just about everything that would rocket Amazon to biggest global retailer in the world and the second richest company in the world 😂 It’s also funny because they take shots at Amazon but failed to realise that before anyone sold anything on eBay it had to first be purchased and used for it then to even make its was onto eBay being sold as “secondhand” and who was the company that would soon be selling all those items to buyers? Amazon. It amazes me how different the internet and internet based companies and their culture were back then compared to know. They talk about a lot of their problems and most of them stem from not “involving the community” which translates to not letting a bunch of middle aged people who use eBay and engage in their eBay message boards in on their decisions which staggers me! Can you imagine Apple asking their sellers for permission before removing the headphone jack from the iPhone 7? Or Amazon asking the “community” if their next Prime deal is a good idea? Laughable 😂 EBay’s biggest problem wasn’t that it didn’t “involve the community” it was letting these people think they had any say whatsoever! It even went so far that the “community” felt outraged that they weren’t involved in the companies public IPO and allowed to buy early stocks! Just because you use eBay doesn’t mean you are a part of the company! I could not stop laughing reading how these idiots would get all up right because eBay changed something to their website but didn’t first post it on their community board 😂 As I said this was a great book while dated does everything it set out to do and it was very well written without feeling the need to stroke the egos of the company execs he interviewed. My only gripe is that the chapters weren’t named so I had no idea what year or time period or what the next chapter was about until I was reading, a small thing but when your talking about a companies founding and history they really help, maybe the author should have posted it in his “community” message boards 😂 5/5 Stars would definitely read again ✌🏻🙌🏻🙏🏻
