Very nice to see this book so highly regarded here. It was the first novel by Taylor Caldwell that I read, back in 1972, I believe. I've re-read it twice since then. It's a powerful story with the author's traditional emotional and scenic detail, a fascinating story peopled with fascinating characters and relationships. Regrettably it's out-of-print at this time, along with almost all of Caldwell's other works. With the current interest in historical novels, I'd like to see some of her books made available again, especially this one. 01/19/10: Nice to see that Chicago Review Press will be reissuing TESTIMONY OF TWO MEN on April 1st - though paperback and hardcover copies of this book can often be found in used bookstores, it's been unavailable to the general public for far too long. And as Caldwell's books weren't considered particularly 'literary' when originally published, it's fitting that Chicago Review Press is the publisher. 3/12/10: I've been in one of those moods where I seem to flit from book to book without being engaged by anything, but a few evenings ago I picked up TESTIMONY OF TWO MEN on impulse, and that situation seems to be resolved for now! Despite remembering many of the particulars of the story, and how it all turns out, this remains a compelling read. 3/23/10: I finished my re-read of TESTIMONY OF TWO MEN this afternoon - I'll stand by my previous comments about the book's quality and emotional depth, though I honestly don't think some judicious editing would have hurt - some information was repeated several times, and occasionally Caldwell's eye for detailed descriptions caused the pace to flag (I've never encountered another author who used the word "and" as much as Caldwell), and some of the characters' speeches occasionally became long-winded and didactic (they no doubt reflected the author's views) - has anyone noticed that many of Caldwell's characters seem to be able to quote at length from political speeches, and scholarly and religious works? These quibbles aside, TESTIMONY OF TWO MEN, along with CAPTAINS AND THE KINGS, remains one of Caldwell's most readable - and re-readable - novels.
