An icon of American children’s books, Theodor Seuss Geisel aka Dr. Seuss has made one of the biggest marks on multiple generations with his whimsical rhymes and wacky illustrations. He became a marvel in the world of children’s books and his legacy remains as strong, if not stronger than when he was alive. A career that spanned over 5 decades, one can say he is a household name not only for children but adults of all ages! Dr. Seuss’ books have been charming children since his first big book was published in 1936, And to Think That I Saw It On Mulberry Street . After being rejected by 27 publishing houses for being “too different” with an unpopular and unfashionable style and a story with “no moral message”, Ted’s reaction was simple What’s wrong with kids having fun reading without being preached at? Like most authors and artists, the initial struggle to get a break can be difficult but for Ted, who never had a knack for academics and was a lover of pranks and all things funny, once he made his entry into the children’s book world, there was no turning back for him. Funnily enough, some of his most known books resonate moral messages and are probably one of the biggest reasons that adults love his books as much as kids. Remember his book Horton Hatches the Egg had a lovely message with these famous lines: ”I meant what I said, and I said what I meant… An elephant’s faithful—one hundred per cent!” The book shares the years he spent as an advertising illustrator and political cartoonist during WW2. He eventually joined the Army as a member of a Hollywood unit under the direction of Frank Capra, the famous movie director, and member animator Chuck Jones of Bugs Bunny fame. This group produced bi-weekly newsreels for the military. Many years later, Ted and Chuck Jones would collaborate to create the legendary movie How the Grinch Stole Christmas . Reading this book will enlighten you about how his books came to being, but the most interesting to me was that he was instrumental in killing the Dick and Jane books when he was tasked with creating a book that would enable children to have fun while learning to read. And thus The Cat in the Hat came to life! And a new publishing house called Beginner Books was formed. This is a very well-planned and thorough look at the life of this reclusive man who never had any children of his own and didn’t really even like to be around groups of them, but spent his entire life entertaining and teaching millions of children and adults through his zany creations. He created his own language through his books and showed kids that reading can be fun. Here are some of his most famous: The Cat in the Hat, McElligot’s Pool, Horton Hatches the Egg, If I Ran the Zoo, Horton Hears a Who!, How the Grinch Stole Christmas, Yertle the Turtle, Green Eggs and Ham, The Sneetches, Hop on Pop, Fox in Socks, Mr. Brown Can Moo! Can You?, The Lorax, There’s a Wocket in my Pocket, You’re Only Old Once, Oh, the Places You’ll Go!
