In the preface to the revised edition of The Paleo Diet, Dr. Cordain mentions that the book’s sales were slow after its initial release in 2002 and didn’t really take off until 2010. He attributes this to the internet: The worth of the book wasn’t appreciated until people started to share stories about the Paleo Diet. Its appeal probably has to do with a general feeling that things were always better in the past – we have mental images of svelte paleo folk running around the countryside, gathering antioxidant-rich berries as they got a great work out. Oh, those good old Paleolithic days! Evaluation of the science behind the book took a back seat to shirtless guys sharing stories on social media about how stoked they are about going Paleo. One of the most surprising things, for me, was how little evidence is provided to back up his claim that Paleolithic people were healthier than modern people. In an introductory section (How our healthy way of life went wrong) Cordain says, “most people just don’t realize just how healthy our Paleolithic ancestors were,” and goes on to say that he has “examined thousands of early-nineteenth and twentieth-century photographs of hunter-gatherers. They invariably show indigenous people to be lean, muscular and fit.” Hold on – photos?? Let’s take a look at Dr. Cordain’s level of scientific rigor: He examined many photos from the last hundred years and extrapolated to conclude that the people of the Paleolithic era (3.3 million to 11,650 years ago) were in tip-top shape. What other evidence does Dr. Cordain have that Paleolithic people were fit as fiddles? Here’s a representative statement: “The few medical studies of hunter-gatherers who managed to survive into the twentieth century also confirm earlier written accounts by explorers and frontiersmen.” There is no specific citation of these medical studies – in fact none of his claims are backed up by specific citations – there is just a general reading list at the end of the book. He did emphasize one study that I was able to find online: a 1971 paper reporting a low rate of heart disease among the Inuit population in Greenland – it has been debunked. In any case, making a case for the health of people who lived more than ten thousand years ago based on comments about the physical appearance of modern hunter-gatherers by explorers and frontiersmen is weak, to say the least. Dr. Cordain has a PhD in exercise physiology – not paleontology, archaeology, or evolutionary genetics. The Mayo Clinic raises a few issues with Dr. Cordain’s claims in these areas: Archaeological research has demonstrated that early human diets may have included wild grains as much as 30,000 years ago — well before the introduction of farming. Genetic research has shown that notable evolutionary changes continued after the Paleolithic era, including diet-related changes, such as an increase in the number of genes related to the breakdown of dietary starches. The idea that we have not evolved since Paleolithic times is simply wrong, as several evolutionary biologists such as Marlene Zuk (University of California) have pointed out. Besides adopting to better digest starch since the advent of farming, populations have evolved over the last 10,000 years to digest lactose and resist malaria – even blue eye color arose and spread within that time frame. Did Paleolithic people live longer lives? I had expected the Paleo Diet book to be full of cool evidence that cave people lived longer lives – surprisingly there’s no discussion on lifespan. Well, did they live longer lives? This paper, published in 2011 by an anthropologist in PNAS (one of the most respected journals) looked at the proportion of younger (20-40 years old) to older (> 40 years old) Paleolithic human remains and found that only a small proportion made it to 40. “All three Late Pleistocene samples have a dearth of older individuals compared with Holocene ethnographic/historical samples.” (The Pleistocene includes the Paleolithic era while the Holocene is our current era.) It would almost certainly be generous to say that the average lifespan of Paleolithic people was 40 years. Paleo Diet pros and cons – impact on health Of course, people who live a “hunter-gatherer” lifestyle that involves moderate food consumption and lots of exercise are probably going to be pretty lean. A sedentary lifestyle that involves over-eating of processed food is a big problem – that’s not news. The Paleo Diet is a mix of good and bad ideas – the good ideas are not unique to the Paleo Diet and I believe that the bad ideas are harmful to both your health and the planet. Paleo Diet rules First, here are the ground rules of the Paleo Diet: All the lean meats, fish, and seafood that you can eat. All the fruits and non-starchy vegetables that you can eat No cereals No legumes No dairy products No processed foods Things that the Paleo Diet probably gets right The last two points, above, are the main reasons why the Paleo Diet might be beneficial for some. Replacing dairy and processed food with fruit and veg would be a big improvement in many people’s diets. Here’s a summary of the good ideas contained in the book (these ideas are not unique to the Paleo Diet): Reduce dairy Reduce processed foods Reduce refined sugar Eat food that is alkalizing rather than acidifying (e.g., leafy greens over meat). I guess the issue of acid-generating food is not as well-known as the others (except for diseases like gout, caused by an excess of uric acid and often associated with a diet rich in animal-protein). Since meat is acidifying, there’s a conflict with the core Paleo Diet, which Dr. Cordain tries to resolve by saying to make sure to eat plenty of greens to balance the heavy meat intake that he prescribes. He neglects to point out that plant-based protein sources like legumes are much less acidifying than animal-based protein (sometimes they are even alkalizing). Things that the Paleo Diet probably gets wrong Eat a lot of animal protein, even relative to the typical American diet Avoid starchy vegetables Avoid cereals Avoid legumes To reiterate: an animal-based low-carb diet will likely shorten your lifespan, even though it may help you lose weight. When you think about the role of the internet in the rise to popularity of the Paleo Diet you get an idea of the root of the problem: photos and testimonials of people losing weight. As described in the last post, long-term studies on the impact of diet on health require huge effort to be done well. Anecdotal stories of weight loss (or pictures of lean people showing their abs) tell you one thing: some people lose weight on the diet. But are they healthier – how about their risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease? You need long-term scientific studies to tell you this: and they have unequivocally told us that there is a significantly higher risk of death from a low-carb diet that’s rich in animal products. Is the Paleo Diet impartial or agenda-driven? I'll stop there because the remaining discussion is getting away from the whether the book is good and focuses more on Cordain's previous funding sources (spoiler: they include the NRA) and also on whether the diet is good for the planet (spoiler: it is not). For the remainder of this discussion please see my blog post on the book: https://greenstarsproject.org/2019/12...
