I chose four stars for the information presented in the book. Jan Meins three years of research, like a volcanic eruption belches fire and brimstone with a mob of characters, a swarm of dates, and unbelievable corruption in an Arkansas murder case. Thanks for the Index that keeps this web of intrigue cogent. Murder In Arkansas characters intermingle again and again; the cohesion between police departments (though there was bitter fighting between the LRPD and sheriff’s office), sheriff offices, politicians, and CEOs revealing a covert and dangerous system in Arkansas. Big pond. Lots of fish with a couple of Great Whites watchdogging the pool. I started this book convinced William “Bill” McArthur arrested for conspiracy to commit capital murder (allegedly paying a $25,000 contract for his wife’s murder) was guilty. By chapter seventeen, I’m not so certain. But whether guilty or framed, the good-old-boys, Arkansas power brokers that operate within a white male social class making their own rules now owed the criminal attorney obvious ten years later in the trial of John Christopher Peeler, a trial McArthur should effortlessly have won — but shamefully lost. Who moved the bouquet of flowers? This subtle action pique’s reader interests. Were they in the house when Alice McArthur was murdered? Was it a sheriff’s deputy early on the scene? A cabal police officer? As incidental as this seems, the bouquet presents a major mystery in the murder. Infidelity, sex, and cocaine unravel throughout this murder mystery. Three people are convicted. Readers much determine whether William McArthur played a hand in his wife’s demise. Chapter twenty-seven wraps the story of The Cops, The Lawyers, The Witnesses and Bit Players, The Killers, and The Victims. But the tale leaves readers with no conclusion. This whodunit lingers in the annal’s of Arkansas history with lots of unanswered questions by readers. The author’s potential for writing is good; the editors of Murder In Little Rock at Rose Publishing Company leave much to be desired. St. Martin’s Press editors did no better. If you are interested in political/legal/law enforcement corruption Murder In Little Rock makes for captivating reading. Show more
