I am in the middle of a project to read all of Denis Johnson’s novels and poetry in publication order. A lot of these are re-reads, but in this case this was my first reading. At the front of this book, Johnson makes it clear that the plot is not his own but that of a poet called Bill Knott. He explains this further in his acknowledgements where he names the poem. This naming came a bit late for me because I’d already been intrigued by the introductory note and done some internet research to find the poem. It is “Poem Noir” and here is a link to it: http://robotwisdom2.blogspot.com/2007... . I decided to include a link rather than the text of the poem because, clearly, the poem itself would represent a significant spoiler. You can read it if you are interested and not worried about spoilers. Or after you have read the book. I decided, and you may not agree with this decision, to read the poem before I read the book. And, truth be told, I have a feeling that was a good decision for my personal experience of the book (although obviously I have no way to prove this). The reason I say this is that knowing the basic plot allowed me to do two things. Firstly, it let me concentrate on the writing, and the writing is the star here: Johnson began his writing as a poet and that is evident in all his novels. Secondly, this novel reads a lot like a dream and isn’t always the easiest to follow: knowing the underlying structure kept me oriented. If you prefer not knowing what will happen in a book, save the poem until afterwards. Writing at oysterboyreview.org, Steve Kistulentz says the following which sort of summarises my reaction to the book: Early in the book, a minor character describes the words of the English language as being like prisms. "Empty, nothing inside, and still they make rainbows." And the book's interwoven narratives are often interrupted by the text of obsessive, feverish letters written to various law enforcement agencies by Fairchild, and his insane brother. It is the beauty of Johnson's language, especially in these epistles, that evokes the language of religious ritual. The overtone of menace, the Gulf War in the distance, Already Dead deliberately conjures the specter of St. John on Patmos, and the dream-riddled composition of the Book of Revelation. Like his characters gathering to channel messages from the spirit world, Johnson writes as if he himself was possessed with an otherworldly gift. Already Dead may not be a breakthrough success; its subject matter and the intensity of its language and its violence will undoubtedly, and unfairly, limit his audience. But it should remind us to be grateful whenever a writer with Johnson's gifts chooses to take huge, and ultimately worthwhile, risks. The basic plot is straightforward and you can read the poem if you just want to know that. What matters more here in terms of reading experience is Johnson’s prose and his social criticism. This book followed the more well-known “Jesus Son” but also came just after the release of Johnson’s collected poetry in “The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nation’s Millennium General Assembly”. The poetry in the language is often very beautiful and, for me, often more poetic than his poetry (perhaps because of the images he evokes which sit in the context of the novel, but I don’t know). Regarding social criticism, the reviewer I have already quoted gives high praise to Johnson earlier in his review: The author's insight regarding American society stands equal to the social criticisms of some of the better central European novelists. With writers like Kis, Kundera, and Robert Musil, Johnson seems to share the notion that any individual choice is also political choice; the narrative time frame of the novel parallels the buildup of tensions in the Persian Gulf in the early 1990s. But Johnson's focus on certain fringe groups in today's society makes him peculiarly American, as much a chronicler of this dark age as Twain or Dos Passos were of previous generations. This book is funny, violent, poetic, and observant. It is not the easiest book to read with its dreamlike prose and regular interruptions from the letters of a mad man. But it is one of those books where you can revel in the language and let the rest wash over you - it is best to let the impressions grow rather than worry about the detail, I think. Slightly inaccessible but very impressive.
