Hermann Hesse led me to fill another one of those gaping holes in my reading resume -- The Bhagavad Gita . And I'm glad he did because it contained some surprises. First of all, how eminently approachable it was. Part of that might be due to Eknath Easwaran's smooth-as-Jif translation, but the bulk of the credit goes to the story of Arjuna and Krishna's long talk about life, death, good, evil, happiness, despair, rebirth, transcendence of rebirth, and so on. I'm no fan of introductions, especially those over 70 pages, but Easwaran's succinct background material on India and Hinduism is must reading for getting into the Gita . On top of that, the 18 chapters are preceded by short introductions by Diana Morrison, each providing a road map of where we're about to go. It made the reading that much smoother. As I read, I was most amazed at the commonalities with other religions -- the emphasis on love, selflessness, service, self-discipline against our own sensual desires. Dead ends, yet oh so tempting in the material, God-less world. And a God-less world is increasingly scary to consider when you consider all the positives religions have provided in their basic scriptures. As moral compasses, they are amazingly similar, given their disparate histories and geographies and appearances in time. And now, a few decades later, I can understand the Beatles' (especially George Harrison's) fascination with Krishna. The verses are beautifully written and vaguely familiar. I grew up on Bible verses, and bits like this from Krishna sounded so similar to my ear, which has heard so often the words of Christ: "That one I love who is incapable of ill will, who is friendly and compassionate. Living beyond the reach of 'I' and 'mine' and of pleasure and pain, patient, contented, self-controlled, firm in faith, with all their heart and all their mind given to me -- with such as these I am in love." Lovely, yes, and sad, too, knowing there are similar verses in other faiths' books, then reading the front pages of the newspapers and accounts of people, whipped up by "leaders" (both political and "religious" -- accent on quotes) who are intent on hatred and selfishness and division for the advancement of their own pockets and power trips. Perhaps they need to get back to the basics of scriptural texts, too.
