Dr.Bloodmoney is a disturbing post apocalyptic novel, but also pretty upbeat compared to some of the other Dick novels that I have read. The novel begins with scenes of life after some kind of nuclear war/fallout. Everyone seems to have put the war behind them and seem to be moving on with their daily city life when there are more nuclear explosions, apparently caused by a scientist who was responsible for the first nuclear fallout and now believes the whole world is out to get him. But once again, the people regroup and form small local communities, who soon begin to compete with each other. The novel moves at a searing pace but there is some good character development for an ensemble of interesting characters - like the black TV seller who simply wants to live a good life, a beautiful and promiscuous woman ( who indulges in some panic sex during the second fallout ), her small daughter with her own brother growing inside her ( a mutation due to the nuclear bombs going off ), the phocomelus with special abilities who wants to become world famous, the sinister, paranoid and evil scientist with seemingly magical powers and the elderly space traveler who was on his way to mars but is now stuck in orbit due to the nuclear explosions and becomes a disc jokey for the survivors of the apocalypse. Through the pretty absurd actions of the characters and unusual interactions between them, Dick touches upon themes like the corrupting nature of power, nostalgia, evil, rural life versus city life and the human spirit. Unlike some other post apocalyptic novels there is no government or some kind of higher authority watching over and controlling the people's lives in Dr.Bloodmoney. But there is self regulation in most of the small communities with the prominent citizens willing to commit murder to maintain law and order. And the disc jockey in space seems to provide some sort of comfort to the survivors of the apocalypse. He is almost like a benevolent god transmitting feel good messages to the survivors. When his health starts to deteriorate, the survivors begin to loose hope and there are frantic efforts to get him help. Was Dick suggesting that a majority of humanity always like to be led and need some kind of distraction to keep them occupied, without which they would go crazy? This is not like a Stephen King novel, in fact it is unlike anything i have read. I did not like or understand all of it, but it is very very intriguing and a pretty easy read. There was an afterword by Dick, in which he wrote that the novel was written during the cold war between the US and Russia when he really believed there would be some kind of nuclear war. I could identify with some of his concerns and fears since I live in India, which could well be the epicenter of some kind of nuclear war in the future.
