3.5 rated up. Ah, mountaineer writers, who give zero fucks about author photo guidelines, I love you: This was a very interesting read, although it did at times, perhaps inevitably, come across as something of a downer, a kind of myth-busting, “okay-real-talk-now” addendum to the much more emotive Ghosts of Everest: The Authorized Story of the Search for Mallory & Irvine . The latter was co-written by Jochen Hemmleb, who is convinced, to the point of obsession (relatable, lol), that Mallory and Irvine made it to the summit of Everest on June 8, 1924, and perished on the descent. Hemmleb has done amazing feats of research into the topic, and his theories are sound, but he is not himself a mountaineer. In this much shorter and somewhat drier book, Conrad Anker – who found Mallory’s body on the Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition of 1999 – shares his own perspective on the search expedition, the circumstances surrounding it, and his own conclusions on the likelihood of a successful summit bid in 1924. David Roberts adds details about the 1924 third British expedition to Everest. I have the greatest respect for Conrad Anker as a mountaineer, and his reasons for not believing Mallory made it to the summit are sound and well argued. At several points, he accuses (in a gently-ish way) Hemmleb of bias due to his obsessive study of the subject, and the members of the 1924 expedition of bias due to their friendship with Mallory. He’s not wrong but I will say that I think Anker brings his own bias to the table: the bias of a modern climber, with 1999 standards of mountaineering, and an ingrained reliance on modern climbing equipment. Much of his argument rests on the fact that 1924 gear (basically a bunch of silk and wool layers, inflexible rope, wonky oxygen apparatus, and a brazen bit of “tally-ho” on top) would never have been up to the formidable challenge that Everest’s cold, wind, and high altitude present. At one point, he even projects an “awareness” of lacking modern support onto Mallory that Mallory, a confident climber to whose mind Everest was overcomeable and his gear (at the time) state-of-the-art, would simply not have had. The conclusions Hemmleb and his co-authors drew about the 1999 expedition, based on the position of Mallory’s body and various items found on his person, as well as Noel Odell’s final sighting of Mallory and Irvine high on what he believed to be the Second Step in 1924, were that the pair summited, but dangerously late in the day, leading to a descent in the dark on which Mallory fell and Irvine succumbed to exposure/exhaustion. Anker’s conclusions have them stymied by the Second Step and perishing after turning back. I have my own bias, because Ghosts of Everest did change my mind when I read it, from “inconclusive” to “you know what, I think they made it.” Ironically, a big part of what convinced me was Conrad Anker himself, partially free-climbing the Second Step, and ultimately rating it a 5.10 climb. That bit demystified the Second Step for me personally (having climbed a bunch of 5.10s in my day), to the point where, formidable as it is, I actually genuinely don’t think it would have been a technical problem for Mallory, hailed as the most brilliant and technically accomplished mountaineer of his time. If he were stymied by the Second Step, it would have been due to high-altitude exhaustion and unpredictable snow conditions, which is of course entirely possible. But I still don’t think a man of Mallory’s climbing abilities would have balked at the technicality of the climb. He wouldn’t have thought of it like Anker would have had him think, in terms of “oh no, I don’t have crampons or proper carabiners or pitons,” modern items that were not part of his experience. His gear would have been sufficient to him because it always was, and because his climbing strength was in his own confidence and physicality. The same concept applies, I think, to the “impossibility” factor of the expedition as a whole. Later climbers have judged it by later standards; they couldn’t not. You can’t literally put yourself into the headspace of a 1920s mountaineer, to whom his current mountaineering standards were the best his climbing world had ever seen. They would have tried what would later be considered “impossible,” because to them… it wasn’t? And often they were right. “Impossible” feats of athleticism have been challenged and surpassed so many times in all kinds of sports, and especially in climbing. It was considered impossible to summit Everest without oxygen until Reinhold Messner and Peter Habeler did it in 1978… but as this very book points out, until then the oxygen-less altitude record was held by Teddy Norton, a member of the 1924 expedition , who got to ~270 metres below the summit, WITHOUT OXYGEN, a few days before Mallory and Irvine. I mean, think about that. That altitude record itself was not broken until 1952. Teddy Norton, a man whose name most people don’t even remember because everything about the 1924 expedition is always about Mallory and Irvine, held the record for altitude for 28 years, and the record for oxygen-less altitude for FIFTY-FOUR YEARS. Even then it was only broken by Messner and Habeler, two of the greatest mountaineers of all time, and plenty of people didn’t believe them they'd done it in 1978 (so naturally Messner did it again in 1980, solo, from the trickier North side, lol). Impossible is relative, is what I’m saying. Describing feats like Teddy Norton’s is actually where this book added some real interest, because David Roberts delved into some of the lesser-known events of the early British expeditions, like the miraculous belay that Mallory executed in 1922, saving two of his team mates in a feat that should have been (wait for it) impossible. These climbers, and the porters who supported them, achieved things that would not be achieved again for decades. Actually, demonstrably achieved, not, as in Mallory’s case, maybe-hopefully-wouldn’t-it-be-nice-if-they-did. Yes, Anker’s arguments are sound, but I still think he underestimated what Mallory was capable of. It’s also easy to dismiss the opinions of Mallory’s team mates and friends, but they knew the man, they knew his climbing style and his (definitely not healthy) obsession with making it up Everest. They didn’t believe he’d have turned back, and I believe their accounts of him. I also remain sceptical of Noel Odell ultimately changing his mind (after returning home and being badgered about it by a bunch of people who weren’t there) about where exactly he last spotted Mallory and Irvine. His first account, which he didn’t start second-guessing until later, was that he last saw them high up, on or near the Second Step. I don’t think there’s much point to simply insisting he was wrong. He was the one who was there. As Anker points out, the question will now very likely never be answered, so ultimately it doesn’t really matter what anyone believes. They did incredible things even if they didn’t summit. Part of me hopes no one ever does find Sandy, and part of me hopes someone will. Ultimately, I found the parts of the book that focused on the 1924 expedition, and especially on those lesser-known triumphs and defeats, more interesting than Anker’s 1999 account, which goes into descriptions of various other 1999 summit bids and the troubles they ran into. The most thought-provoking part of the 1999 parts, to me, were the sections on sharing the news of how Mallory’s body was found, the way internet dispatches and immediate leakage of the story took control of the narrative away from the expedition members, and the backlash they experienced over having disturbed Mallory’s body. This year marks a quarter century since they found him (which is absolutely mind-blowing to me!), and the way we consume news has changed so much even since then. In the toddler years of the internet in 1999, they struggled with the “insta” share of having the story break on the same day, with not having time to prepare proper statements, with their inadequate immediate responses captured for all the world to see, with the vast discrepancy between their “lame” commentary and the poetic writings of the 1920s climbers. I haven’t kept up with how mountaineering reporting has evolved in the days of social media, but I shudder to think how this discovery would have gone down today. Anyway. It wasn’t a super-strong book but it made me think a lot, and I’m guessing as it’s the centennial this year, I’ll be reading and rereading some more books on the subject. It never gets old or less moving.
