Can you forgive her? Can you forgive her? Can you forgive her? Can you forgive her ? “Poor Alice! I hope that she may be forgiven. It was her special fault, that when at Rome she longed for Tibur, and when at Tibur she regretted Rome.”* Oh, Alice, Alice... not only did she break one engagement, but a second one too and this to a solid, stolid man with status and prospects. And then, and then... Alice Vavasor is honest, forthright and she sticks to her principles. However, as she breaks off one relationship after another she indulges in a great deal of soul searching, self loathing and regret. As she is quite well off in her own right she dresses well, but it is not difficult to imagine her in a hair shirt whilst flogging herself with a whip. As far as Victorian society is concerned it’s shocking enough that she is a jilt, but the fact that she jilts a man who is highly regarded and who is approved of by friends and family alike seems to be unforgivable. Everyone elbows in with advice, whether she wants it or not. It is a society which doesn’t accept that mistakes can be made and promises broken. It is also a society in which it is imperative to marry well. Fortunately for the reader there is comic relief from Alice’s angst in the shape of other shenanigans. Alice’s cousin Lady Glencora married Plantagenet Palliser on the advice of family and friends, but she also regrets her choice and would much rather have married the handsome Burgo Fitzgerald than the (possibly) future Chancellor of the Exchequer. Mrs Greenow, a widow, flirts with two men and tries to marry one of them off to various unmarried nieces. But what is it that women want? That is the question that baffles several men in this novel, and is a question which the women themselves are not always able to fathom. The conclusion of the novel is more or less that all’s well when women aren’t willful and follow the advice of their betters. Mind you, Mrs Greenow might have a word or two to say about that. And as regards Alice? Why, there is an awful lot of forgiving, whether she wants it or not, but does she forgive herself? The narrator, who frequently inserts his own opinions, tells us that he forgives Alice, but poses the question: “But can you forgive her, delicate reader?” ### Anthony Trollope’s humour is not of the “in your face” variety, but is very, very subtle. This review doesn’t mention all the characters, most of whom are well fleshed-out. They vary substantially in character, and some are likeable or even loveable, whilst others such as Mr Bott are odious. There is drama and humour alike. There are villainous doings, but there are also acts of self sacrifice and kindness. Everything is very neatly tied up by the end of this long tale. This Kindle edition is full of typographical errors. From Chapter 48 through several chapters there is a dire need of apostrophes, both to denote possessives as well as omissions - after all, can't and cant mean two very different things. *Author’s note: “Tibur: town sixteen miles north-east of ancient Rome; Alice’s feelings are those of the poet Horace in his first Epistle.” ### "'What game is up now, I wonder,’ said Jeannette to herself, when she was left alone. ‘They two’ll be cutting each others throatses before they’ve done, and then my missus will take the surwiver.’" "And look here, Mr Cheesacre, if it should ever come to pass that you are making love to a lady in earnest – ’ ‘I couldn’t be more in earnest,’ said he. ‘That you are making love to a lady in earnest, talk to her a little more about your passion and a little less about your purse. Now, good night.’" "Nature, I think, had so fashioned George Vavasor, that he might have been a good, and perhaps a great man; whereas Mr Bott had been born small. Vavasor had educated himself to badness with his eyes open. He had known what was wrong, and had done it, having taught himself to think that bad things were best. But poor Mr Bott had meant to do well, and thought that he had done very well indeed." "She knew that she had been wrong in both, and was undergoing repentance with very bitter inward sackcloth." “... and Alice went out of the Countess’s presence with sundry inward exclamations of ‘mea culpa’, and with many unseen beatings of the breast.”
