" They're all nice guys. They just get to thinking, you know? " It is a bit like a police procedural except the guy hired to solve the problem of a card game heist is also a conman. Cogan's Trade is an apt name for the book because most of it is about this really tough guy named Jack Cogan going about finding who robbed a card game and then eliminating them. First, he has to find out whether it is Mark Trattman, the guy who runs the game but robbed it once before and got away with it. Once it is discovered that it is not Trattman who did it this time, Cogan orders that Trattman be murdered anyway so that it can give the actual robbers a false sense of safety. The book is a great account of the antics of a bunch of lowlife gangsters who have spent too much time in prison. But even when they're outside, they get involved in low return con jobs like stealing dogs. One account of a long dog stealing heist and procedural aspects of how a large number of angry dogs are transported, dealing with dog farts, dog shit, dog food and hard-boiled dogs who remember their stealers face no matter what was really hilarious. Like Elmore Leonard, Higgins isn't much of a descriptions guy. In fact, Higgins makes Leonard look like Norman Mailer. The plot moves forward almost entirely through dialog. Sometimes the syntax of some working class dialogs were indecipherable. There is a long conversation between the two robbers - Frankie and Russell, on their drive to the card game heist. I am sure a young Quentin Tarantino read this. Cogan refusing the request of a prostitute to zip her dress for her establishes his tough as nails nature. The book is also strangely touching with gangsters narrating their personal follies to each other. Frankie never got laid before he went to prison because the girl he was dating had a father who always kept interfering. Frankie and Russell share details of their mothers coming to visit. Frankies rarely did. Russell's came all the time. Mickey, a gangster whom Cogan hires for a job goes on and on about his troubles with his wife who is ready to leave him if he is convicted in a hunting case. It takes a few chapters to really understand who is who and what is really going on. It took a while for me to finish. I am glad I did.
