This is one of the latest novels by a SF author, who became popular in the 1950s with both his novels and shorter works, including such masterpieces as City (1952). This is also his last SF work, nominated for a major award (ok, posthumously, in 1997 he was nominated for Over the River and Through the Woods to Locus Best collection, but most (5 of 8) of the stories there are from the 1950s). This novel, published in 1981, was nominated for Hugo in 1982 (also for Locus), lost Hugo to Downbelow Station and Locus to The Many-Colored Land . The story starts with a man, Thomas Decker, living alone in the woods, communicating in his mind with mysterious Whisperer, a being that seems both a trickster and a naïve child. In this, the character reminds of a protagonist of Way Station . Then the story shifts to Jason Tennyson, who flees for his life and becomes a runaway on a spaceship. He finds out that the ship’s destination is a desolate planet named the End of Nothing at the edge of the galaxy. Only this ship connects the planet with the rest of the galaxy, and it mainly transports non-human pilgrims. For on the planet, there is a religious institution called Vatican 17. It is a secret project of robots to merge human faith and reason and create the ultimate infallible Pope, an omniscient supercomputer. There, robots and a few of their human assistants toil for a millennium on this grand task. Tennyson, who is a medical doctor, is asked by locals to stay, for their only medic died recently. And the first major case for him is to try to save Mary. She is an old woman and one of the best Listeners (human psychics who can travel mentally to other places and whose travels are objectively recorded by knowledge cubes). And recently she visited a place she is sure was Heaven… Another human, who came to the End of Nothing, is a female reporter Jill Roberts, who tries to investigate Vatican 17. Jill and Jason fell in love and the Whisperer visits Jason to take his on a journey to the world of equations… The story starts quite well, showing glimpses of possible secrets and an interesting setting of god-seeking robots. However, for me, this strong start fizzled to a way weaker finale.
