This book was a very interesting insight into the beloved author and "World's most famous vet". It seems Herriot was every bit as likable in reality as he seems to be in his famous semi-autobiographical books. Herriot's son, Jim Wight tells us proudly of Herriot's successes and unflinchingly of his struggles, which given his very private nature were often completely internalized. As a side bar it is also delightful to have some knowledge of the men on whom Tristan and Sigfried Farnon are based and indeed it sounds like their portrayal in print is mostly spot-on. Right up-front, Wight tells us that he was reluctant to pen a biography about his famous father because he doesn't really consider himself a writer. While it is true that he writes in a different style than his dad, his biography is accessible and interesting to read. For me, he really hits his stride about thirty pages in. In a couple of places, Wight seems to inadvertently fall into the trap of recounting stories we've already heard told so masterfully in Herriot's canon. I feel these time are unfortunate because they don't play to Wight's strengths as an author. And a couple of times, Mr. Wight comes off a tad defensive in tone over some details that I would suppose the misunderstanding of which has been a source of irritation. But these are very minor flaws, and I am grateful that he has shared with us his unique perspective on the life of his father. I believe Mr. Wight provides a wonderfully succinct and insightful epitaph to his father's career as an author on Page 238: [Herriot:] felt compelled to describe the old Yorkshire he had grown to love -- a way of life that was fast disappearing -- and he wanted to preserve it for others to enjoy. And thank god he did! Herriot was always a little bemused by the interest that we Americans showed in his stories about his far-away rustic agricultural community. I must admit I'm bemused by his bemusement! But he supposes at one point the drive behind our attraction to his beloved Yorkshire. He says, in essence that he supposes we are drawn by the quiet, slow-paced, old fashioned ways that contrast so sharply with the face-paced, industrialized lifestyle which most Americans live. It is an accurate supposition, I think. What a remarkable man. What remarkable stories. What a remarkable legacy.
