If John Murrey Eden had a theme song, it would be the Johnny Cash rendition of ‘Hurt.’ Go look it up. I’ll wait. *sips coffee* *checks weather forecast on phone* *sips coffee again* ...Now that your Feels have been alternately cradled in loving arms & stomped into an unrecognizable bloody mess, you’ve successfully duplicated the Eden reading experience. 😇 This is #3 of Harris’ long-running family saga, & it goes without saying that they *must* be read in order. It’s been 10 years since I finished PRINCE OF EDEN (I checked GR to be sure) & at first it was a struggle to recall the various threads & themes that were woven into books 1-2, but once I settled back into everything, the book flowed along & was difficult to put aside for sleeping or eating. Harris has that rare ability to write long, complicated sagas that grip your attention + very little filler—which makes the poor quality of her genre horror novels all the more puzzling, but that’s neither here nor there. 😶 I find many reviewers’ standoffish reaction to John Murrey Eden puzzling...until I remember the waves of fangirling for Edward in #2, & then it becomes clear. Readers, like the characters within the story, are suckered into expecting John to be an Edward clone. HE IS NOT. And his frustration with people for expecting that is, IMO, a justifiable one. Edward had many noble qualities, including his charitable bent, but one thing he lacked was the ability to recognize that his “give until it hurts!” mentality was depriving his son of a stable emotional base, which translates into a longing for tangible security. John struggles with his lack of financial/family structure throughout EDEN PASSION, quite literally wandering the earth after his expulsion from Eden—which, sadly, is also due to his father neglecting to reveal the truth of his parentage, thus instigating a terrible incestuous mistake & the wreckage in its wake. By the close of the book, John has indeed rebuilt a family & cobbled together a foundation for fiscal security...but it’s not an easy journey, & surrounding characters are swept along in his wake, like Elizabeth (one of my faves—such a BAMF survivor), Dhari (poor girl), Jack Willmot (RIP), cousin Richard (a gentle, sensitive soul, which is surprising given his emotionally stunted parents), & many others. There are no saints in the Eden-verse, but Lila comes closest to that honor—I’ve no doubt her fate will be unpleasant in book 4. :P So. I LIKE John Murrey Eden, & find him all the more relatable for his flaws & feet of clay. Whether I’ll still like him after WOMEN OF EDEN, who knows; Harris has a way of changing your mind & turning characters on their heads without warning. But I bet I’ll still hate Harriet. That selfish moo drives me crazy—I didn’t care for her in book 2, but I really can’t stand her after that meltdown in book 3. Keep calm & grow a spine, already. Anyhoooo... This was really good. Beautifully written, beautifully plotted, beautifully characterized, emotionally involving for better & for worse. If book 1 is a lengthy gothic chase & book 2 is a sensational Victorian saga, this is a mix of the two + a healthy helping of Greek tragedy (particularly in the motifs of blindness, inability to speak both literal & metaphorical, search for retribution, quest for home, etc). 5 shiny stars.
