(Edited and pictures added 9/20/2021) A bouncing romp through the Amazon rubber boom. An adventure story, part historical novel and part farce, set in the rubber boom world of the Amazon basin in the very late 1800s. Our main character is quite a ladies’ man. He prefers married women, especially young ones married to elderly wealthy gentlemen, but in a pinch, the mayor’s wife, a stage actress, or a wayward nun will do. So there’s a lot of farcical episodes of sneaking out of bedroom windows and being on the run from the police and angry husbands. The main character gets involved in intrigue over the disposition of the rubber-rich Amazon province of Acre – will it go to Brazil or to Bolivia and how and why is the United States flexing its muscles in this matter? Our main character ends up as ‘King for a Day’ of this territory, well, for a few months anyway, until this house of intrigue collapses around him. This is the historical part of the novel, in part based on real-life events known as the Acre Revolution of 1899 when the Brazilian rubber growers in Acre revolted against Bolivian control. The book is a humorous romp and a quick read written in a lively style and in very short segments or mini-chapters, usually one to several paragraphs with descriptive section titles reminiscent of old British works such as “An Uneasy Bolivian,” “To the Dining Room,” “Curtain Call,” and so on. This book was written in 1977 and translated from (Brazilian) Portuguese. The author, a Brazilian journalist born in Manaus, on the Amazon River in 1946, has made his writing career on a dozen or so novels, like this one, a work of fiction based in part on historical events in the Amazon River basin. This book and Mad Maria, are his two best-known works in English. From what I can tell on GR, it looks like only four or so of his books are available in English. Top photo of the Amazon from news.climate.columbia.edu Historic photo of Brazilian rubber workers from america.aljazeera.com The author from pwf.cz/archivy/
