The second book i read was Dead Girls Don't write Letters. Its about how this family loses their oldest daughter Jazz to an apartment fire. the family basically crumbled after that. the father became a heavy alcoholic and the mother was depressed and couldn't even do anything for herself anymore. the youngest daughter Sunny is basically left alone to do for herself and to take care of the mother because i guess the parents split up and went their separate ways after Jazz dies. After a while Sunny notices a letter in her room, and its from her sister Jazz. at first she's confused, and thinks that the letter is one from before Jazz's death. but nope it was recent, and it said that she was still alive and that she would return home to prove that she was still alive. when Jazz did come home, the dad and sunny know right off the bat that this girl was not their jazz. but the mom believed it and embraced jazz with open arms. the creepy part is that this girl claiming to be Jazz supposedly doesn't look anything like the real Jazz but she knows so much about the family and picked up the same habits and mannerisms that Jazz had. Since the ending to this story was really bizarre im not going to ruin it for anyone! all i can say is that i honestly didn't expect for that ending to come along, you just have to read it to understand what im talking about. i gave this book five stars because i personally connected with the main character Sunny. we both get compared to people in our families and we haven't really truly found who we are yet. we both imagine things to be one way just so that we don't have to see/hear the truth. basically we like to live in la la land, and shelter ourselves from the world around us. i also gave this book 5 stars because of the author Gail Giles. she's personally one of my favorite authors besides Harlen Coben. she definitely knows how to write fantastic stories for teens/young adults. "I know you miss her. Everybody does." Yes indeedy. Everybody misses Jazz.Everybody but me." (Giles,10). i picked this quote because Sunny's sister supposedly just died! and even if they didn't have a good relationship with each other i would still be upset that i lost my sibling. when i read this i knew that there was something clearly wrong with Sunny's mind. like along the lines of needing therapy or something. yet at the same time i found myself relating to her and feeling sorry for what she was going through. A connection i can make to the class is that the writer used a lot of similes and metaphors. and even though this book wasn't humorous i think i would kind of say there was a lot of exaggeration especially on Sunny's part. she's really just a sarcastic kind or person in the book. i would recommend this book mostly to teens, specifically girls, or fiction/suspense lovers. this book has a huge twist at the end that i honestly had to re read a few times just to realize what just happened. because at first i didn't believe it , but overall it was a really good book and im sure most people will appreciate it.
