Finished 02/03/2022 I picked this up when I was much younger, 19, 20 years old. Barely stumbled through it and retained nothing. For awhile now it's been one of those modern classics that I always intended to go back to as a more mature (hopefully?) adult and see all the genius and amazingness that catapulted this into classic territory. Well. This time around I definitely grasped the subject matter a lot better, I'm pretty sure the first time around I just read words without lending any brain power to deciphering them. You know like when you're distracted and you read a page 3x and you realize you read the words but don't have a single idea what they said? Ya, that's how I got through it the first time around, so this time I at least understood what I was reading. Still though, if I'm being entirely truthful I'd have to admit that my 3 star rating is actually being generous. I hate to say this, because I did feel that at the core of the story there was something special, and the subject matter of course is no triviality. I am not particularly artistically inclined, and I had literally zero knowledge of Michelangelo or his works other than seeing The David in Florence & then also my experience sneaking pics of the Sistine Chapel in Italy & getting kicked out by Italian police shoving assault rifles in my back and forcing me to delete the pics from my phone (which is stupid because the actual reason for not allowing pics inside is because the flashes can be erosive to the art, so making me delete a pic I had already taken was just redundant. But whatever this is off topic.) I am not a particular fan of Michelangelo's, classical art like that just goes over my head, so why I chose to read this biographical book on the artist, I'm not really sure, but I felt it was a classic I had to check off the list. And so checked it is! What tripped me up with this was just how convoluted this was, and on top of the endless Italian names and references, it made it difficult for me to ever get into a reading groove. I crawled through this, tiny bit by tiny bit. I shouldn't have expected anything especially fast paced considering the subject matter, but there were just bits that really just hardcore dragged and felt aimless & meandering. That in itself wouldn't have been enough for a low rating though as I realize this was never going to be plot centric. I have to admit that for like the first quarter of this book, I thought this was a fictionalized/imagined/reimagined account of Michelangelo's life, so I was constantly googling things to see which parts were true and which were embellished/made up, and eventually when things kept checking out it occurred to me to confirm that this was actually fiction, and what do you know, I realized it was in fact an actual biography of Michelangelo. Nice Jenelle. The layout was novel-esque, which naturally added to my confusion, but once I had my ah-ha moment and finally understood what I was reading, I kinda sorta almost liked this layout for a biography, the idea of a single cohesive storyline rather than the typical increments divided by subject or time span. One major and significant failing in the Agony and the Ecstasy, is the portrayal or lack thereof of the well known homosexual undertones in Michelangelo's work. Of course I realized that TAATE was published in the very early 60's, and so the way info was snipped & skewed to suit the morality of the times would obviously be an issue. But knowing what we know now, leaving something out that we know is so significant winds up making TAATE look and feel just plain ol antiquated and incorrect. After pausing here and there to do a little research alongside my reading, it became pretty obvious that Michelangelo's sexuality plays a substantial role in not just his art, but also the curiosities and passions that fueled his art, things like his interest in flesh, anatomy, death, intense joy and melancholy, spirituality & transcendence. Not being able to tell his story truthfully & having to suppress & conceal such a defining & crucial element of his story docked TAATE major points, it's basically akin to reading a decades old middle school history book, like the kind that depicted Thanksgiving as this friendly feast between colonizers and native Americans, devoid completely of all the genocide, disease, starvation, hostility, cannibalism, greed and enslavement that was in reality the defining events of the time, it's basically the same thing. There is still plenty here to learn about and engross yourself in, though the absence of all mention of his homosexual tendencies was conspicuous and was for me jarring, just knowing that so much of what was written was missing a key component, but as far as the setting and location, that was probably the book's highlight for me, my introduction to the Medici family & the culture & the detailed accounting of all his works. Though it was at times sliiightly oversaturated with these details, like we literally go down the line of every single one of his significant works & are totally submerged in info about each painting/sculpture/piece etc. There was a lot of great insight here, but again, without any mention of his homosexuality we wind up missing out on a lot as well. I also really enjoyed the realistic depictions of Michelangelo, I actually found it funny because on the one end, artistically, it's obvious that Stone sort of thinks Michelangelo can do no wrong. There's seemingly no trial an error, mess ups, drafts or revisions. I mean come on, working with stone?!?! Nobody just gets up and carves out the David on his first try. We DO get plenty of oddly descriptive and sexualized accounting of his chiseling, hitting, tapping, carving, etc etc, but in terms of being an artist, Stone obviously idolizes him. But on the other end of things, as a person, Stone manages to depict Michelangelo with a little more honesty, revealing his whiny, irritable, nagging side. It was all together just fascinating to pick up all these bits of Michelangelo that make up a whole, to learn all about this historical figure who has always been larger than life and go into depth about all his contributions to the various arts: sculpting, painting, architecture, even politics. He was undeniably a genius and getting into the mind of somebody so brilliant is always going to be interesting. And back to the "sexualized accounting of his chiseling" really quickly. When I said that I was not joking, in fact I was under selling it. He straight up is f*cking the stone. Like full on sex scene complete with thrusts and humps and pulsating and climaxes. I kid you not. I can't say that I all together hated it though, there was something well, sexy about it. Not the actual idea of supposedly penetrating stone, which obviously is impossible you'd either break your dick or break the stone, but just the all consuming love and passion for an art form such as stone work, the idea of loving something so wholly and entirely and passionately that it also encompasses your sexual side. I wholly believe that Michelangelo was capable of this level of intensity and passion, so not only did I find it sexy but it also rang true. All in all, I found enough here to immerse myself in and absorb despite my misgivings and complaints. It absolutely was not the easiest read, it was totally a slog and a half for a good chunk of the time but I managed to make it through, I really wanted to give it a higher rating but the reality is just that for me the reading experience just never exceeded that of a 3 star, and the 3 stars was TAATE at it's best, at it's worst it was closer to 2 stars. Had I been an art buff who was interested in Michelangelo mainly as an artist, this book probably would've hit a little better, but I was definitely more interested in him on a personal level, & historically as well, and unfortunately it was in those departments that I think Stone was deficient. Without ever even mentioning his homosexuality he does the reader the disservice of never painting an adequate or truthful picture. I'm going to give Stone the benefit of the doubt and assume that it was just a sign of the times, publishing in 1961, we were coming straight out of a hyper traditional decade and had yet to hit the sexual revolution, so I'm going to believe that Stone was simply writing a book for his time, just like most authors would do, and that it wasn't some indication of his own personal homophobia. Though a quick google search showed me that Stone apparently adamantly refused to admit that Michelangelo was a homosexual and went so far as to call the charge slander. SMH. Oh well. I'm still going to say that some accounting for the times has to be made. Regardless of how wrong or right it may have been, it was what it was, and Irving Stone was a product of his station and the times. At the end of the day, I think if one wants to read an unmitigated biographical account of Michelangelo's life and work, there are surely more accurate and comprehensive works out there.
