I don’t know what I was expecting from this but what I got was disappointing. First of all, Goad writes the entire book in this weird southern boomerspeak dialectic, like a much more vulgar Jeff Foxworthy. And that’s really what this feels like. It feels like he’s playing a character. Which would be fine if he didn’t go to such painful lengths to convince you of his “white trash” street cred. This guy grew up in Philadelphia, got a degree from NYU and married into a Jewish family. Sorry but I’m not really buying the “redneck” routine. He uses this persona to tackle some of the most basic talking points about race relations and PC culture ever. “If a black person does or says (X) then it’s fine, but if a white person does or says (X) then he gets called RACIST!” Ok, we get it. There’s a staggering and blatant double standard in this country when it comes to race and being able to discuss racial issues. But this is not a hot take. We all know this already. It might have been a hot take in 1997 but I doubt that too. I guess I was expecting some kind of deeper analysis. Maybe a little insight into the linguistic war on white people. A look into the WHO and WHY of this double standard. Something. Another thing that really bugged me to the point that I almost stopped reading in the first chapter: For a guy who supposedly loves and embraces his poor white heritage, it does not come across in the language he uses when describing poor rural folks. He goes through great effort to describe them as dirty and ugly and stupid and all around vile. Talking about his hometown: “The cheap houses... always smelled like methane and rotted fruit. Toenail clippings and balled-up boogers lurked beneath the sofas. The men were very hairy and dumb, while the women were somewhat hairy and dumb.” Who talks like that about their own people? I grew up in a poor white town and would never dream of describing my town or my neighbors in such a derogatory way. The chapter on taxation and the federal reserve lacked any libertarian minded insight and instead reads like the rantings of an angry drunk who just hates paying taxes. The chapter on religion sounds like it could have been written by an edgy seventh grader with a chip on his shoulder because his parents made him go to mass. The saving grace of the entire book is the history of the white underclass in Europe and America. There’s some good information there. However, this part could be read in the bookstore. No need to take it home. If you want a picture of rural southern culture, read Faulkner. If you want to know about taxation and the federal reserve, read Ron Paul. If you want race realism, read Jared Taylor. I really can’t think of a good reason to read Jim Goad.
