Lonesome Dove by Larry McMurtry is a 1985 Pocket Books publication. A little background- I do not read westerns- with the occasional exception of western historical romances here and there over the years. When it comes to movies or television shows- again, that would be a big, fat, no- except for the movie Tombstone . However, after reading a nonfictional book about Dodge City, I thought I might finally be ready to try a fictional western. Overwhelmingly, my Goodreads friends recommended I read this book- and one wonderful friend gave me a special nudge to get started on it sooner, rather than later- and I really, really appreciated that!! Reading this book also worked toward a personal book challenge I set for myself at the beginning of this year- which was to read more books ‘everyone on the planet had read, but me’ and to try authors I should have read by now. With the book weighing in at over nine-hundred pages, I thought I should wait for a time when I could read large portions of the book at a time and really digest it, because the praise heaped on this novel indicated it would demand my undivided attention. As it turns out, life thew my family a few serious curveballs this past summer and I found myself struggling to keep up with everything, so I took a little sabbatical from social media, including Goodreads, and dove headlong into this unforgettable saga. I can’t add anything much to numerous, and far more eloquent reviews for this book. But I will say, these characters, the landscape and scenery, and dialogue held me in thrall. Naturally, I will have to be the only person to have a ‘pet peeve’ here, but before I say more, I do realize the time period in which the story is set, as well as the time period in which the book was written. But, I absolutely loathe the word ‘whore’ and as anyone who read this book can attest, it is a word that is used in nearly every other paragraph, it seems. I eventually became numb to it, though. The ending threw me a little at first, too. I rolled it around in my head for a while trying to make up my mind about it. It is also one of the reasons why, after having finished the book months ago, I am just now attempting to verbalize my feelings- going back over everything that led to this crossroads of life for Call- and wondering if I was taking from the novel all that was intended. But, when you get right down to the nitty gritty, this novel has many of the elements I love in a good long saga that spans over a long period of time. I love how the story takes readers on an adventure, giving the characters true tests of courage, and letting them develop in a way we don't see much of, these days. Naturally, these characters will endure hardships and tragedy along the way- and the reader is right there in the thick of it, experiencing every emotion up close and personal. Although I have read my fair share of long sagas, I have never experienced a book quite like this one. The writing is rich and vibrant, but with a raw grit to it, that occasionally caused me to pause for time, but despite the pain, and anger, and sadness- there are moments of lightness, humor and laughter, and a deep poignancy makes this a novel that sticks with you for the long haul. I will never, ever forget these characters, or the incredible storytelling in this novel!
