I was 12 the first time I read Flowers in the Attic. My girlfriend (the one with the cool mom) had this, and I read it while I was at her house. You know those childhood books that you remember forever? Like, they were a part of what defined your experiences during that period of time? Yeah, that. Flowers in the Attic defined puberty for me. Maybe because puberty felt as awkward and semi-gross as reading about the Dollanganger siblings. But on the flip side, I could relate to Cathy’s angsty yearning for something that was just outside my reach (and thankfully my knowledge base) for at least a few more years. This book is old as hell. There will be spoilers. Alright. So what I remembered of the story in my young, fevered, hyper-hormonal brain was this incestuous romance that somehow didn’t make me feel as vile as it perhaps should have. Sure, I was squeamish about it. But I was raised Southern Baptist, and everything was a sin, so being a brother fucker wasn’t any worse than smoking a cigarette or dancing to the devil’s music. Besides, I was an only child and had no real concept of what a sibling was. I probably didn’t understand what the word titillating meant when I was originally reading this, but that’s what it was. 100%. Adult Anne knows why budding boobs Anne was shoveling this into her eyeballs. I truly believe that V. C. Andrews may have put the guilty in guilty pleasure reads. Bless. What I didn’t remember was how well-written this was for incest smut. And maybe smut is too harsh. The one sex scene (yes, yes, it was rape but we’ll get to that later) was seemingly written for a girl teetering on the verge of womanhood. It was as frustratingly non-descript as it could get while still getting the point across. Now, as an adult, I read this with a whole new set of eyes. Well, actually, Mena Suvari read it to me because I try to give my eyes a break when I can. But what I mean is that I saw what happened in a whole new light. When I was young, Chris and Cathy were this illicit love story, fueled by the backdrop of a cruel grandmother and a disingenuous, flighty mother. Now I saw two children who were forced into the role of mother and father to their younger siblings at the most tumultuous points in their mental development. They used to be normal kids. They would have grown up to be normal adults. Why? Because before they got hit upside the head with the crazypants grandmother and her religious fervor, they had never even thought about each other as sexual objects. Add that to being trapped in an attic for 3 years with no outside contact, and no outside context for any of the normal sexual urges that flood your system at that age, and you have a recipe for complete mental disaster. This doesn’t even take into account the physical and mental abuse they were subjected to by their grandmother or the damage caused by their gaslighting mother. They were set up to fail. And maybe that’s why you never really think of them as nasty. Even the rapey sex was somewhat understandable in the moment. These kids have been beaten, starved, and poisoned - figuratively and literally! They aren’t adults, and they don’t have adult coping mechanisms, so all of this felt like a somewhat inevitable dam that finally burst. A dirty, tantalizing, incestuous dam. Is this really a 5 star book? I don’t know. You’ll have to ask someone who didn’t use this to grade every childhood crush she had for many years to come. Don’t judge me. Now that I have kids, Flowers in the Attic is still the benchmark I grade myself on. Each night before I go to sleep, I ask myself if I’ve been a good parent. Anne, have you locked your children in the attic recently? No? Well then. Good job, you! Thank you, V.C. Andrews, for nudging me in the right direction and making me into the fabulous mother that I am today. Recommended for every 12 year old girl out there.
