So I read this book almost 8 years ago in the book format and gave it three stars. And I just finished it in September 2020 in the audible format and I am upping it to four stars. The book was first published in 1978 and apparently the audible was finished in 2011. I found the book to be at times dragging and at other times dazzling. It really improved once I figure it out the switching back-and-forth from real Time to Real imagining. There is not so much of the jungle fighting that you get used to in Vietnam war stories. But there are plenty of paddies and enough war is hell blood and guts. There are some excellent moments of reflection. I am plenty glad that I listen to this book so long after I first read it. I have to admit I have no recollection of reading this book other than the words that I wrote at that time. I want to mention that the Kindle book has an interesting after word Q&A with the author. Also an interesting readers guide at the end of the Kindle book. ********************** that was one of the jokes. There was a joke about Oscar. There were many jokes about Billy Boy Watkins, the way he’d collapsed of fright on the field of battle. Another joke was about the lieutenant’s dysentery, and another was about Paul Berlin’s purple biles. There were jokes about the postcard pictures of Christ that Jim Pederson used to carry, and Stink’s ringworm, and the way Buff’s helmet filled with life after death. Some of the jokes were about Cacciato. Dumb as a bullet, Stink said. Dumb as a month-old oyster fart, said Harold Murphy. This book is no joke. But you may find yourself laughing in spite of knowing that nothing in it is funny. It’s way too awful to be funny. Surreal page after page, dreams and nightmares, confusion and terror. All of these: strange, weird, odd, unreal, dreamlike, fantastic, bizarre. Here is what some other GR reviewers had to say about this book: Brilliant, hallucinatory and hypnotic, the narrative jumps around, jumbling continuity, reality, fear, duty and dreams as it deftly and completely messes with your head. Source: http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/... … O’Brien brilliantly portrays Berlin’s story of Vietnam through fragments and an array of possibilities that cleverly leaves the reader’s mind open to many avenues of understanding and interpretation. Source: http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/... … Cacciato -- "dumb as milk" but always ahead, always out of reach -- leads them through a surreal landscape of rabbithole logic as if they were newly dead spirits trying to find their way in the fog of an unfamiliar netherworld. Source: http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/... So you get the idea that you have to have a flexible brain to read and enjoy this book, don’t you? You have to learn to drift along with the often illogical story but to be prepared for regular bits of realism. What does it take to be a heroic soldier in a war zone? The blond-headed lieutenant watched him climb. Though he did not know the soldier’s name, this did not matter much, for the soldiers whose names he did not know he simply called Soldier or Trooper, whichever came to him first, and there was nothing impersonal or degrading about either word. He watched the boy’s strange mechanical walk, the lazy obscurity of each step, the ploddingness, and he felt both sadness and pride. He saw the boy as a soldier. Maybe not yet a good soldier, but still a soldier. He saw him as part of a whole, as one of many soldiers pressed together by the force of mission. The lieutenant was not stupid. He knew these beliefs were unpopular. He knew in his society, and many of the men under his own command, did not share them. But he did not ask his men to share his views, only to comport themselves like soldiers. So watching Paul Berlin’s dogged climb, its steadiness and persistence, the lieutenant felt great admiration for the boy, admiration and love combined. He secretly urged him on. For the sake of mission, yes, and for the welfare of the platoon. But also for the boy’s own well-being, so that he might feel the imperative to join the battle and to win it. A bit of rah rah! And what did it all mean? After the war, perhaps, he might return to Quang Ngai. Years and years afterward. Return to track down the girl with gold hoops through her ears. Bring along an interpreter. And then, with the war ended, history decided, he would explain to her why he had let himself go to war. Not because of strong convictions, but because he didn’t know. He didn’t know who was right, or what was right; he didn’t know if it was a war of self-determination or self-destruction, outright aggression or national liberation; he didn’t know which speeches to believe, which books, which politicians; he didn’t know if nations would topple like dominoes or stand separate like trees; he didn’t know who really started the war, or why, or when, or with what motives; he didn’t know if it mattered, he saw sense in both sides of the debate, but he did not know where truth lay; he didn’t know if Communist tyranny would prove worse in the long run than the tyrannies of Ky or Thieu or Khanh – he simply didn’t know. And who did? Who really did? He couldn’t make up his mind. Oh, he had read the newspapers and magazines. He wasn’t stupid. He wasn’t uninformed. He just didn’t know if the war was right or wrong. And who did? Who really knew? So he went to the war for reasons beyond knowledge. Because he believed in law, and law told him to go. Because it was a democracy, after all, and because LBJ and the others had rightful claim to their offices. He went to the war because it was expected. Because not to go was to risk censure, and to bring embarrassment on his father and his town. Because, not knowing, he saw no reason not to trust those with more experience. Because he loved his country and, more than that, because he trusted it. Yes, he did. Oh, he would have rather fought with his father in France, knowing certain things certainly, but he couldn’t choose his war, nobody could. Was this so banal? Was this so unprofound and stupid? He would look the little girl with the gold earrings straight in the eye. He would tell her these things. He would ask her to see the matter his way. What would she have done? What would anyone have done, not knowing? And then he would ask the girl questions. What did she want? How did she see the war? What were her aims – peace, any peace, peace with dignity? Did she refuse to run for the same reasons he refused – obligation, family, the land, friends, home? And now? Now, war ended, what did she want? Peace and quiet? Peace and pride? Peace with mashed potatoes and Swiss steak and vegetables, a full-tabled peace, indoor plumbing, a peace with Oldsmobiles and Hondas and skyscrapers climbing from the fields, a peace of order and harmony and murals on public buildings? Were her dreams the dreams of ordinary men and women? Quality-of-life dreams? Material dreams? Did she want a long life? Did she want medicine when she was sick, food on the table and reserves in the pantry? Religious dreams? What? What did she aim for? If a wish were to be granted by the war’s winning army – any wish – what would she choose? Does gen-x or gen-y or gen-z get it? Is it just the baby boomers who remember Vietnam? And who waded into Iraq and Afghanistan in spite of that? Is Going After Cacciato just nostalgia, a lesson unlearned? Is this book from 1978 best left in 1978? Being a winner of the National Book Award of 1979 doesn’t garner this book any extra points from me. I have been impressed by Tim O Brien ’s In the Lake of the Woods and The Things They Carried but less so with Tomcat in Love and If I Die in a Combat Zone . I have July, July on my bookshelf to read one day. So, I guess you could say that I am a fan of Tim O’Brien who has not loved all his work. But I seem to keep coming back for more. Three stars for this one with some significant chunks of four star quality. Any book that suggests the absurdity of war has some star quality as far as I am concerned.
