People often act curious about my interest in books and poetry for a podcast topic. I have ballet trophy photos on my Facebook and seem to be a fan of dancing and music. Why not dancing? Why not a podcast on music? Is there anything dark or gothic in college textbooks on poetry? Well my friends you pretty much just asked if there was H20 in raindrops, stone bricks in castles, or sugar in bars of chocolate because FAR before any rock band used the word gothic for music, it was used in literature to describe an entire genre of poetic literature first and foremost. The dark romantic period of penny dreadful books on taboo fears is where the term “Gothic Art” actually comes from on some levels. Rock stars took the phrase “gothic poetry” to describe their written lyrics from the actual real literature genre, and owes its origin fully to poets and wordsmiths of old world times. One of the classroom books that best traces this dark origin steeped in history and controversy is this edition of the Norton Anthology’s Romantic Period. I made an A in the class at Austin Community College I took where this text was used. (Inside jacket read.) Let’s take a look at their own description of this book: “Read by millions of students over 7 editions The Norton Anthology of English Literature remains the most trusted undergraduate survey of English literature available, and one of the most successful college texts ever published. Firmly grounded by the hallmark strengths of all Norton Anthologies throughout the helpful introductory manor, judicious annotation texts where ever possible this edition has been revitalized through the editors…The editors have rethought this Anthology to make it an even better teaching tool.” This Anthology defines the Romantic Period as the time period between 1785- 1830, but often includes years to 1900 near the Victorian poetry era. The writers it defines as influential to the period were the top five poets mentioned on page 1 of paragraph 1: “Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Percy, Shelley, and Keats, adding Blake belatedly to make a sixth.” Yet what most non-academic fans of this time period will remember is the inspiration it caused to movie makers at the dawn of the Golden age of Hollywood. Bram Stoker wrote the famous Dracula May 26, 1897. An earlier work published in this period was made January 1, 1818 called Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. Percy Shelley lived between 1792-1822 and wrote “Ozymandias”. Another story of dark duality from this age is Dr. Jakyll and Mr. Hyde in 1886. Always a fan favorite of the flamboyant set The Picture of Dorian Gray was published in 1890. The 1800s was a hotbed of beloved literature. If you are noticing a pattern of the greatest movies from the dawn of the Golden age of Hollywood being taken from popular literature of the era you are not wrong. Why does this period of time so capture the modern imagination even in modern day? The dawn of mass communication first forms itself in this era of the 1800s. Printing presses become machine operated, and mass market publication is first possible. The Norton Anthology mentions the dawn of an Industrial age that first blooms into being at this point in History. “For one thing new classes inside England – manufacturing rather than agricultural were beginning to demand a voice in government proportionate to their wealth.” Is a quote from page 3. It is hard for humans born into the age of cars and computers to grasp the idea that just a couple hundred years ago over 90 percent of the jobs in the world were all related to farming. Literacy for people of any social background was so rare people could not write their name. “James Watt perfected the steam engine in 1765. In the succeeding decades steam replaced wind and water as the primary source of power for all sorts of manufacturing processes.” The book states on page 3. People were born, lived, and went to the grave within 20 miles of where they were born in agrarian medieval times. As the age turned to the 1800s they could go places beyond their birth town as steam boats and steam trains clawed their way into human life. New things called towns and night life IN towns dawned into being. Suddenly people have social and gender identity they have never had before. This did not always go smoothly to say the least. On page 21 the anthology gets into a great definition of gothic romance as a fully recognized academic genre. “Another innovation in novel-writing took shape, strangely enough, as a recovery of what was old. Writers, whom we now describe as the Gothic novelists, revisited the romance, the genre identified as the primitive forerunner of the modern novel, looking to a medieval i.e. “Gothic” Europe that they pictured as a place of gloomy castles, devious Catholic monks, and stealthy ghosts… Gothic horrors gave many writers a language in which to examine the nature of power – the elements of sadism and masochism in the relations between men and women for instance. Frequently the Gothic novelists probe the very ideas of historical accuracy and legitimacy that critics use against them and meditate on who is authorized to tell the story of the past and who is not.” The anthology says the end of page 21. This then opened the door to the ideas of revisionist History. In agrarian times only around 5 percent of the population was literate, and most literate historians were the close relatives of the wealthy kings. History was only told making a tiny amount of hero-sexual, pale, land owning, males look perfect and error free. Revisionist Historians questioned the accuracy of this idea. Mary Wollstonecraft’s Vindication of the Rights of Women highly questioned patriarchy. Her daughter in turn wrote Frankenstein, and the work talks about social and gender relations in metaphors. In addition the unquestioned icon of fame known as George Gordon Lord Byron living in the years between 1788-1824 was one of the poets most considered the embodiment of the Gothic literature movement. On page 608 of the book introduction notes. “Byron also lived on in the guise of the Undead, thanks to the success of a novella by his former friend and traveling companion John Polidori whose “The Vampyre” published in 1819 mischievously made Byron its model for the title character.” Lord Byron was by no means a role model, and was in fact mad, bad, and dangerous to know. Yet he was one of the few highly published intellectuals with the ability in high birth and wealth to come out of the close as bisexual gay in a day and age where most all literature on the lifestyle was banned. Many people of lower social station would have their books banned as they were tossed in jail. He stood out as one of the few people challenging traditional norms of behavior and keeping his wits about him while surviving. My review is that this book is one of the best works of literature ever written. The analysis of poetic technique to classic poems and rhyme structure is fascinating. There are parts that drag on forever as it is not a “quick entertainment book” that is good for a laugh. It is a college level textbook telling the history of literature in a very dangerous and volatile part of human history. Yet I wish this book would replace Romeo and Juliet as part of every high school English class in modern day. What early writer had to go through on their way to modern day enlightenment should not be hidden away in high level elective classrooms of higher education. Readers of all backgrounds should check it out. I give it five stars out of five stars. More at FH7publishing.com
