In "Cause Celeb" Fielding satirizes the pretentiousness of celebrities, the not-always pure motives of humanitarians, the poetical idiosyncrasies of Africans, the tangled and futile politics of foreign aid, and the stupidity of certain women when it comes to relationships. I enjoy Fielding's novels even though I can never manage to relate to her female protagonists, who tend to be shallow women who lack self-respect, initially have bad taste in men, readily engage in casual sex, and play relationship games, only to wonder why they suffer so much angst. I imagine Fielding is satirizing the modern, secular single woman with such characters, but somehow they always manage to end up with a good man despite never fully, completely reforming their approach to relationships. In some ways, "Cause Celeb" is a better satire than Fielding's other books: it is certainly more raw and biting, and that is perhaps why it is not as popular as her lighter works, but that is what makes me more impressed by it. As a satire, however, it is only half formed. While half the book has that clever, biting edge, the other half is all straightforward seriousness. That's not necessarily bad, but it's a conflation of genres that jars a little. In the straightforward parts, she gets a bit heavy-handedly political at times, and although there is certainly some poetry in the telling, and some moving moments, at times the story also drags a bit, and, at other times, the message comes at the reader like a two-by-four. I've quoted a few of my favorite lines from the book below, some satirical, and some non-ironic: "The relationship seesaw: What would you do if it was perfectly balanced? I thought...Much better to be slightly at a disadvantage; so much more fun that way…Much better to have those passionate, tantalizing thrills than endless boring TV suppers, sitting snuggled on the sofa in jeans and an old cardi, not caring what you looked like because inside you were so sure he loved you just for you." "As if love was something you earned like a merit star, and if I followed every single instruction in every single magazine that month…made my own pasta, studied advanced sexual gymnastics, never crowded him…Oliver might decide he was in love with me." On the protagonists first trip to Africans: "I was shocked when I watched Live Aid…But that was a safe breed of shock…This [however:] was the shock of feeling for the first time that the world had no safety in it, that it was not governed by justice, and that nobody who could be trusted was in control. It was the shame of feeling that I shared responsibility for this horror and of breaking down and ceasing to function…" On adjusting to ordinary western, upper class life after her initial, powerfully unsettling experience in Africa: "Quickly I grew less deranged. I had begun the process of calming down, assimilating and compromising, which is necessary to live comfortably in the world as it is, and probably is why its imbalance never changes." On the fact that Africans, unlike Westerners, didn't care if their prosthetic limb looked real: "As long as the limb worked, they just wanted to get on with their lives. It wasn't something they bothered to disguise. Maybe this was because of the war and the proliferation of mines. I suspect it had more to do with what they valued in each other."
