In a time of supreme danger, when the world hung in the balance, U.S. President John F. Kennedy steadied a course that would safely see a supreme nuclear crisis alleviated through his calm, thoughtful judgement and leadership. As a keen student of history, I had read quite a bit about what has come to be known as the Cuban Missile Crisis, but to read a first hand account from JFK's brother, the equally intelligent and steady, Robert F. Kennedy, allowed for greater access into the inner workings of those crucial, dangerous days when the question of Armageddon weighed most mightily on the world. The United States has often had the great benefit of having the greatest possible leader in times of great crisis. Leaders like George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and John F. Kennedy come to mind. We've also had the misfortune of having been led by leaders put into office who were not graced with the qualities befitting of a sound leader; who were in a power of position when their judgment and leadership were needed to steer through dangerous waters, but for which their character, intelligence, temperament, or judgment were not up to the task. When those leaders are met with their time, history has proven the consequence of their actions (or non action). Leaders such as James Buchanan and Herbert Hoover meet those criteria. It's worth noting this, as since Donald Trump's ascension to sit as President of the United States, I've contemplated how his character, intellect, judgment, and temperament would match up to such crisis as potential succession, extreme economic Depressions, or, in the case covered in this book, possible nuclear war. It doesn't take a presidential historian to realize that had Donald Trump and his advisory team been around in the time of the Cuban Missile Crisis, I would not be sitting here writing this review because I wouldn't have been born to read the book. Americans take for granted the importance of history. We like to remember past moments of American glory...winning two World Wars, landing of the moon, etc. We don't contemplate the momentous decisions and keen judgment and temperament of our leaders that lead to those great moments in our history. I'm convinced that men like Donald Trump and the small-minded individuals could not remotely match up to the wisdom, courage, and judgment of the steady leadership of JFK. After reading Robert Kennedy's memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis, I come away with two thoughts... I thank God that our country and world John Fitzgerald Kennedy when they did and I equally pray to God that we will never be tested to such a dangerous degree as long as Donald J. Trump or leaders like him are in a position to make the life and death decisions to see a peaceful conclusion to such a crisis.
