Below us the depths which could only be imagined, the gorges and canyons of that unfathomable continent: above us the death-black blue of the sky. It is the year 1847 and The Star of the Sea is one of what was known at the time as a ‘famine ship’ , transporting hundreds of impoverished Irish peasants to the promised land of America. Aboard are also several well-to-do first class passengers, among them Lord Kingscourt and his family, a doctor, an American journalist and an Indian prince. Suspended between two desolations in the freezing winter of the North Atlantic, many of these people will not live to see the end of the journey. The sharp divide between he first class people and the dying multitudes in the steerage hold mirrors the tragic events unfolding in Ireland as the potato crops fail and the landlords evict their tenants for being unable to pay the excessive charges levelled against them. One man seeks to cross the divide, walking all over the derelict wooden ship night after night, cloaked in silence and darkness. He is nicknamed ‘The Ghost’ by fellow passengers and his personal quest of murder is the glue that holds this historical novel together. At night one sensed the ship as absurdly out of its element, a creaking, leaking, incompetent concoction of oak and pitch and nails and faith, bobbing on a wilderness of viciously black water which could explode at the slightest provocation. People spoke quietly on the decks after dark, as though fearful of awakening the ocean to savagery. >>><<<>>><<< I’m glad I have come to this story unprepared, knowing nothing of the author I found out only now as I write my review that he is the brother of Sinead O’Connor or of the plot. Because right from the opening pages I was knocked over by the beauty of the phrasing, by the poetry of the sea voyage, in such stark contrast to the pain and terror experienced by the passengers. This dynamic, this enchantment with the prose, made for a compelling drive to keep reading, to put aside other projects and to give my full undivided attention to the characters and to the historical context of the journey. The contention that the one task required of the unemployed aristocracy might be to prevent those on whom it leeches from starving to death, is considered bizarre by My Lords of England and Ireland. Indeed it is de rigueur to chastise the poor for their poverty while regarding one’s own riches as a matter of Divine entitlement. Those who toil the hardest possess the least wealth; those who do nothing but eat have the most. Millions of impoverished Irish people have died in the Famine of 1847 while the land owners and the politicians were busy to blame the victims for their plight: the Irish were portrayed in the press as lazy, drunkards, unreliable to downright bestial and dangerous for demanding their rights. Sounds familiar? Probably because the downtrodden who try do escape their doom are still treated as criminals today by politicians and by the press: from the US border to occupied Palestine to civil war Darfur. The merit of O’Connor here is to concentrate on the lives of the people involved and not on the politics of the situation. Both his vengeful ghost and the abusive lord of Kingscourt are given the benefit of the doubt and a nuanced characterization. Both narrators, the captain and the journalist, are fleshed out as people and not simple mouthpieces for the author’s beliefs. The novel alternates between the chronological journal of the ship’s captain, a person remarkable for his empathy, who painstakingly puts down in the ship’s log the names of daily crop of victims of hunger and disease, and flashbacks to the lives of the three main characters before the journey. They had paid their betters’ accounts with the sweat of their servitude but that was the point where their purpose had ended. Their lives, their courtships, their families, their struggles, even their deaths, their terrible deaths – none of it mattered in even the tiniest way. They deserved no place in printed pages, in finely wrought novels intended for the civilised. They were simply not worth saying anything about. The grotesque cartoons depicting the Irish poor in the English journals began to change. Always previously portraying them as foolish and drunken, now they more frequently showed murderers. Ape-like. Fiendish. Bestial. Untamed. How we draw the enemy, what we fear about the self. Thus, the true purpose of the novel is revealed: lives instead of statistics, even when millions die in a preventable and manageable food crisis. The end of the journey, the arrival in New York, offers the most painful images of rejection and discrimination, when the ship is put in quarantine and the relatives of the passengers, already settled in the New World, cry out in vain the names of their loved ones from the boats surrounding the ‘Star of the Sea’. It is an eerie sound, at night especially, to hear all the names being cried out from the darkness. I believe, like O’Connor, that we should not keep quiet, that these names of the hungry and the dying should be spoken out loud and clear if we want the discrimination and the abuse to end. As though the act of saying their names – the act of saying they even had names – was to speak the only prayer that can ever begin to matter in a world that turns its eyes from the hungry and the dying. They were real. They existed. They were held in these arms. They were born, and they lived, and they died. And I see myself on the deck in a scream of vengeance, as though it was my own spouse who had been scourged to despair; my own helpless child so cruelly destroyed. >>><<<>>><<< Most of my comments focus on the politics of the novel, but I feel I should also stress how well the plot holds together, how skillfully the transitions from the present to the past are handled, and how the past lives of the passengers lead to the drama unfolding aboard ship. David Merridith, who inherits a large estate from his abusive father, would like to improve the lives of his tenants, but he is buried in debts and ridiculed by his peers. The nanny of his children, Mary Duane, is his former childhood girlfriend, a relationship broken by the difference in status between Lord and peasant. Mary is also the link to the Mulvey brothers, hard-scrabble farmers on a land near the Merridith estate. The Ghost leaves his farm to escape an unwanted fatherhood and becomes a drifter and an outlaw, heading for the ill-famed neighborhood of Whitechapel in the metropolis. He is haunted by his own crimes, by his youthfull passions and by his contact with revolutionaries who want an independent Ireland. Maybe we could call Mary a saintly figure [the title of the novel is apparently a reference to one of the Catholic appellations for the Holy Virgin] , but both Merridith and Mulvey qualify as ‘grey’ characters. Singers were admired by almost everyone; they were annalists, chroniclers, custodians, biographers. In a place where reading was almost unknown they carried the local memory like walking books. These flashbacks and the way of life they describe are probably my favorite sections of the novel, with cameo appearances and off-beat commentary on the literary scene from references to Charles Dickens and the Bronte sisters – contrasting the Victorian primness and inclination towards melodrama with the crossing of the famine ship. They sailed to America in search of new beginnings. People are still searching for the promised land in 2024, they are still forced to leave their homes and their countries by natural disasters, poverty, abusive governments and paramilitary goons. Like the passengers of the Star of the Sea, they are rarely received with empathy and kindness, being instead demonized in the press and used in fascist propaganda. I think we need more writers like O’Connor to give us the right perspective on such issues.
