To each culture and to each period in time, Alexander the Great has meant something different, and each generation that recounts his history tends to do so from a different political and social perspective. To the Republic and Empire of Rome he was a noble conqueror; to the Greeks of his time he was a tyrant; to the Indians he was no more than a passing barbarian. To Peter Green (in 1970) he is a man standing upon the shoulders of others, making his own history as he goes, and, like so many absolute rulers, touching it up in retrospect to obscure flaws and preserve the illusion of his infallibility. For all his greatness, Alexander was not perfect. Alexander is reliant upon others, much as he may have been loathe to admit. Without his army, his father, his commanders, his Macedonian core, his fame may never have reached such heights. They are the tentpole upon which all of his successes hang. Green says as much at the outset of his work: “Genius Alexander had, and in full measure; yet even genius remains to a surprising extent the product of its environment. What Alexander was, Philip [Alexander’s father] and Macedonia in great part made him, and it is with them that we must begin.” Nevertheless, Alexander is a powerful historical figure as an individual. So much so that his history is commandeered and contorted to espouse a variety of ideals. Mosaic of Alexander at the battle of Issus, BCE 333. Green attempts to eschew these proclivities, see past the propaganda, and give an account free of ideology (though he admits this isn't possible, even for someone conscious of the possibility). Green paints a sometimes unflattering picture of Alexander. Alexander comes off as impertinent, quick-tempered, self-righteous, vengeful, surrounded by capable commanders, and the beneficiary of those who were ill-prepared to deal with an army his father had created. Granted, if Alexander had been completely devoid of ability he would not have stifled the resentful Greek city states, obliterated the massive Persian empire, quashed repeated revolts, subdued a large swath of India in spite of horrendous conditions and fierce resistance. He is, at the same time, depicted as cool under pressure, well educated in classics, a brilliant strategist, a profoundly successful manipulator, motivator, and an unprecedented logistical wunderkind. But to say he did so entirely of his own accord, built the mechanisms of government necessary to do so, and developed the processes of army training and unique characteristics of the Macedonian phalanx (considerably longer spears, for example) from the ground up would be a mistake. Similarly, it would be a mistake to believe that wherever Alexander trod, citizens bowed to his leadership. Where Greece is concerned, nothing could be further from the truth-—Alexander’s lust for conquest presumably made him indifferent to the turmoil there that had little interest in being ruled from afar by a Macedonian king, charitable or hostile though he may be. Alexander is a man raised to believe he is special, a new Achilles, and this hubris taints Green’s interpretation of him, believing he is often guided by own grandeur rather than sensibility (from a political rather than tactical standpoint, in any case), and the pursuit of a great destiny rather than the solidification of the empire he created. Alexander is lauded for his ability to suppress a wide variety of cultures and bring them under his banner, a feat that, even in this age of modern warfare and superpowers vying against meager militaries in distant countries, is all but impossible. Green sees this less an example of brilliance than an afterthought and consequence of expediency as the army moved hastily on its route through southern Asia. Essentially, conquered people remained just as they had been. Nothing changed but the landlord. Even so, revolts invariably sprang up as soon as he left, making the map of his empire something of a misrepresentation and more of a catalog of places he had been and conquered. Perhaps most astounding about the history is how much information is available, particularly the minutiae, including, in some cases, the precise quantity of bribes to individuals. Alexander himself is to be thanked in this regard, considering he had the foresight (at least on his Asian campaign) to take not just soldiers, but historians, zoologists, botanists, and a wealth of other individuals with a mind to catalog everything they witnessed. This was a consequence of both Alexander’s tutelage under Aristotle, as well as a very concerted effort to record his history in the most favorable method possible, both for the purpose of his legacy and to quell discontent in the regions under his control. Most refreshing is the perspective one gains from time and the ability to call upon prior biographies, from sources as ancient as Plutarch and Ptolemy, to more contemporary (relatively speaking) sources originating from the middle ages through colonial and even early 20th century, noting how they choose to present Alexander according to the sentiment and ideology of the writer and culture--something Green notes his own writing invariably suffers from as well. He notes in Alexander's time he was viewed as a tyrannical, militant autocrat; during the height of the Roman and British empires as a laudable imperialist seeking to enlighten the world through Hellenism; and a liberator from monarchy during the revolutionary periods of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Green himself presents Alexander as a brilliant tactician, planner, and propagandist done in by megalomania brought on by his unprecedented successes and an empire he sought ever to expand rather than consolidate and secure. From a contemporary standpoint, as one might expect, this is a wholly satisfying stance to take. The general consensus views conquerors as people seeking their own gratification and power rather than fellowship--those who do seek fellowship don't use military domination as their tool since doing so is effective against armies, but not populations. In the end, Green's biography borders on cynical, painting Alexander less as the deity he believed himself to be and an example to which others compared themselves (notably, Julius Caesar), and more of an ambitious human with a tremendous opportunity, and both the will and acumen to see it through. This is a stellar, humanizing work, and a brisk one, too, even at more than 500 hundred pages (including the appendix, which makes convincing sense of the cluttered details surrounding the pivotal battle at the Granicus river). For anyone interested in the subject and the period, this is an excellent place to start and a reliable place to return to.
