Amid the burned ruins of an advanced medical research lab, the horribly disfigured body of a security guard is found. The guard’s body is riddled with hundreds of large tumors which appear to have spontaneously erupted, causing a massive shock and instant, painful death. The odd nature of his death captures the attention of the FBI’s Least Wanted – Agents Mulder and Scully. As their investigation into what, exactly, the research facility was working on begins, a second corpse is found. Could there be a man-made plague on the loose? Mulder and Scully scramble for answers, leading them on the trail of the lead researcher’s wife and son who went missing after the fire. From there, they are in a race against time to contain the outbreak, save the boy, and stay one step ahead of the sinister enemies who orchestrated the destruction of the research lab. Kevin J. Anderson has written a good example of a worthy tie-in novel. The plot itself is gripping and propulsive. The writing is smooth and the pacing entices the reader to keep turning the pages. He has captured Mulder’s sardonic sense of humor with many cynically witty comments and shows Scully’s adherence to the provable scientific fact. As is typical in the X-Files, despite Scully’s skepticism, she expresses wonder at some of the events that transpire, while attempting to figure out exactly how it happened. This is a vast improvement over Charles Grant’s attempt at an X-Files novel in Whirlwind. Mulder and Scully are front and center in this book and sound like their TV counterparts. The facility’s research involves nanotechnology. The head scientist, driven to cure his son’s leukemia, invented nanobots that could conceivably cure any disease, heal any wound, and could even be the key to immortality. It was an early version of this technology that causes the horrible mutations that drew Mulder and Scully to the case. While sticking with the X-Files tone of horror and suspense, Anderson also dips a toe into the Michael Crichton world of technological caution. Just because scientists could do something, doesn’t mean they necessarily should. Anderson shows both sides of the argument about creating such a nanotechnology, but leaves it up to reader The climax is a bit larger scale than the typical TV episode, but this is a fun example of a classic X-Files Monster of the Week. As with all of the episodes, the proof of the X-File slips the agents’ grasp at the end and the book ends on a classic semi-unresolved note that is an X-Files trademark.
