Updating to 5 stars after a recent re-read. Fabulous chemistry between the MCs - as expected from MR. The h is torn between her father and her commitment to her fiancé. Her father is on the verge of a collapse so the h runs to the H, who helped her dad financially advance his business projects. The H agrees to help but for a price: her. The h is flabbergasted and outraged by his insolent suggestion and shows him her hand, precisely her very much engaged left finger. The H is relentless and purposefully bids on her and buys off her fiancé. The h is broken and humiliated and left to the charms of this ruthless man to order her life around! And really, nothing so heartless about a head over heels man who fought for you and fought to keep you around him for life! A very comforting sweet angsty read from my fave MR! —————————————————————————— Another of MR with a dreamy hero and an ungrateful, immature heroine. It was torture reading the last part of the book. I almost wanted to pull my hair but I was also curious to know what this entitled miss would do to suddenly be deserving of her husband. Sigh. Anton marries Nina to save her father's company but more because he liked her. Nina was also aware of Anton checking her out and making serious eye contact everytime they'd meet at business gatherings but Nina was already dating some other guy. Later they're married and she's all shy and virginal but later on this damned woman keeps accusing her husband of having lustful feelings towards her. This one thought consumes Nina and to me she becomes a spoiled, child-like teen with her tantrums! The husband keeps being sweet and territorial AND respectful to her. But Nina here keeps ranting how he only 'lusts' her and doesn't love her and that he uses her body as a vent for that. Like why couldn't she as a woman also accept that her body needed him too, even if she was adamant to refuse his presence in her life as a loving husband. From and each and every scene in the book not once could I see this man being rude to Nina. I'm honestly taking a MR break now. These disrespectful women do not deserve these wealthy, possessive, doting, indulgent, goodlooking husbands! Disappointed. Feeling murderous.
