What I appreciate the most about Joanna Russ, after reading this and On Strike Against God , is how rough around the edges she is. Not in terms of her writing quality or skill--in We Who Are About To... she uses an unreliable first-person narrator and an unexpected narrative structure masterfully--but in terms of her willingness to let the negatives of experience all hang out without apology. Of course, that makes her sound bleak, so perhaps it would be better to say that she seizes on all forms of energy--whether anger or fear or shame or euphoria or happiness--and let’s them play out without trying to force them into conventional containers. In We Who Are About To… this takes the form of a prickly, unnamed narrator who (to put it mildly) abrades and is abraded by her fellow (space)shipwrecked passengers as they face (or don’t, as the case may be) the simple fact that they don’t know where they are in the universe, aren’t ever going to be found, and have limited supplies. From the first line (“About to die”), it’s apparent that this is a novel about dying, or, more specifically, about how to live once you’ve realized that living is also dying. Our narrator sees their end as inevitable, while her fellow passengers quickly get to work talking about colonization and continuing civilization (“Civilization’s doing fine,” says our narrator, “We just don’t happen to be where it is”). This conflict solidifies and deepens over the course of the first part of the novel, bringing up a variety of questions about their contrasting perspectives, what it means to live, and the relationship within a society between outsiders and the status quo. Most any answers the reader might think to have found in the first part of the book, as the conflict and the stakes intensify, are then undermined and shaken by the beautiful and uncomfortable second part of the book, when our narrator’s carefully presented perspective cracks. It’s difficult to leave it there, without delving into those questions and answers and the specifics of how they play out with all their sharp edges and uncomfortable silences, the kind of questions and answers that hook into your mind and can’t be shaken off, but to go more into it would be to potentially spoil that first experience of it. (For better thought out observations, with spoilers aplenty, see L. Timmel Duchamp’s essay on it .)
