Set in recently liberated Paris in the year of the end of the war, the novel opens with the central character of the novel, Therese Espinosa, a 79 year old actress engaged in a murderous coupling with the man she calls Poxy, a deserter from the French Foreign Legion. Therese likes it rough. She pays younger men to beat her. The Legionnaire, to her great joy, kicks her in the jaw, setting her false teeth rolling across the room. The manic narrative follows the adventures of this decrepit, female Don Juan as she prepares for her greatest triumph on the stage. The novel abounds with eccentric and vain characters, each one dedicated to their own aggrandizement. As the action ranges from Theresa’s glorious fornication, to a mysterious murder that threatens to disrupt the play, we hear her sometimes disjointed, ebullient tale of a life lived to the max. Cendrars’ comedic novel is a tour de force of language in which the reader is propelled at high rates of speed through digressions that detail a lost age of romance, frivolity, obsession and passion. For Cendrars, there is little difference between the action on the stage and life itself. “…tragedy, drama, comedy and farce are all manifestations of everyday life, and…rules mean nothing, that among all peoples at all times all art forms are permissible and that the theater is an acceptance, a common submission of men and the stars in heaven to the obscure laws of creation, a taking part in the joys of living, a game of chance, come good luck or bad, and that the individual’s destiny in isolation has no meaning beyond that of the comic, the caricature, and that all together, actors and public, are bound to each other in the delirium or enchantment that possesses them.” The tale is ribald, earthy, tragic and comic. Its language is elegant and brisk, down to earth and carnal. Theresa’s Legionnaire lover is said to have, “The axe man’s guide mark on his neck.” Theresa at one point is described as being “…as happy as an honest woman compromised for the first time in her life with a lover in a public place.” She admonishes another character, “Don’t shit higher than your nose, it falls back.” As for the play which serves as the central structure of the novel, “The play seemed to have bee written with bursts from a sub-machine gun. Nothing was sacred. Blood, shit and tears. One long raspberry. With much more tragic laughter than social message. Contempt for humanity. Respect for nothing. Foolery. And an atomic brilliance and fire and pace. It couldn’t have been better. Only new plastics used in the décor. Pure colors. Distorted perspective. Worthy of cubism. And the whole bathed in a stupefying, unreal light.” Clearly, this book is not for the casual reader. It’s hard work to keep your concentration as the words and phrases come hurtling by. The book apparently took Cendrars seven years to write. One senses him pouring over his work, shoehorning in the fast paced narrative. I recommend the book highly for the serious reader.
