"Did your brother warn you about me?" The plaid swirled around her knees as she pivoted to face him. "I beg your pardon?" Her throat worked convulsively for a second before she could get an answer out. "Actually, I think Perry said you go through women like a gambler goes through decks of cards." She matched his frankness, but she was shaking inside. "Very aptly put." His glass was lifted in a mock salute. "Because generally I discard them after very little use -- sometimes for no greater reason than that I want something new." ........ And so it began in this novel about an unapologetic man whore H and the pretty young Mary Sue heroine he decides to seduce before losing his nerve and breaking her heart. The H Brock, owns a lot of luxury hotels and resorts throughout the world and he has arrived at his New Hampshire hotel where the heroine Stephanie works as a bookkeeper. Brock was kinda sleazy to me because he arrived at the hotel with his current penis polisher in tow and the woman was basically a whore for hire like some kind of upscale escort/mistress. Her name's Helen and she knows she will never be good enough for him to marry but is happy to just make money by lying on her back. What astounds me was the way she was so condescending to Stephanie. I wanted to reach into the story, grab Helen and tell her that Stephanie doesn't polish penis in order to make a living. Brock was shameless in his pursuit of Stephanie. He was flirting with her soon after he sent Helen to unpack their suitcases. And yes, he and Helen were sharing a bedroom. Brock eventually decides he is bored with Helen so he dispenses with her services and packs her off to the airport. Then he decides to start chasing Stephanie. The heroine is attracted to him but doesn't give in easily. At certain points in his so called courtship of Stephanie, it seemed as if he cared a lot for her. However he always kept back pedaling whenever his poor manly heart seemed at the risk of succumbing to love. He then makes a wishy washy sort of commitment to Stephanie. I refer to it in this manner because all he commits to is a relationship where he will visit her as often as he can. She agrees to date him but she really knows nothing about his lifestyle ( and whether he will have OW when he not with her ). Their relationship never becomes sexual and I did give her points for being careful with the man whore. Eventually, however, Brock realizes that Stephanie is the type of woman who is happiest with a faithful husband and kids so he breaks her heart in the most cruel fashion. He turns up at the hotel with Helen in tow and arranges for Stephanie to see them so that she will think he is up to his old tricks and dump him. Of course his disgusting plan works and Stephanie flees from the hotel. Brock was a real emotional coward because he took the easy way out. He wasn't man enough to dump Stephanie to her face. He had to pay Helen to pretend to be mistress again and go through a farcical play acting scene. Brock only realizes he loves Stephanie after she is in a car accident and he almost loses her. I don't really like that kind of situation where the H is literally shocked into realizing he loves the heroine. I also disliked Brock's proprietorial attitude with Stephanie where he got jealous of her just talking to an old High School friend. Sometimes a jealous, possessive alpha male is sexy in a romance novel. Brock was, however, just like the proverbial dog in a manger with Stephanie. I also wondered if Janet Dailey was inspired by the Rolling Stones' old song 'Heart of Stone' when she was devising a title for this novel. I had this thought because some of the lyrics to that song seems applicable to Brock and the way he viewed women. For example, Mick Jagger sang: "There's been so many girls that I've known I've made so many cry, and still I wonder why Here comes a little girl, I see her walking down the street She's all by herself, I try to knock her off her feet 'Cause you'll never break, never break, never break, never break This heart of stone, oh no, no, this heart of stone" This is not a novel I enjoyed much because I felt that the H wasn't deserving of the heroine and he just needed to be less sleazy. I am really disappointed with this "New Hampshire" leg of Janet Dailey's "Americana series" journey. The ones I've read previous to this were quite enjoyable, quaint and sweetly old fashioned.
