My low rating of the book doesn't really have anything to do with my feeling about Joe or his opinions. The title of the book should have tipped me off with "Collected Musings" but I was expecting a more focused retrospective on the music of the era as opposed to a rock critics greatest hits of contemporary newspaper/magazine articles and album/concert reviews. Though this does make it a somewhat interesting window into the past so it's not all a waste. Magazine and newspaper articles are good in short doses but it's hard to just sit down and plow through a pretty dense book of them, which is why it took me almost a year to get through this thing. I'd read an article or two then put it down for a week or two and read other stuff, sometimes I'd go a month. It's not easy when quite a few of these articles are about obscure groups I'm not familiar with (though I did check out a lot of their stuff just to see what he was talking about) or quite a few that I'm familiar with and just don't care about like Veruca Salt. In the end I binged the last 75 pages just because I was sick of seeing it on my Currently Reading shelf with its garish cover and title that looks like I'm reading some weird fetish comic book. As for Joe and his opinions, I found him obnoxious and irritating but sometimes entertaining and there were times where I agreed with him. I had no clue who he was when I bought the book so I wasn't aware of his notoriety. Had I read some of these articles as a teenager in the 90s I probably would have hated him and passionately defended some of my favorite bands but I'm 40 now and past getting emotional about rock stars or people having differing opinions about them. And in some cases time has proven that a lot of his cynicism about these bands was well founded. The worst thing about him is just that he seems to be mostly interested in trying to get the attention of artists with his often obnoxious reviews and hopefully starting a feud with them. In the case of his feud with Billy Corgan (who I don't really care for so I didn't know who to dislike in that story) he was clearly over the moon about his time in the spotlight and trying to contrive ways to keep it going like sitting outside of a concert he was banned from attending. His reviews are usually less about the music and more about him. But like I said it wasn't his grating personality that earned it the bad review, if anything the obnoxious writing made it a little easier to get through a giant book of newspaper clippings. But it's hard to give him even that little bit of credit when he was the one who made a book full of old newspaper clippings.
