I may be in the minority on this one, but I thought Flowers in the Attic was fantastic and I am so glad I read it. This book was published in 1979. In reviewing and critiquing this book, I thought it might be helpful to know/recall what else was going on in 1979 in terms of events and cultural/political issues. A brief Google search revealed the following: 1. The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. 2. Movies that came out that year running the gamut were Superman The Movie , (the horror that was Star Trek: The Motion Picture , and Kramer v. Kramer . 3. Great Britain elected Margaret Thatcher, the first woman elected to that position. 4. The Sony Walkman blasted into the years of the world’s youth (damn I wish I’d had the forethought to keep mine). 5. The Iran hostage crisis occurs. 6. The Moral Majority was formed. 7. Television shows that debuted (at least in the US) include The Dukes of Hazard , Hart to Hart , and The Facts of Life. Lynda Carter’s Wonder Woman ended in 1979. 8. On the darker end of the entertainment spectrum, Uncle Stevie published The Long Walk and The Dead Zone . Koontz published The Key to Midnight . Also the movies Alien and The Amityville Horror came out. This provides some limited context of the world when this book came out. Not exhaustive, but just few things that came up and seemed relevant to me. So it should not come as a huge surprise that a book where four kids who are imprisoned in an attic by a crazed religious grandmother, two of whom have an incestuous relationship, blew minds. It had to be seen as pretty wild and unique at the time. I was only vaguely aware of the content when I was a kid. I haven’t read it until, well, now. I don’t know if VC Andrews had an intended audience in mind when she wrote it. But I have pretty diverse literary tastes. And I personally loved this one. People may have been shocked by the relationship, but the book is so much more than that. To me, the psychological components of this book were so much more impressive. It’s the build up to Cathy and Chris’s relationship that is captivating and engrossing. It’s how the four young lives are uprooted and degraded. It had suspense and twists that hit me and impressed me. Andrews captured Cathy’s voice (who is the oldest of the two sisters and the second oldest child), especially as their horrific conditions develop. This book offered a much deeper psychological component than perhaps pop culture would have you believe. It’s not perfect. For example, the exclamation points are WAAAAY over-used. But the book exceeded my expectations and I loved it nonetheless. You can bet your butt I’ll be reading the rest of the Dollanganger series.
