one of murdoch’s finest. i’m still a bit overwhelmed - as with her finest work, this one has a real emotional and metaphysical heft to it, but it’s compounded by two factors: a) the middle section, seegard. it wouldn’t be unfair to claim this as not just one of iris’ finest bits of writing, but it’d be an understatement to say that it’s also her most terrifying. i’ll add some context for those who haven’t read it and might wish to: edward baltram is consumed by guilt over the death of his best friend (and, let’s be honest, crush), mark wilsden, who jumped out of a window after being unknowingly dosed with LSD by edward. he recieves accusatory letters from mark’s mother every few days, and his family are no help - his stepfather, harry, is hounded by his inability to get his novel published, and his half-brother, stuart, has decided to renounce all earthly pleasures and learn to be good. compounded by this, the advice of thomas mccaskerville, and his increasing sense of isolation, a sudden dispatch from his stepmother, may, inviting him to the house of his reclusive painter father, jesse, sends him to their isolated house in the country; where he is held under the thrall of his stepmother and two sisters, each more faerie than woman. to reveal too much about this would do a gross disservice to how murdoch writes about this strange dynamic, but to my eyes, it’s perfect - a modern update of the gothic novel that bursts with its own horrifying aura of mystery and magic. like the finest horror fiction, it leaves just enough to the imagination to be truly unsettling; but as with dame iris’ best work, it’s also a stunning cross-section of guilt and emotional repression gone unheeded. point b), however, is the resolution. each iris murdoch novel begins with an introductory set of scenes where she pulls the wool over our eyes and sets us up for an enchantment. here, she methodically lifts that enchantment, while still leaving just enough unexplained to remind the reader that the world, and the emotions we deal with living in it, is ever so lightly more rich and strange than we would like to admit. plus, the dialogue is absolutely hilarious!
