24 Hours follows Ellis, who's 17 and just back from boarding school, over the course of a day-long period that turns out to have a lot more adventure and drama in it than expected. When Ellis runs into a former classmate (Jackie, who's a little older, but isn't a university student and doesn't have a steady job) he figures they'll just have a beer and go their separate ways. But Jackie talks Ellis into driving him to a party, where conflict ensues, which leads to a much bigger and more dramatic conflict that Ellis finds himself involved in as well. Meanwhile, Ellis (who wants to be an actor) finds himself thinking about Shakespeare and mortality (his best friend, Simon, killed himself a few months before) as the book's events unfold. For a pretty short book, there's a lot going on in this one, plot-wise. After going to the party with Jackie, Ellis also meets three sisters (Ursa, Leona, and Fox) who all live in a rundown former motel with their former guardian; Jackie hangs out at the motel (which is called the Land of Smiles) too, and Ellis ends up at another party there, moving in adult social circles that are very different from the ones he knows from his financially-comfortable family. At the same time, it feels like for a lot of the book, we don't know any of the characters that well: we're thrust with Ellis from one odd situation to another, and I found the book's pacing slightly strange. That said, by the final portion of the book, I was cheering Ellis and Jackie and Leona and Ursa on, and eager to see how the ending of the book would unfold. And there are some satisfying moments and passages earlier in the book, too. I like how at the first party, there are musicians playing Vivaldi, and Ellis recognizes the tune from a car commercial while Jackie knows the composer and moans about how the music is "so beautiful" but is so over-played that it's "become its own sort of joke" (25). And I like various descriptions: I like how Ellis takes in the neighborhood around the Land of Smiles like this: "All around him lay a country of rust and graffitied fences" (90). Later, Ellis finds himself on top of a building, "looking down on an expanse of roofs, a geography of corrugated iron" (168). And I like how Jackie describes a large portrait painted on a wall as being by an art student who "thought art should be out and about—everyone living with it whenever they walked to the shop to buy bread" (96). Also pleasing: I learned that Margaret Mahy got a tattoo when she was 62 because a character in this book gets a tattoo and she wanted to write about it convincingly.
