FIRST READING 6/2018-ish: 5 Stars, Most Likely Pretty sure I read this soon after John Sladek’s other Thackeray Phin novel, Black Aura, and simply forgot to mark it down. Or maybe I was saving it for a rainy day, because I do that kind of thing a lot, and I’m just imagining that it’s very familiar. SECOND (?) READING 1/20/23: 4 STARS And maybe it’s only because one of the characters was named Gervase and another Phin, or maybe it was the type of absurd and witty humor, but I kept thinking of Edmund Crispin’s Gervase Fen when reading Invisible Green. Whatever, it’s a great classic, classical, detective story worth revisiting now and again. In 1981 for an Ed Hoch project seventeen famous detective fiction authors and critics thought so, too: when they famously ranked their favorite mystery books this one placed fourteenth. It’s definitely a fun ride with a few impossible puzzles (with ingenious solutions) but for me the detective is the star of the show here. He’s kind of like a cross between Willy Wonka and Oscar Wilde. Kinda. Phin is a very enjoyable lead. He’s easygoing and humorous but also straight to the point. This is a character that behaves as if he knows he’s living inside of a detective novel and doesn’t want to waste our time. Why did I downgrade Invisible Green from 5 to 4 stars? Only because I was expecting to be blown away. Knowing how much I enjoyed it the first time around and knowing it’s reputation, I expected to be wowed. Not to say the ending is unsatisfying in the least, though. All that’s to say, I could have saved time by simply copying and pasting my “review” for Black Aura, which is as follows: Too bad Sladek didn’t write any more Phin books. Although, there are two Phin short stories that I did track down years ago but I now don’t remember anything about them. So I’ll be reading those again ASAP. Not for nothing, but my copies of these two novels are the ones from Walker & Company from the 80s and they’re perfect little books with nice covers. I wish there was a machine that could turn ebooks into smelly, yellow paperbacks. Sorry, World Peace, if I ever capture a genie that will be one of my wishes. (The other two are none of your business.)
