Village of Singleton Magna, Dorset, 1919. I thought I knew who did it, and couldn’t believe Rutledge was clueless. Well, I was wrong. There’s quite a surprising twist at the end, yet I might have given more weight to some few clues along the way. SUCH a sad story. So much grief. I hope Inspector Hildebrand gets his careless ass fired. I fondly imagine the scene. Treat him like the stubborn stupid jerk he is! The Great War ruined so many lives, body and mind. I hope Rutledge helps that poor sod in the cell. He said he will (to Hamish). Wish we knew. That would lend some hopefulness to a dark tale. Actually, I’d like a story where Hildebrande gets framed and arrested by some fool inspector, and he has to beg Rutledge to help him. By then, of course, his chief constable has already told him off and dismissed him from service. Meanwhile, Mowbray has a good job with the deaf farmer. characters: Superintendent Bowles, idiot boss at the Yard. Sergeant Gibson at the Yard. Francis is Ian’s sister. Miss Margaret Tarletan, a youngish lady from London, is missing. Local Inspector Hildebrand thinks the dead woman in the field is Burt Mowbray’s wife, Mary. Where are her children? Marcus Johnston is the solicitor / lawyer assigned to Burt Mowbury Constable Truitt, local ladies’ man. His neighbor, Mrs Prescott. Local gossip is the farmwife Mrs Dixon Mrs Dalton fills the gap left when her husband, the rector, died. She is a well-intentioned busybody. Her adult son is Henry Dalton, but he is somewhat childlike Miss Elizabeth Napier is the manipulative daughter of the wealthy and powerful Mr Napier. She was in love with Simon Wyatt and expected to marry him before he went to war Miss Napier’s private secretary was Margaret Tarletan, who is missing. She grew up in India, and moved to England as an adult. She helped tend wounded soldiers, and briefly dated Canadian war vet Shaw. Mrs Wyatt (Aura?) is a Frenchwoman who married local landowner Simon Wyatt during the war. Her maid is Edith. Simon Wyatt had been expected to marry Miss Napier. Simon now wants to open a museum— his way of coping with his war horrors Edith is Mrs. Wyatt’s maid. Local inspector Hildebrand is ambitious and idiotic
