Hot damn, I love this book. It's not perfect, but it hits the spot. First, the things I didn't like. Major spoilers ahead. 1) The way that, towards the end, things started leaning towards an unambiguously supernatural explanation for events What I found really brilliant about this story is the ambiguity. Most of the characters are so absorbed in their own small worlds that they can't put the puzzle together. But the reader can. The best example of this is the bright light in the sky. Wendy thinks it's a comet or something. Raphael thinks it's a supernatural sign of a new era. The Aviator says that it's a space station exploding. One could choose to think that Raphael and Wendy are right, depending on what kind of story they want this to be, but the Aviator's explanation clarifies SO MUCH about the world. Like, for example, what an Ascendant even is. And then Wendy manifests the Hanged Boy in front of a crowd of people, and makes out with Justice's ghost, and I guess one could still argue that these things might only be happening inside her head but it feels more like Hand is saying "no this shit is for real" and I kind of hate that. Maybe that's because I'm biased towards science fiction in favour of other kinds of spec fic. Maybe the whole point is that some things defy explanation, which I'm enough of a romantic to believe is true. But damn it, those few scenes really messed up my suspension of disbelief and made me feel a bit misled. 2) Justice. In a way Justice is refreshing because he's pretty much a dude version of so many fictional women. He's pretty, he's nice I guess, for some reason he really wants to fuck the protagonist, he's mostly useless, he dies unceremoniously for the sake of the protag's character arc. But he's the most boring worthless character and I didn't buy his relationship with Wendy at all. At first I thought maybe the point was that this was a shallow adolescent romance and Wendy is putting more stock in it than she should, as teens do, but then at the end Wendy's humanity hinges on how she feels about Justice and like his ghost gives this speech that's supposed to be moving or something. That kind of frustrates me because Wendy's relationships with Miss Scarlet Pan and Jane Alopex are not only more interesting but more convincing, even though Jane is introduced pretty late in the game. (Incidentally this is my problem but I kinda feel like Hand queerbaited me. Jane is clearly a huge dyke, she and Wendy make out and brain fuck each other and are both pretty into it (even though Jane almost dies?), Jane kills the Aviator, and I'm supposed to accept Justice as a leading man? Come on. Jane for leading man!) Also, Wendy believes (and it seems the audience is meant to believe) that the moment she becomes Truly Human is when she weeps over Justice's corpse. Sure, okay. The moment she becomes Truly Human, if you ask me, is the moment she decides not to kill Jane. It's the first time she feels remorse for hurting another person. She does it in part for Miss Scarlet Pan, which is significant, and in part because she has a thing for Jane's brain. It's a great scene! 3) The grimdarkitude By the fortieth time a kid got impaled and beheaded I was over it. Bonus: why the fuck is this creepy science werewolf thing named Trey. That's the worst name for a creepy science werewolf thing. Now, the things I liked 1) literally everything else. Damn I love these characters. They're all pretty much horrible people. Like, truly horrible. Raphael tries to rape his pal, accidentally kills her in the scuffle, and then goes ahead and rapes her corpse. Wendy mind fucks a six year old girl, driving her insane and almost killing her, and doesn't care. The characters who are pretty okay are pretty pathetic. But somehow, I love them all. Except Justice. I love the prose. It's purple as hell and it works. I felt like I was drowning in it. It's so opulent it's hedonistic. Reading this book is what I imagine smoking opium is like. I love the world. The worldbuilding is killer. Hand is like a magician, creating this spectacle, distracting your eyes, timing it all just right so that you go nuts when she finally reveals her cards. But she doesn't reveal too much, and that's part of the fun of it. There's still that sense of mystery, of "maybe it really is magic." I love that it's a story about stories, and about how we act out these ancient stories even though at the end of the day none of us is Baal, or the Magdalene, or the Consolation of the Dead, we're just a bunch of broken people trying to find something worth believing in. I'm excited to read more Hand. Although if she fails to make the sexual tension between Wendy and Jane add up to anything in the next two books of the trilogy I will be unhappy. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
