I loved this Victorian - the story involves two estranged spouses finding each other again amidst exotic danger. What's not to love? Ross and Julia married very young but they knew they belonged together. That is, until Ross returned home from visiting a relative one day a few months after marriage to find his beautiful bride had run away from him and kept running. Now it's twelve years later, and Ross is a well-known explorer off on his last, desperate mission - to track down his missing brother-in-law Ian, who may or may not have been executed in Bukhara. And it is on his trek through the Kara Kum desert that he meets Julia again. Julia, who the author clearly based on Lady Hester Stanhope, has carved a life for herself in a remote outpost as a 'ruler' of a small fortified village. The bulk of the book is set during Ross and Julia's journey to Bukhara and their time in the menacing city, as well as their escape. But much as I loved the highly unusual setting (when's the last time you read a romance set on the Silk Road?), what really made me give the book 5 stars was the complex, tormented relationship between Ross and Julia itself - these are two smart, strong-willed, passionate people who have never gotten over each other, and who have caused each other unimaginable pain - they cannot stay away from each other, now that they are thrown together again - but they cannot move forward either, because there is so much baggage between them. They lash out, they comfort, they fight and love and are incapable of letting go. I liked Julia, who is pretty unusual for a romance novel heroine - the separation is very much her fault - there is no misunderstanding, no 'Ross brought it on himself' here - but she is older and wiser and scarred by her past behavior as much as she scarred Ross. She's brave and complicated and makes mistakes and atones for them, and is a pretty wonderful heroine. But much as I like Julia, my heart belongs to Ross - a self-effacing explorer with a not so-hidden adrenaline-junkie streak, shaped by his loss but not made less, Ross is a rare romance novel hero who is just plain good and one I'd not mind taking home to mother :) So yes, go read!
