"We repress our bodies to purchase a soul that time cannot destroy; we sacrifice pleasure to buy immortality; we encapsulate ourselves to avoid death. And life escapes us while we huddle within the defended fortress of character." ~Sam Keen Consumption. There are books that I read and then there are books that I consume. Denial of Death was consumed. This reads more 1990's than 1970's, a testament to Ernest Becker's acumen. It is both critical and reverent of Sigmond Freud's psychoanalytical theories. A careful restructuring that tosses out the framework without collapsing the house. Becker points to Charles Darwin as the harbinger of change in the mindset of modern psychology. It was Darwin's evolutionary theory that put the problem of death anxiety at the forefront of psychological assertions and, by extension, "heroism" as a defense mechanism against that anxiety. Becker elaborates on the role of heroism as a cultural construct, and theology as the standard bearer of that construct: "...the crisis of society is, of course, the crisis of organized religion too: religion is no longer valid as a hero system, and so the youth scorn it. If traditional culture is discredited as heroics, then the church that supports that culture automatically discredits itself. If the church, on the other hand, chooses to insist on its own special heroics, it might find that in crucial ways it must work against culture, recruit youth to be anti-heroes to the ways of life of the society they live in. This is the dilemma of religion in our time." The real conundrum of man's existence is that, in all of the animal kingdom, he alone is aware of his own mortality. It is this awareness that fuels his adult anxiety, an awareness that no matter what he accomplishes in his 60+ years of tarry and toil, he is ultimately food for worms. In the face of this terrifying realization, all of us, as sentient beings, as "meaningless creatures," deploy our coping mechanisms. Becker expounds on this assumption and analyzes it with dizzying efficiency. This is a challenging read, but one that is well worth the time.
