Alice at the ripe old age of seven and a half is still bored , as she plays with her adorable black and white kittens, yet she needs something better, again ignored by her older sister...wants more stimulation, excitement, yes adventures, so decides to go through a looking -glass and escape the tedium of everyday life of Victorian England...She will not be disappointed, in reality probably much too much for Alice's childish taste . The girl sees a magnificent garden and a twisting road leading there...Nevertheless she ends back were she started disoriented, perplexed, downright anxious . Welcome to the fantastic world on the other side of the mirror, the fast traveling Red Queen ( not to be confused with the Queen of Hearts) tells the little girl she too can become a queen if...a mighty big one, if she partakes and wins in a giant game of chess , the enormous, beautiful squares have been built on the ground and the player follows the course they being the pawn. Alice must navigate the maze of dark woods, losing her way, asking directions and getting baffling answers, from strange things, animal and human, well maybe some are and the weird characters she encounters, the over confident Humpty Dumpty on a wall, shaped like an egg, forever espousing his belief he can stay there without stumbling, Alice is not too sure, as he asks unanswerable questions. Tweedledee and Tweedledum two fat twin boys constantly reciting poetry, don't bother trying to tell them apart... The White Queen a befuddled old careless woman, dressed inappropriately , sloppily, in other words a mess. The Lion and Unicorn their never ending daily battles for the throne ...which is not vacant, still the local inhabitants like watching this ferocious struggle . Not to forget the White Knight, his day job, the passion, making minor inventions ( a little disguised version of the great writer Lewis Carroll) , he and his horse are seldom attached, the ground is more his home but gets back on the saddle. The Red King sleeps so peacefully never waking and the White King has troubles with an egg. Others like the diverting talking flowers, make this story flow smoothly to the inevitable conclusion. Lewis Carroll was a very inventive author, always giving the reader plenty of material to digest, this is not just for children, these books Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Through The Looking- Glass are charming classics for everyone who enjoys reading.
