Victoria Holt was one of my Big Three intros to classic, gothic romantic suspense along with Phyllis Whitney and Mary Stewart. I devoured her huge backlist as a teenager and pretty much loved it all. It has been many years and many twists in my reading taste since I picked up one of her books and when I spotted Bride of Pendorric re-released in audio, I was curious to revisit a world Victoria Holt was superb at creating. Bride of Pendorric was not one I remembered at all, but I was struck when I started listening by the familiar vibes of Daphne du Maurier’s Rebecca. Not exactly and milder, though the scope was just as broad with its atmospheric settings and situations, mysterious events and the legend of the tragic Pendorric Brides. The almost naïve and innocent young heroine in a whirlwind romance and marriage to an older worldly, and slightly jaded man who kept big secrets and a brooding house and household back home. Oh yes, it definitely had delicious Rebecca overtones and I was all in for that. This was written in the 1960’s as a current romantic suspense. My first read was in the 80’s and it felt ‘classic’ then. Now, after reading and listening to books with an even much greater time gap, I really felt like I was listening to a classic and a time long gone. Favel’s gentle persona and Roc’s overbearing behavior reflected the times and the isolated feeling needed for such a gothic story to work its wiles on the heroine and her own temperament doing the rest. The story builds a setting and a feeling which includes all the characters surrounding Favel when she swiftly marries Roc after her father’s death and goes home with him to discover there is something wrong and still going on at Roc’s home in Cornwall. Though gentle, there is a quiet strength to Favel that she discovers as she faces it all even the possibility that her own husband may be a villain. I loved the moderate thrills and chills that come from her investigation and road to discovery. Henrietta Meire was a new to me narrator. She was a great match for this story that is told from Favel’s point of view. She voiced the cast of characters well and she caught the tone of each scene and the buildup of the story fabulously. Revisiting a book years later can be a chancy thing, but I loved Bride of Pendorric and now I have a thirst for more along the same vein and from the same author. Those who like milder, but no less atmospheric gothic romantic suspense should snatch this one up. I rec’d the audio from Tantor Audio to listen to in exchange for an honest review. My full review will post at Books of My Heart July 19th.
