"Just a Bully" by Gina and Mercer Mayer is a childrens picture book about a bullying situation within school. The trouble begins when our main characters little sister is being bullied by a crocodile on the play ground. When the older brother stands up for his sister, the bully begins to target him in school. The bully pulls the brothers hair, flicks him with rubber bands, and calls him names. The situation escalates when the bully breaks the main characters science project and begins to push him. After a fight breaks out, both the bully and the brother are scolded. On the bus, the bully begins to pursue the brother again, but the sister sticks up for him, and the bully walks away defeated. This book deals with an incredibly difficult subject matter: bullying. Many, if not most, children face bullies at some point in their school years and for some, if impacts their lives drastically. Bullying can result in lowered grades, happiness, school retention rates, and school morale. Because of this, I believe that teaching children about bullying from a young age is extremely beneficial for the wellbeing of our school communities. However, this book looks at bullying from what I believe to be an outdated standpoint. The way our protagonists get their bully to stop picking on them is simply to resort to bullying him back. Near the end of the story, after the bully and older brother engage in a physical fight, the sister pushes the bully and calls him a "fathead." It was this particular instance of bullying that put the nail in this books coffin for me. Name calling is not appropriate in any situation, and because the protagonists of this story solve their problem in this manner, it teaches children that bullying a bully is acceptable. For this reason, I would not use this book in my curriculum unless I followed our read aloud by prompting the question, "how could our main characters have handled this situation better?" Then I would provide my students with more appropriate ways to deter bullies and create a positive classroom environment.
