Supposedly the game-changing novel that launched the Bonkbuster. Take a browse at Wiki's Bonkbuster page and you'll find that Krantz, extending on Robbins' and Susann's famed work, was awarded the title of pioneer of the Bonkbuster genre, with this early entry ('78) to the field. Known by the sex and shopping subgenre. This book is written imperiously, although the language is surprisingly salty. The novel has an untold level of name-dropping of brands, designers and products during the '60s and '70s that virtually forms an extensive history of American style and attitudes. Starting with the opening line about the elderly and infirm being amongst the only people not to own a car (like losing a limb, she adroitly notes of the go-go Beverly Hill folk) we find out that, Scruples, in the heart of Rodeo Drive is owned by Billie, a slim woman (always important) with money (essential) and a hypersexuality (bingo), who is awaiting the results of this year's Oscars. Her workers are the secondary characters who shape the novel. These are the wannabe up and coming NYC designers and trendsetters who by hook or by crook will become the outfitters and gurus who dress the crème-de-la-crème of Hollywood while we cheer them on. The book staggers on with plenty of 'sexy results' as Krantz gives her take on frigid women (weirdos), homosexual men (perverts, sadomasoquists), lesbians (obsessed with power; all around America; sneaky - will pounce like tigers with the appropriate bait - hold on to your skirt, ladies), repressed women (the c word was used frequently to describe Billie once she had coined on to the idea of taking advantage of her staff in a predatory way and was getting pleasure in spades), straight men, straight women etc. Views were very dated but Krantz clearly went hell-for-leather and wasted not a drop of potential for this debut novel. The standout has to be Sergio, who has no moral standing, no class, pride or dignity in filth designed to fascinate housewives the length and breadth of the U.S. and beyond. 5 years later Collins added Hollywood to her titles and the rest was history. Even though Collins was writing raunchy lifestyles of the rich and famous literature since her debut a decade before the publication of this, Krantz probably did help roll out the genre for beachgoers worldwide. As it stands in 2022, it remains a sweet-smelling, designer-outfitted near-600 page stroll around the mall.
