What did Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980) and Ernesto “Che” Guevara (1928-1967) have in common? Prior to reading this book, I did not know that they saw each other when they were both still alive. This is my first book read written by Sartre and three years ago, I read John Lee Anderson’s Che Guevara: A Revolutionary Life . Before Sartre’s image in my unsophisticated (read: zero knowledge in philosophy) mind was this old professor talking inside his wood-paneled and fully-carpeted office about the things like existentialism that was so deep I would never ever understand what he was saying. On the other hand, prior to the Anderson’s book, I used to see the image of Che Guevara printed on the t-shirts of some hip teenagers. I had some clues who he was because of the communist posters my handsome brother brought home when he was still in studying in a radical university. But not all young Filipinos: one caller in a morning show thought that Guevara was some kind of a band soloist so he asked what latest rock song he recorded. Thanks to printed words. Thanks to books. We can read them and we can be informed. We can choose not to be ignorant. We can also contribute to influencing future generations by writing too. We can make books of our own. The importance of reading and writing to his life. This is basically the main theme of this book, The Words by the existentialist philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. At the age of 59, he wrote this book about the first 10 years of his life on earth. He was exposed to books at a very young age. He remembered looking at the volumes and volumes of similar hardbound books stacked in his grandparents’ room. He did not know what were those but he loved to touch them and hear the flipping of the crisp pages. From then on, he resolved to himself that he would not only read those books someday but he also become a writer. Same thing happened to Che Guevara. His parents also loved to buy and read books. In the above-mentioned Anderson’s biography of Guevara, one of Che’s childhood friends recalled that he could barely navigate inside the living room of the Guevaras because of the many stacks of books and magazines on the floor. So, what made Sartre and Guevara in common? (1) They both loved to read; (2) They both believed and supported Marxism; (3) They actually saw and talk to each other in Cuba in the 60’s. In fact, when Guevara died in 1967, Satre declared “He is not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age and the era’s most perfect man”; (4) I both have read something about them. Ako na! (Me already!). Next in my to-be-read is the childhood days of Sartre’s girlfriend, Simone de Beauvior, Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter .
