I first read this book about two years ago, and this is what I wrote then: It was certainly very informative and Marcus made an interesting case about how Dylan and the Band drew on the old, weird America of the past (Kill Devil Hills, Smithville) in the summer of 1967, when they recorded the famed Basement Tape Recordings. It is a bit surrealist, drawing on the conscious and subconscious influences in art/music, on the role of masks and personas, and the essence of time. The discography is, perhaps, more interesting than the prose. Marcus never fails to introduce me to old recordings that are new to me (in 'Mystery Train' this was particularly true with the music of Harmonica Frank Floyd), in this case to the recordings of Geechie Wiley and Dock Boggs, and many of the tracks on the ever-so-hard-to-find Genuine Basement Tape recordings. Over the past couple of years much of the book had been forgotten, but some tiny details stuck with me, for they resonated with me for some reason or another. I decided to pick this book up again not because it had any profound impact on me at the time or because of a love of Greil Marcus’ writing style (I actually find his style a bit tangled and unfocused at times), but rather because of the recent official release of the Complete Basement Tapes by Columbia Records, the 11th installment of its Bob Dylan “Bootleg Series” at the beginning of this month. The Basement Tapes were recorded in 1967, during what some argue was the most prolific period of Bob Dylan’s musical career. They were, as The Band’s Robbie Robertson says, never meant for anybody to hear: “We went in with a sense of humor. It was all a goof. We were playing with absolute freedom; we weren’t doing anything we thought anybody else would ever hear, as long as we lived. But what started in the basement, what came out of it . . . came out of this little conspiracy, of us amusing ourselves. Killing time.” Some say that the basement tape sessions were intended to fulfill part of a contractual obligation to Columbia Records, with the covers and parodies being just warm-up exercises to help Dylan and The Band (then The Hawks) find their sound. Others suggest that these recordings were meant to be offered to other musicians, which seems logical as 14-tracks were pressed as an acetate and sent to other artists (soon recorded by the likes of Peter, Paul & Mary, – whose recording equipment was used for these legendary sessions – the Byrds and Manfred Mann). Beginning with the release of Great White Wonder in 1969, the record that is often credited as the beginning of the bootleg industry in music, the basement tapes soon were being sold on the streets. Great White Wonder was quickly followed by many other vinyl pressings with a variety of interesting titles. And in the 1990s and early 2000s several CD sets were released, claiming to offer all or most of the material from these famed sessions, among them The Genuine Basement Tapes and A Tree With Roots. Aside from bootleg recordings, every now and again a track would officially be released giving listeners a taste of what was put down on tape in houses in and around Woodstock, New York in 1967 (most notably in the house affectionately known as “Big Pink”). “Quinn the Eskimo” was recorded for Dylan’s critical flop 2LP album Self Portrait. In 1975 Columbia released a 2LP set titled simply The Basement Tapes, which included on it 16 basement recordings, plus 8 demos by the Band. The most remarkable thing about this album was the inclusion of an alternative version of the song “Too Much of Nothing,” very different from the oft-bootlegged one, and the inclusion of the never-before-bootlegged “Goin’ to Acapulco,” which led many to believe that there was much more basement material out there than what first hit the streets in 1969. On Dylan’s Greatest Hits Volume II, released in 1971, a couple re-recorded versions of basement songs surfaced. And when Columbia Records initiated the Dylan “Bootleg Series” in 1991, collections of rare and (more often) live Dylan performances, some basement tape tracks appeared, but not very many. And despite fans’ expectations, it took 11 bootleg series releases and 23 years for the complete basement tapes to finally achieve “official” release. Having searched for bootleg copies of these recordings – with no success – for many years, I was ecstatic when I heard about this release and I had anticipated it for months before it actually hit store shelves. I had finally (just before reading news of the release) found The Genuine Basement Tapes on eBay for about $125 (much more than I wanted to pay). I had assumed that the Columbia box set would be pricey – perhaps around $50-60 – but I didn’t expect anything near the actual price at which this box set hit markets: $150! Finding it on sale for $120, I bought it (somewhat reluctantly), knowing that it contained almost 40 more tracks than The Genuine Basement Tapes set and was reputed to have the best sound quality to date (still quite poor for some tracks, relatively). That was on November 4th. I listened to all of the tracks twice through. Most of them were unfamiliar to me – I knew they were out there somewhere, but I had never heard them (though I searched for them determinedly) – and others I had heard countless times before (those that had been officially-released here and there over the years). After two listens (about 6 hours through each time) I decided to revisit Marcus’ book to help me better evaluate the songs and when I did all I can say is that I was not prepared for what lay ahead of me. I entered a labyrinth that took me on a journey through time, from the “old, weird America” to the present (not just 1967, when these tracks were recorded, but to today – and even beyond, into the great unknown). Now for a bit more on Marcus’ work itself. Marcus writes at the beginning: “Heard as something like a whole—as a story, despite or even because of its jumble of missing pieces, half-finished recordings, garbled chronologies of composition or performance—the basement tapes can begin to sound like a map; but if they are a map, what country, what lost mine, is it that they center and fix? They can begin to sound like an experiment, or a laboratory . . . .” I began listening to the music as a map, listening along the way to the originals of the covers and to influences that Marcus points out in the text, from the recordings of Geechie Wiley and Dock Boggs to “Rabbit” Brown, Frank Hutchison and countless others. Often times I would encounter a song and find a lyric that Dylan lifted for one of his songs, something he has been doing throughout his career, just as many in the folk tradition have done for centuries before him. One example was when listening to the Bascom Lunsford song “I Wish I Was a Mole in the Ground” (recorded in 1928), in which the following line appears, “Cause a railroad man he'll kill you when he can/And drink up your blood like wine,” which Dylan recycles in “Stuck Inside of Mobile With the Memphis Blues Again” from his classic amphetamine-drenched 1966 album Blonde on Blonde. Another example was in the song “James Alley Blues,” recorded by “Rabbit” Brown, which Dylan has not only covered, but which includes some lyrics that Dylan recycled for “Crash on the Levee.” In recent years he has done this perhaps with even greater frequency than he did at the start of his career. Countless writers and musicians have lifted lines or melodies from others, and it is part of not only the folk tradition, but many literary traditions as well (Ferlinghetti remarks on this somewhere; so does TS Eliot). Marcus in this book gives us a blueprint for discovering some of these recordings and if we follow the paths he lays out in this book, without deviation, we find that the roads actually go much deeper in some cases, into forbidden forests and up winding mountain roads. I tried to stick only to the roads Marcus shows us in his map, but—despite warning signs – I found myself sometimes sneaking down hidden alleys, building bridges, turning around at various roundabouts and dead-ends and sometimes finding that certain roads were much longer than I had at first anticipated. I spent hours with this book over the past couple of weeks, mostly lost in the 40(+) page detailed discography. I had expected my adventures with this text to be a fun three-day voyage (at most), but I found instead that my trip was much more complicated than I had anticipated, with rocky terrain, innumerable detours and many signs reading “No Exit.” There is indeed no real exit from this world once you enter it. It draws you in and shows you all sorts of interesting things about not only the music, but about yourself and about the collective American experience (if the reader is an American). In some tracks on the basement tapes we really do just hear guys goofing off, having fun, killing time. But on other tracks we find hints of betrayal, seduction, lust, deception, warning, desperation, that are part of the collective American experience, going back to the beginnings and running through the present (and beyond). I took the first exit that I could from this work, but I still left a good deal of terrain unexplored. This is a work that one can easily get lost in and spend months or even years on. And it is not easy to find a way out. At best, we can escape. But it also has a mesmerizing effect, and the book, – even if the writing itself is not my ideal – much like the music discussed therein, has a very seductive appeal. It calls out to us and draws us in. This book for now goes back on the shelf, to be pulled down again for reference when needed or when it calls out my name again. For the uninitiated reader, beware: it’s a long, tiring Homeric epic, peopled with one of the strangest casts of characters you’ll ever meet. Yes, there are sirens and lotus-eaters to be found here, and also swindlers, murderers, preachers, performers, reformers, jilted lovers, poets and a whole array of social misfits. Enter at your own risk, but take heed that you may never find your way back home again and if you do it might be very different from the way you left it, and/or you may find yourself changed.
