I’ve been meaning to read this for a very long time. And, to be honest, this wasn’t at all what I was expecting it to be. One of the things I know about Hinduism is that there are millions of gods – so, I was expecting this to be a bit like Ancient Greek religion – with lots of lustful, angry, self-righteous gods causing endless trouble. That this book makes it clear that there is really only one god, in multiple aspects, took away that expectation from the start. My other main experience with religious texts is the Bible. And I’m not going to pretend I’ve had a fun time reading the Bible. The god of the Old Testament is decidedly not someone I would want to spend eternity with – or even a wet weekend. It would be hard to come up with someone more obnoxious and capricious. Sure, he becomes a little more rational when he gives birth to himself as his own son, but much of the New Testament after the gospels seems to rely solely on the argument that this is all true and so we are to believe or burn for all time. It is certainly not ‘philosophy’, in any real sense. And that’s what I found interesting about this book. And while I don’t agree with all of the philosophy, I was able to see how this might have influenced Greek philosophical thought and definitely how it influenced western modernism. I loved the setting of this. There is going to be a terrible battle tomorrow, and a great warrior is talking with Krishna about the fact that he really doesn’t want to fight in that battle, since he will be fighting members of his own family. He can’t help feel that whatever he does in the morning, he will be committing a great evil. Recently, I read something by a Jungian psychologist that said you become an adult when you realise that you have two paths before you, but that both lead to ends you do not want – but you have to choose anyway. Well, that’s where our hero is situated. I think the core message here is that we spend too much time obsessed with finding ways to meet our desires. But that while desires, as such, seem like great benefits if we were to achieve them, but that really they turn to ashes as soon as they are achieved, or worse, they turn into their opposite. That is, a life spent in pursuit of desire is one that ends in a kind of squalor. And while our desires lead us to waste our lives, or rather, destroy them – the path out of this is through service to others beyond our desires and without an expectation of reward. Now, I really like that. I think the world would be a better place if there was more of that attitude in it. That is so much better than ‘do unto others as you would have them do unto you’. I’ve never particularly liked the calculation at the heart of that moral maxim. I also liked the discussion of opposites in this and how one turns into the other. All that said, the idea of service also turned into its opposite for me when Krishna shows himself in all his manifest difference – mostly as a god devouring the lives of all people. A part of the message here seemed to be, do not worry about who you kill tomorrow on the battle field, remember, all are going to die anyway, and the cycle of life is a burning of karma while striving towards enlightenment. I don’t know. I find that turning away from life to be the opposite of what I would like to think of as enlightenment. And that is, a life of service disinterested in the normal rewards. I also found a lot of the language confusing here and struggled to remember which new word I'd never encountered before meant. I would really need to read this all again and much more slowly, but I'm not all that convinced I would get enough out of such a close reading that would repay the effort. Like most religious texts, I don’t really understand the spiritual aspects. They leave me confused and also more than a little cold. All the same, I felt this was much more interesting than many of the other religious texts I have read. Decidedly less fun that the Greeks, but I think I could have a laugh with Krishna in a way I've never thought I might be able to have a laugh with Jesus. And I think laughter is grossly underrated in religious circles.
