I love this book. Now, would I recommend it? Conditionally, yes. If a wonderful trip to Italy, for you, would be hitting the high spots in Rome and Venice (and how awesome is that?!), you may feel overwhelmed by Grizzuti Harrison's tome. It is very long, and it's very detailed. I'm guessing the reader visits 30+ churches with her in Rome, alone. The book is part travelogue and part "Roots" in Italy. I found myself mesmerized by both (and I'm just going to call her Barbara and move forward with this). Okay. Barbara's grandparents, maternal and paternal, emigrated from Italy, probably around the turn of the last century. And like most of the immigrants from that time, they were from the desperately poor South. If you speak to the children and grandchildren of these people, most will tell you their families refused to allow them to speak and learn Italian. Imagine living a life so hard, you even try to run away from the language and protect your children from it, like a curse. My maternal grandfather's family was like that; today we aren't even sure of the proper spelling of their last names, or precisely where they were from. "Near Campobasso" (like Barbara's family - and thousands more) is about as close as we come, since that was most likely the nearest city with a railroad stop to take them away from those rugged hills. I'm going on too long. In a nutshell - Barbara began in fashion-forward Milan, among the wealthy and sophisticated northerners. As she makes her way south, eventually joined by her daughter Anna in Naples, plus a friend and that friend's daughter (also of southern Italian descent)we the focus shifts from observations about architecture and cooking and art and descends into the hot, emotional, rocky land of her ancestors. It starts feeling very personal, and eventually - almost too much. This is not the land of the Medicis and the popes. It's almost primordial. It's sometimes more than you want to imagine. Barbara spent her time in Italy in the mid 1980s and the book was published and acclaimed by all in 1989. But even as I read the reviews on the back cover, I wondered if the reviewers really read the whole book. Did they really get it? I'm not so sure. This book can be pretty, charming. As warm and inviting as pots of geraniums posing on the sun-splashed balcony of an ancient stone villa. And this book is gut-wrenching and sad, as we mourn the wrenching divide between the Old Country and the New. How did those mothers let their sons and daughters leave? How bad did it have to be to pray that your children could get out, and forever? Read this book if you want to spend a lot of time looking at Italy, bello e brutto. (I hope I said that correctly - but it looks like a fitting end to this lengthy review, don't you think?)
