Shattering Glass by Gail Giles is a dark take on today’s need to be socially accepted; in this instance, the popularity status/ladder in high school. Throughout the novel, you see many instances where some of the main characters are following the lead of their charismatic “leader” for no other reason to remain in his good tidings, resulting in their ability to stay in his group of accepted peers/friends. Like most high schools in real life, everyone has something to hide and in the book it is no different. No one questions why the most popular guy in school is taking in the nerd, until it is too late and his true personality/motives are revealed. In Shattering Glass, Gail Giles tells the story of how Simon Glass, the hated school nerd and scape-goat for aggression, is taken under the wing of arguably the most popular guy in the school, Rob Hayes. Although at first it seems that Rob feels sorry for Glass, Rob’s close group of friends quickly decide that it is Rob’s way of getting back at Lance Ansley, Simon’s biggest bully and the most popular guy in the school. Within Rob’s group of friend there is Young Steward, from whose point of view the story is told. Young is the first to question Rob’s motive, but does now say anything out of fear of being unaccepted or losing Rob’s favor or attention. Although things start out great and everyone seems to be benefitting from the adoption of Glass into their group, it is not long until Glass starts to develop a backbone of his own, going against Rob and his commands. This is the start of when Rob’s ugly side comes to the surface. Rob’s leash around the boys, including Young and Glass, grows tighter and his moods are sudden and violent. Glass and Young notice this, prompting them to search for secrets that Rob might have in the school data base and library. What they find changes their entire viewpoint of Rob. Keeping the secret until the favorite’s dance, the pity Young feels for Rob causes him to fall back into complement while it seems to make Glass more unruly. The book finishes at the favorites dance with Glass changing the votes to ensure that they go against Rob’s wishes. While fighting with Rob, Glass exposes Rob’s secret while enraging the other boys. Humiliated and furious, Rob and Bob beat Simon near to death, taking out Coop’s knee, crippling him for the rest of his life, on accident while Coop was trying to protect Glass- the reason Coop got into a good college. Meanwhile Young watches innocently and in the end it is him who takes the blame for everyone else. When Young is first introduced into the book, he is described as one of the most popular guys in school, but throughout the book it is revealed that Young isn’t really popular except for the reason that he just happened to be friends with the right group of people. Young Steward is the type of person that would usually blend into the background, but as luck has it, he was able to befriend a group of people with high popularity status. A big effect on who Young Steward is as a person all tracks back to his family life. Both of Young’s parents, established therapists, overanalyze every aspect of Young’s life, micromanaging him to the point where they control what classes he takes in high school, what he will be going to college for, and what his future career for life will be. Needless to say, Young’s life is not just stressful for him, it is a struggle to be accepted by his friends and his parents. Young is a people pleaser through and through; throughout the book this does not change much. Whether it is pleasing his parent, his friends, his girlfriend, Young will go to any lengths not to let down the people in his life. A real critical turning point in the book for Young is when Rob asks him to break up with his dedicated girlfriend Ronna, who he loves very much. Young has an internal struggle because he knows that whatever decision he makes, he will let someone down: Rob or Ronna. In the end, Young makes the decision to let down Ronna, causing him to feel disgust, anger, and disappointment in himself. At this point, I think that Young realizes that he can’t please everyone, which only makes him try harder. This shows when, after Glass is murdered, he takes the blame for everyone else so that they don’t have to suffer. I rated this book five out of five stars because I liked how it was centered around the human need for acceptance, control, and how we deceive others by lying or hiding things about ourselves. Despite the extreme ending, I think this was a very hones book portraying the stress put on the lives of highschoolers. I would recommend this book to a mature audience (14+) who like dramas, fiction novels, or are just looking for a fun, easy-to-read novel with a twist. I think this is a book that both genders would enjoy and one that people of any ethnicity (as long as they don’t mind a few swear words or graphic violence) would enjoy as well.
