IBM and the Hollocast Very interesting story. I would not typically choose to read something that sounds so sensationalized, and though there are some overly dramatic sections, it is a very interesting read. IBMs first large customer was the US census - IBM supplied "Hollerith" punch card reading/sorting machines to the census bureau. During the holocaust, the Nazi's would walk into a town and know the names of all the Jewish people they were supposed to intern. The names came from various versions of the German census, and the German government contracted with IBM's German subsidiary "Deheomog" to manage the census. In a "punch card" system for population management, each person is represented by a punch card - it's equal to a database record. The Nazi punch cards contained fields for: - ethnicity - languages spoken - birth place of mom, dad, grandparents The Nazi's would then feed the completed cards through the punch card sorting system, and based on the number of cards found, they would know how many Jewish people had been selected by their criteria. The Nazi's had a target for the percent of the population they wanted to eliminate, so they could reclassify "Jewishness" via different sorts until they came up with the right number. Then the could sort those punch cards by region, and have the local police in each area go out and capture the named jewish citizens. Additionally, Dehomag had lots of German military contracts, and even worked for the prisons department which managed the internment camps. The entire system was extremely efficient, just like the Nazi "blitzkrieg" on the battlefield. Unfortunately that efficiency was to facilitate genocide. Moral of the story I suppose is to be careful what information you supply to any government - as Jews who avoided the census could also have avoid capture. IBM had excellent political connections in the US and in Germany, in fact most customers were governments in the early days --- IBM carefully avoided connection with and responsibility for Dehomog due to leveraging gov't relationships, for example instead of "communicating with the enemy" IBM used the State Dept to pass messages, and therefore keep their hands clean. The CEO of IBM, Watson, was a very interesting character and a powerful motivator and manager. Should read more about him. All over IBM he wrote one word, on doorways, in halls, on paper, everywhere. He wrote this to inspire troops to keep and open mind, know exactly what they were doing, be cautious, and avoid mistakes. That one word: THINK. Would be interesting to do the same thing for O8, but use the Latin or Greek version of the word: Latin: COGITA Greek: SKEFTOME (Σκέφτομαι)
