Based very loosely on a true story, this follows paranoid schizophrenic Michen O'Kane as he murders a mother and child, then the priest that he summoned to give them the last rites, before finally the guarda (cops) close in. The book falls into three very (very) roughly equal parts: (1) the back stories of both Michen and his first two victims, Eily and her toddler son Maddie; (2) the crimes and the manhunt; (3) the aftermath, as Michen goes on trial and descends ever deeper into his alienation and madness. This is, I think, the first of O'Brien's novels that I've read, and for the most part I was very impressed. Her use of language can be, at its best, quite astounding, full of wonderful lyrical flourishes and brightly realized images. On the other hand, there's only a thin line between gloriously idiosyncratic prose and Pseuds' Corner, and every now and then -- not so very often but nonetheless too often -- O'Brien stumbles over this boundary: "He is crying then, his teeth eating his tears" (p248), for example. Sometimes, too, the text lapses into incoherence, and there are some idiotic continuity errors -- idiotic in that there's no aesthetic reason for them, just sloppiness. On pp139-40, for example, we're told that "It was the first sound of [Fiona's] voice since he had come in," and yet, oops, at the top of page 139 Fiona has shouted to him, as he entered the shop, "We're not open, we're not open!" Allied to this are willful changes of tense from present to past or vice versa mid-paragraph, and sometimes (if memory serves) even mid-sentence. O'Brien doesn't seem to be using this tense-related chaos for any particular narrative purpose, just, I think, in an effort to look artsy. Much of the narrative is done from inside Michen's head, in what I assume is an attempt to depict paranoid schizophrenia, and I had problems with this aspect too. Like most of us, I haven't known too many paranoid schizophrenics, but I've known quite well a couple of friends who've suffered, at the very least, related diseases. O'Brien gets some parts of her portrayal of Michen's mindset right; it may be that she has the whole of it right, but often and again I was looking askance at the page at something that didn't seem to ring true. Michen's view of the world, in other words, seemed less like a paranoid schizophrenic's, more like an author's idea of what a paranoid schizophrenic's mind should be like. So much for my reasons for unease with the test. What about the good things? Well, as implied above, when O'Brien is getting her prose right, which is by far the most of the time, it's enough to make the hairs on the back of my neck stand on end. This she manages while making her text quite infernally readable. If some of her characters are straight out of Central Casting, enough of the main ones are so excellently drawn that it's hard to believe they're not real: Eily, Kitty (the girl whom Michen abducts as a sort of replacement Eily), O'Mara (the retired cop brought in to help in the interrogation of Michen), and others; and it's superb that O'Brien chose to dodge the cheap trick of painting the toddler Maddie as a cute, angelic little sweetie-pops and instead made him a bit of a self-centered brat -- a real child, in other words. Overall, the book has the pace of a thriller even if, at the end, there's no satisfying conclusion, no closure, of the kind a thriller might have. In short, a book that's very well worth reading even if you might find you come away from it with reservations. ===== As an aside, Goodreads (unless it's just moi ) seems to have done away with the Preview function. Elderly geezers like me rely on the Preview function to help them get at least most of the typos and idiocies out of their texts. Let's hope the function is returned Real Soon Now.
