It's interesting to look back on this book given Goad's position now. He currently occupies the skeptical contrarian/nihilist end of the spectrum of Alt-Right pundits writing for TakiMag, his new writings mostly consisting of fapping to an old copy of the Bell Curve and flirting with big sloppy wet kisses with eugenics and Social Darwinist racial tribalism, expressing outrage over non-worthwhile lost causes like the Confederate Flag and stumping for the Donald. A disappointing melange not substantially different than most of Fox News and appealing to a comments section that is basically a cesspool of denizens from Men's Rights forums, Fountainhead readers and Stormfront. This book on the other hand occupied a moment in his trajectory where he was strangely close to anarcho-leftists like Howard Zinn or Noam Chomsky and to having class consciousness, writing from a perspective of working class whites as the only acceptable pariahs left in the wake of political correctness as a foil to distract criticism from rich whites who tangibly benefit the most from systematic racism. It makes one almost nostalgic for the times when blatant racism hadn't come back out of the woodwork in full force and we could pretend. Almost. Those were the times of the 1994 Crime Bill and the beginnings of mass incarceration, so let's not get all weepy eyed. But I digress. It's full of forgotten historical moments of class warfare perpetuated against immigrant workers and indentured servants from Europe. I'm sure other writers from America's past along with Zinn have made the point better than Goad, but he is a case study of how a disaffected angry hate nugget (and I mean that in a good way) can lose it's aim. This was his high point where he could have gone in a different direction. This touched on the authentic hungers that demagogues always promise to feed in angry poor whites with right wing junk food, jingoism and religion. I't s a mixed bag though. Already in this book are hints of Alt-Right talking points that would become standard red herrings to derail discussion of systematic racism (e.g. the idea that slaves overall had arguably better quality of life than indentured servants because people treat property they own better than cheap disposable rent-a-slaves), but also a nascent critique of neo-liberalism and hypocrisy that is still needed today. In his more recent writings, Goad has seemed to downplay any discussion of class and economics and focus instead on joining in the Fox chorus bashing the supposed Cultural Marxist/Frankfurt School specter to be found around very corner. There might be some stuff here to cut out of the surrounding rotten tissue for those with the patience and time to do so. Some kernel of jouissance that could be put to better use. This book, along with 'Them' by Jon Ronson should be required reading for those who want to understand the current malaise in American politics and the appeal of the Alt-Right from Alex Jones to Goad to the Militia movement. Ah, what strange bedfellows the times can slap together at odd moments.
