In hopes of trying to stir up the vibes for Robert A. Caro to complete this multi-volume biography of Lyndon Baines Johnson, I chose to begin a re-read of those tomes already published. Let’s see if it works! In reading Robert A. Caro’s second volume of the Lyndon Baines Johnson biography series, I was completely blown away once more. While some call it less exciting than Caro’s opening volume depicting LBJ’s Texas life and early congressional years, I felt that it helped shape the image of the president I knew from the history books. This tome is by no means a shrinking violet in the literary world, though the level of action does pale when placed against the first book. Still, Caro brings to life those years that bridge the lead up to his arrival on Capitol Hill and his arrival in the Senate, where he made a national name for himself. From falsified war stories to his campaign and complete robbery of the 1948 Democratic primary for the US Senate. Here I thought ‘Dewey wins’ was the #1 story in the 1948 election cycle. Caro pulls no punches, appearing to side only with the truth and that which the record reflects, rather than cozying up to the famed LBJ. The reader learns a great deal about the chain-smoking, ill-tempered LBJ as the story progresses from his arrival on the scene as a congressman and his failed attempt at the Senate in 1941. The reader will, more than likely, not leave this volume with a strong feeling that the hometown son will vanquish his foes. Early parts of the book explore LBJ’s ability to spin a tale like no other, puffing up his war efforts to make himself look the hero, when he was in action for only 13 minutes. His lies and deception with this event helped exacerbate the tales that would be useful when he needed the support for his successful Senate run. Johnson’s wife, Lady Bird, plays a prominent role in this volume. While she was quite shy, she helped to shape Johnson into the prominent politician he would need to be for decades to come. It was also her family money that helped purchase some radio stations around Texas, whose messaging could be used to promote the congressman during his early political years, thereby paving the way for his Senate campaign in 1948. What stunned me most in this volume, perhaps in the entire biography up to this point, is the story (read: saga) surrounding the 1948 US Senate election and LBJ’s attempts to (and successful actions to) steal the Democratic primary by any means necessary. Caro makes this election campaign the poignant part of this volume, spending a great deal of time on the issue and looking at it, both in-depth and from a variety of perspectives. Not being American, I was not as aware of his moment is history as some may be (and it seems the US media really picked up on it after LBJ’s death in 1973), but the 87 votes that changed the world really is a key event in both the progression of this biography and the life of LBJ. For, as it is said many times, had he lost (and actually been declared the loser), his limelight would surely have burnt out and left others to fill the void. It was with this victory that his way to greatness and infamy on the national political scene was paved. I cannot express how impressed I am with this book and the progression of this series. As I enter the third book (longest and probably the most powerful, as we examine LBJ in the Senate), I cannot wait to see what Caro reveals and what history has to say about this powerful man, who will do anything to get what he wants.The chapters were filled with great narrative bits and helped shape an image of LBJ for the attentive reader. While there are surely tangential aspects to the storytelling, everything has its place and serves a purpose. Caro is a master and I cannot wait to see how things progress into the meatier tomes to come! Kudos, Mr. Caro, for another stunning volume in the life of this most conniving politician. Like/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at: http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/
