synopsis & moral if you are a timid American abroad in quaint rural England, looking to buy a home for you and your best friend, make sure not to blow all of your combined savings by buying a grim, gothic priory with a bad reputation plus no electricity - especially if your best friend is a vindictive gaslighting psychopath. remember: safety first! this was engaging and surprising. great cover too. I put a bit of a spoiler in that synopsis, in a no-doubt failed attempt to encourage people to read this bit of deeply buried treasure. because it deserves wider readership! it doesn't look as if Margaret Wasser wrote anything else, alas. The Priory's twit of a protagonist gradually becomes more sympathetic. especially after her dreadful "best friend" comes to stay, nearly 80 pages in - the contrast between the two is striking. compared to her friend from back home, Lisa Stafford is an icon of transparency and relatability. it was no small feat for the author to eventually turn Lisa into an enjoyable character, because man oh man she was a trial to read about in the beginning. so many bad decisions! so mousy! and all of her absurd rationalizations! I really wanted to shake some sense into her. but, incredibly, she became someone I was really rooting for. a well-developed heroine, in a book full of well-developed characters. Wasser's book has atmosphere to die for (literally). the not-so-jolly English village felt so real. same for the not-so-picturesque countryside. and that priory! or rather, the foreboding manse that sits next to the ruins of an ancient priory. the reader can easily imagine how this sinister, gloomy place feels, its drafty rooms, the odd layout, the giant subterranean kitchen and the outdated 'modern' kitchenette, the fireplaces, the strange door with 14 locks, the secret passage to a secret staircase to a secret tunnel leading to the riverside. I'd rent the place for sure. fun! but a bit hard to imagine actually living in this atmospheric dump the book has a great ending that takes place during a raging storm, when the cold war between Lisa and her worst friend finally reaches a very hot boil and the knives come out (literally). in such situations, a loyal dog and a secret doorway to a secret passage to a secret staircase to a secret tunnel leading to the riverside can come in pretty handy. 3.5 stars
