A very good retelling of the highlights of Washington's life with an overt focus on his thoughts, words, opinions, and most importantly, his actions and interactions with African-Americans. The good news is, of four books I've read about GW this is the one that most delves into his views and actions regarding African-Americans (both enslaved and free.) The bad news, while much is made about George's intentions, evolution of thought, desires, hopes for the betterment of African-American life in America, his actions very rarely amounted to very much. When it came to actually doing anything that helped African-Americans, Washington was the lover who promises to visit every day, but comes around only 4 times a month; Washington was the kid who always has an excuse for not turning in his homework; Washington was the co-worker who never turned his portion of the project, leaving it to others to do. For a man who took action so quickly and decisively so many times in his life for so many different causes, it is GLARING how easily he did not take action regarding bettering the lives of African-Americans. Actions speak louder than words, and Washington's actions prove he really didn't care all that much about the well-being of African-Americans. George Washington may be The Father Of America, but he was also an enslaver who fully participated in profiting from enslaving and brutally punishing African-Americans. That, and more, is made very clear in this book. Fight the British to evade taxes? Right away! Take up the cause of emancipation to prove America really is the land of the free? That's too difficult to pursue. I wonder if the fact that GW was promised large land holdings for fighting in two wars was the real reason he chose to fight for America - and maybe he failed to pursue emancipation because it would detract from his wealth. For all the author tries to rationalize GW's actions and explain "the times" to us, it is very apparent that GW was not much different than Jefferson and all the other slavers - they both maintained slavery to maintain their wealth. Imperfect indeed.
