To fully appreciate Kenzabuo Oe’s “Eyore” series one should first have an intimate understanding and respect for the works of William Blake; who as mentioned a fervent champion of the imaginations power to transfigure reality, to prioritize and romanticize one’s return to innocence, one of the “great life affirmers” among the ranks of Dh Lawrence, Arthur Rimbaud and Friedrich Nietzsche, those who through their poetry affirm the wild, mysterious, and marvelous ordeal of living as it is. They do not seek to escape suffering, but overcome it. This transfiguration is what Oe sets out to achieve in Rouse up O young men of the new age Oe masterfully weaves throughout the narrative a force of imagination in re contextualizing the circumstance of his severely handicapped son, his own circumstance as well as their collective circumstance as father and son. It’s important to note that while this book is a work of fiction, it is clearly inspired by Oe’s actual experience with his son in real life who has severe autism. While at times repetitive, the way Oe can relate a price of Blake’s poetry to transform his perceived truths never gets old and failed never to put a smile on my face. While admittedly a stretch at times, others times the connection is beautifully obvious even to a novice reader of Blake. The premise being that our narrator is at attempting to create a sort of guidebook to life that his son will be able to intimately understand in his own terms, and as mentioned in the afterword the son ends up the teacher at this later junction in the series, the lessons he delivers are about discovering the promise of renewal in a cruel and apparently unredeemable world. There is so much to cover in this work, “teach us to outgrow or madness” and “a personal matter” along with some Blake is encouraged before approaching this novel. “Every man has the right to his own illusions even if they are nothing more than that, and the right to express them powerfully. And the fair Moon rejoices in the clear & cloudless night; For Empire is no more, and now the Lion & Wolf shall cease.’” “Then first I saw him in the Zenith as a falling star, Descending perpendicular , swift as the swallow or swift; And on my left foot falling on the tarsus, enter’s there” -William Blake “Milton”
