I read Dragons of a Fallen Sun many years ago but I'd almost forgotten I had. In going back through the original, main series, I assumed I'd forgotten it because it wasn't very good. What a pleasant surprise to discover a quite brilliant fantasy novel of epic proportions. Weis and Hickman's writing is, objectively, better than their first books and they can draw on deep wells of character development and world building. Fallen Sun is packed with descriptions of places, people and events that will be very familiar to you if you've grown up reading Chronicles and Legends. I actually found myself skim reading long passages that told me about the Inn of the Last Home or the history of the Qualinesti or about the Solamnic Knight's Code and Measure. Because of this, Fallen Sun feels unnecessarily long, especially for part one of a trilogy. For someone revisiting this world, however, it provided just the refresher I needed to dive right back in. It felt like an old friend and Weis and Hickman pull a neat trick of mixing the perfect amount of old and new to create a believably continuous narrative which enriches and extends the story that ended so epically at the end of Dragons of Summer Flame. The new antagonist of the novel, the warrior prophet Mina, is the weakest link. The story jumps between disparate narratives which luckily serves to evoke a sweeping, worldly story rather than a collection of unconnected ones. Next we are introduced to spoilt heir to the elven throne, Silvanoshei, who accidently finds his way back into his kingdom which has laid under an inpenetrable magical dome for years. We also meet Marshal Medan, a dark Knight in charge of occupied elven Qualinesti. He has become enamored of the kingdom and Laurana, mother to the puppet ruler, Gilthas. Finally, we head to Solace, where it all began, where a discontented Solamnic called Gerard discovers a time-travelling Tasslehof in his own ceremonial tomb. Gerard, on the request of the dying Caramon Majere, takes Tasslehof to find someone who can solve the mystery of his appearance and Palin, transformed from his earlier, more heroic incarnations in the Fifth Age books by years of torture and disappointment, realises the significance of a kender who was supposed to have died saving the world. He determines to send him back but Tasslehof isn't entirely sure if he wants to return to his own death. There are a few problems with the plot. Firstly, time-travel is always problematic. Weis and Hickman messed with it in the Legends trilogy with great success, enriching the history of the world they had created but also permitting almost Dickensian moral questions to enter the narrative. The attempt here is similar and, narratorially, works quite well, backed up by the very fitting characterisation of Palin. As for Tasslehof, he is too inconsistent. He seems to have learned what sadness and trauma are countless times. Many times we've poignantly seen him cry or feel fear. Here we reset the clock. This isn't the Tasslehof that has gone through seven books of heroic adventures. This is the original Tasslehof - great for injection a little humour into the story but irritating because it makes Tasslehof's likeable soul completely ingenuine. His develop over the book would be believable, except for the fact that its the same trajectory he's followed before. It's a credit to Weis and Hickman's writing that the novel is, despite this, a huge success. My niggling doubts were dispelled by how much I was caught up in the story and the mystery. When Palin discovers there is no past, I was genuinely intrigued. It is a major rewrite of what Jean Rabe tells in the Fifth Age books. One has the impression that this trilogy is an attempt to correct and repossess the world that Rabe turned on its head with those book which are, while entertaining, of a much lower quality than Weis and Hickman's work. So I was happy to go along for the ride. Medan is a fantastically sympathetic character, one in a long line of characters who refuse to place themselves in the fantasy stereotypes of good and evil. Meeting Gilthas, Tanis's son, is a pleasure. Silvanoshei is the most annoying of the new characters but when he collides with rampaging Mina and her evangelical band of Dark Knights we get a spectacular end to the first book. There are so many mirrored events and parallels that it could all seem very contrived and repetitive but, as they showed in their original trilogies, Weis and Hickman know what they are doing. They take their world very seriously and they create moments of portentious poignancy. It is, most certainly, a part one and it is much too long-winded for many modern fantasy fans. It's also no Game of Thrones with grit, violence and shocks on every page, and it's not a woke, innovative, silkpunk. It's very, very traditional fantasy with one notable difference - it's written by great writers who know how to write memorable characters. Laurana is as good as the new Marshal, Palin is as interesting as the anti-Knight Gerard. And maybe it's also good because they don't murder everyone horrifically. Weis and Hickman might not be as popular as Martin, but they might actually be better writers and they certainly know high fantasy better than most.
