I can't believe I read this all the way to the end. First of all, Paulsen is trying so darn hard to be poetic that it loses any powerful or beautiful wording it might have had. He's straining so hard to sound deep and meaningful that it's just stupid and I come away from it impatient and annoyed. He puts too much meaning into e v e r y t h i n g because he's trying to be insightful and profound. Secondly, just some nit-picking here, he mentions that he knows how to survive in the woods because his grandfather taught him. Except that he also thinks that he'll freeze to death if he falls asleep in the snow. You live in Minnesota, stop acting like it's Mount Everest. I've lived in or near a city my entire life, and even I know that when you fall asleep, your core body temperature drops - which helps your body adjust to the weather. And also, "uncontrollable shivering will wake you up before you get too cold" so he has nothing to worry about. But because it wouldn't be much of a book if he fell asleep, Paulsen keeps him awake. Third, John wastes the whole book tracking a deer. He doesn't even shoot it. He just follows it until it dies. Disclaimer, I've never hunted. I'm not even interested in hunting. But if you're going to go out at three o'clock in the morning to bag a deer, then good grief, bag a deer. The worst of it is that he doesn't shoot the doe because when he sees her, he realizes gosh darn I love this deer. He literally falls in love with an animal. He feels bad that he has to shoot her but he puts the gun to his shoulder and then still doesn't shoot her because... he wants to touch her. Don't deer carry diseases? So he decides to follow her so that he can touch her and, in doing so, somehow stop his grandfather from dying of cancer (not sure how the two are connected, the book doesn't bother to explain). The thing is, he's so caught up in avoiding shooting a deer, and is so obsessive about touching her, that he doesn't realize he's actually simply killing her a different way. He sees the blood on the ground (because fsr she's bleeding. idk why, it never explains) and he's like "WOW it's so beautiful in its ugliness!" The kid is mental. And the thing that most bothered me was just how unsorry he was - he's so fixated on how bad it is to kill stuff but then once he kills her, well it's fine because he killed her in an unusual, but still on-purpose, way so that makes it justified somehow. He completely misses the fact that following her is making her scared and she's running away from him . He's too busy thinking thoughts such as, "a piece of me is in her, and a piece of her is in me." When she falls and doesn't get up, he drags his sorry butt over to her (because by this time he's tired, too) and touches her. He watches as she dies and is all "ah my life is full of peace and harmony and potential" so he gets up and... Goes home. Without the deer. Hey genius, your grandparents are counting on the deer meat for their food - you said so yourself. Does he not care that he's leaving behind perfectly good meat, essentially making the grandparents' situation more desperate (according to the granddad, it's been slim pickings for deer-hunting this year), while being incredibly wasteful as well? When he reaches the farmhouse he's like I found a deer but I uh...I just followed it. And touched it. And all is right with the world (minus the fact that you're going to starve through the winter now but that's inconsequential). "A thing changed. A thing changed in hunting, in everything, and I walked after her but didn't shoot her. [...] And I walked for two days and then I touched her. Actually two days, and a night. And when I touched her everything changed - everything about the way we are and what's happening." and the grandfather's response is: I AM SO PROUD OF YOU, GRANDSON. I'm not even kidding. He's actually, genuinely, proud of his grandson for touching a disease-carrying animal, killing it through cruel and unusual punishment, and then coming home without it and wasting two days, a night, and an entire animal. Could someone please shoot this kid. And then the grandfather.
