I picked this one up from a secondhand bookshop while trying to add my books up to 3 for promotion. Now, I've always enjoyed a good mystery and seeing as this was an Edgar award winner, I was intrigued. And it didn't disappoint. In fact, I'll be on the hunt to read the rest of the series, starting from the very first book where we meet the journalist Irene Kelly who the books are based on. I chose this book to read while I was flying home and so I didn't get to realize this was part of a series until I came home to check it on here. But even though it was a series book, this is the 7th, it didn't bother me reading it as a stand alone. Obviously we're supposed to have met some of the main characters but I think every book features a different mystery in itself with new additional characters so I wasn't lost trying to figure out who was who. Everything I needed to understand to follow the story was plainly explained to me and I was able to enjoy the mystery to the fullest. The book is about a serial killer making a deal with the police to bring them to the body of a long lost victim. Along with the police and the killer and his lawyer goes Irene, who was in touch of the victim's family and who's acting on their behalf, and a group consisting of anthropologists and rangers to help around the mountain area where the body is supposedly buried. The way this book was told was new for me. While we get Irene's first person narration on her side of the story, we do get the killer's point of view as a third person narration, and also of a few other people's. Irene is the only one who tells her story firsthand and this type of division of narration was new to me, yet not at all confusing or bothersome. We do get a new chapter or a clean paragraph for every new viewpoint so I didn't have to think about whose perspective we've jumped to while reading. The mystery was a very good one that kept me at the edge of my seat, I was constantly thinking of a new theory when the one I had before went down the drain. There were some very likeable characters, and Irene herself was a heroine who was strong and real. I also enjoyed the parts with the serial killer's perspective. I've always had a certain curiosity when it comes to serial killers, and Jan Burke has described a man so cold, so calculating and so sociopath. Nick Parrish, the killer, is a man who scares you, gets under your skin, and he has such a unique sense of humor in a way only a sociopath can have. Apart from a few editing mistakes and a couple of sentences I took longer to understand, possibly due to english not being my main language, I gave this 5 stars because I really enjoyed the mystery and the plotting and the characters. And because it tempted me enough to add the whole series to my to-read list.
