A DIET BASED ON THE "IMBALANCE" THAT SUCH "ADDICTS" MAY HAVE Richard Heller and Rachel Heller are research and health biologists and professors in the Department of Pathology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, as well as at the Graduate Center of the City Universtiy of New York. They have also written 'The Carbohydrate Addict's Diet', and other books. They state, "This book will guide you in the two most important tasks in life. The first task is to allow the thoughts and feelings that you have held inside for so many years to rise to the surface and be experienced. We call that task Discovery. The second task is to throw off the negative influences of these experiences and to replace them with positive thoughts and feelings that will help you to achieve the goals that you want for yourself. We call this second task Recovery. Together, Discovery and Recovery will lead you to complete your own circle of success." (Pg. 5) They assert, "If you're a carbohydrate addict, you have a hormonal imbalance (called hyperinsulinemia) that leads you to crave starches, snack foods, or sweets. This extra release of insulin takes place after you eat carbohydrates... of any kind. The good news is that we know what causes this physical problem and we now know how to eliminate the cravings and remove the weight gain that goes along with it." (Pg. 31) They observe, "Carbohydrate addicts... are vulnerable to conflict because... [they] have a physical imbalance... which causes them to crave starches, snack foods, or sweets. Carbohydrate addicts' bodies are almost always in conflict with their thoughts and feelings. Because of their overabundance of insulin, they often feel compelling or recurring food cravings pushing them, against their desire, to eat. It is hard to be happy, or to keep up your motivation, or to stay in control, when your body is signaling you that you are hungry." (Pg. 55) They note, "Carbohydrates cause the body to produce the brain chemicals that soothe and relax us but, for the carbohydrate addict, this balance is temporary at best. Within a short time, the imbalance returns and the addictive cycle repeats... and repeats and repeats. The goal of this book, and our lives, is to take the feelings and thoughts that cause our bodies to crave carbohydrates and let them in, let them out, and let them go, and with the letting go, move on with our less-addicted lives." (Pg. 88-89) Show more
