It's worth buying this book to have your own copy of "A Country Road Song," which I expect to be rereading for as long as I can read. Like a a great poem, it reveals a little more of itself on each return, always holding a discovery or two for next time. The essay doesn't explicitly ask, "How do we go on after unimaginable loss?" Dubus lets you wander the contours of that loss--the two strong legs that used to carry him as a runner, then as a walker down a road that for him was a wellspring of wholeness. Readers familiar with his work and life will know about the accident that took one leg and left the other useless. He told the story in a previous essay that bluntly and powerfully recounted the aftermath: a painful course of physiotherapy, the end of his marriage, the humiliation of utter helplessness. The earlier piece, in BROKEN VESSELS, has conviction of the most literal kind, grounded in events and processes. With "A Country Road Song," Dubus takes flight through the runs and walks of memory to stationary contemplation from his wheelchair. His real subject is the ravages of time. What happened to him, he implies, could happen to any one of us--if not through maiming, then some other equally terrible way. He concludes: "“When I ran, when I walked, there was no time: there was only my body, my breath, the trees and hills and sky…I always felt grateful, but I did not know it was gratitude and so I never thanked God. Eight years ago, on a starlight night in July, a car hit me…and in September a surgeon cut off my left leg… It is now time to sing of my gratitude: for legs and hills and trees and seasons…I mourn this, and I sing in gratitude for loving this, and in gratitude for all the roads I ran on and walked on, for the hills I climbed and descended, for trees and grass and sky, and for being spared losing running and walking sooner than I did: ten years sooner, or eight seasons, or three; or one day.” The other essays in the book don't achieve the same level; a few are pretty slight. But how many writers are consistently sublime? If Andre Dubus had written nothing else, he'd have my gratitude for "A Country Road Song," one of the finest and most moving pieces of prose I know. For "A Country Road Song," I'm giving this book five stars. Andre Dubus could have called this collection Meditations from a Wheelchair. He'd been navigating the world in a wheelchair since the catastrophic accident that took one leg and left the other one useless.
