A slow build-up that snowballs to a quietly devastating and uplifting conclusion, I'm so glad that I finally read this book. Its simplicity belies the deep truths that it shows; so simply written that the truth of what her family went through becomes very, very powerful, because everything is just left to speak for itself. The start is a lot about what Morgan remembers from her young childhood and school days, and I was almost bored. Then, slowly, she began to discover what was behind her grandmother's and mother's fear and distrust of authority. A lot of the childhood events are shown later through others’ eyes, and the detail of the telling becomes like a witness statement, a document of her life, and it became a little harder to quibble with the editing. I'm putting in revelations that start coming in adulthood behind a spoiler tag not because knowing them would ruin the experience of the book, but - it might lessen it a bit. The way the revelations slowly unfold and Morgan's knowledge deepens is more than the mere facts, the beauty of the book is also about how her whole family relates to what she discovers. They're not Indian, as the children are told to say at school. Her grandmother was Aboriginal with an unknown (probably white) father, and her mother's father is undisclosed (probably white) as well. Morgan is moved to discover more about her Aboriginal heritage even as her mother and grandmother want her to let it lie, because it's caused them nothing but pain. (My god, the way men acted!! Constant mentions of casual predation. Sickening.) The book is a matter-of-fact exploration of her roots: the white family who took her grandmother away from her own mother saying it was what her grandmother’s mother wanted, and how she then worked for them as "one of the family." Indeed, it’s quite possible the patriarch of this family was indeed her father too. Her great-uncle telling his story, (which had a fair amount in common with The Story of Jack McPhee, also recorded by Morgan)- a hard-working man constantly being screwed over, and persevering anyhow. Gradually, Morgan persuades her mother to tell her story, which begins with being sent to a children's home because the family Morgan’s grandmother (the one who was taken from HER mom) works for says she can't keep her daughter at home, though at the same time they are "part of the family" - when it suits them. Only seeing her mother a few times a year, and her mother had no power or standing to claim her own child. The family her mother's working for isn't even paying her. I mean, you don't pay family, right? We also hear the story of Morgan's father, whose time as a POW in WWII left him with severe PTSD which affected her childhood. Lotta trauma, right? But all of these revelations are seen as a gift by the author, because she wants to know her heritage and her family. She takes a trip up north with her mother, and they learn a little more about her grandmother's past and are told by the people they meet that they know who Morgan is through her family connections, and that she has a place now always with them - hence one interpretation of the title. Finally Morgan's grandmother, nearing the end of her life, agrees to tell some of her story. Some of it she still can't talk about. Here we learn that of course her mother didn't want to let her go with that white family, never to meet again. (The level of delusion in that family! Though they did help out a bit at other times.) All that said, this book doesn't read as too depressing to go on AT ALL. With all this trauma there is a great leavening of people helping, reaching out, doing the right thing to help others get by. For all the very damage that policies regarding Aboriginal people in Australia produced, so many people were looking out for one another. There is a lot of beauty and love in this book. This book is, in fact, all heart. Alice Walker wrote the sole blurb for the edition of this book I read, and it is completely fitting. This is a very famous Australian book, from what I can tell. If you want to know about Australia, I think that reading this book is necessary. The level of colonial arrogance and utter racism that Australia was founded on comes through loud and clear in the actions and beliefs of the people in this book. It is fascinating what a big deal it was that Morgan was claiming heritage that was so looked down upon in the culture of the time (and this culture persists today). I was glad that she was able to bring some healing and pride to her mother and grandmother. A good book for Americans to read, I think, because it's like looking at our history but through a different lens, so different things can come to the forefront.
