So, now having read the first four in the series in order and to my son, I still see the appeal. I could live without the complaining first Honey and then Di do about being rich. Even When they talk about how little the money means to them. Well, yeah! Poor little rich girls! And now so magnanimous. I can see it now, but it didn’t bother me at all when I was reading them as a child. I identified more with Trixie probably because she was the main character, but also because her family is solidly upper middle class, which is how it was in my family until I got to middle school (when my father’s business failed and we had serious money issues). All the kids felt it was important that they all contribute equally, financially and work-wise to their club and clubhouse The Bob-Whites and they all did odd jobs to earn money, even Di. That is all just backdrop though. In this story, Trixie’s sixth sense is working overtime and she is suspicious of Di’s long lost uncle from the very beginning. Things get quite exciting there at the end and it makes me wonder what it was really like in the 50’s in smallish town America. It surprises me now that Sleepyside-on-the-Hudson (the fictitious town where Trixie lives) has a seedy part of town at all. My parents both were about the same age as Trixie’s brothers growing up in very small towns (under 1000 people) in Iowa and I don’t think there were enough people for a bad neighborhood. And many things were in many ways much simpler then. They don’t watch TV (although in this one the adults do!) and they don’t have phones or computers of course. They ride horses, garden, sew, repair various things and are counselors at summer camp. Even reading these in the early 80’s it was idyllic. At any rate, the writing is good and the stories compelling. My son loves them. Original review when added to GR without rereading. It’s really just a review of the series as a whole: Strangely, this no. 4 in the series was my introduction to all that is Trixie Belden. I was enchanted! I loved how spirited she is, how close-knit and loving, her family is, yet she and her brothers bicker all the time, just like me and mine do. That she hung out and played with the "neighborhood" kids and all over the area where she lived, made her feel like she could've been one of my own friends. And what a cool friend she would've been. I wanted to have red hair like hers, but violet eyes, like Di. I'm afraid I don't remember the details of any of the books in the series that I read (which was very many of them), but I loved them all. I couldn't understand why everyone preferred Nancy Drew!
