Overall: ⭐️⭐️ 2 stars Plot/Storyline: 📖📖📖 3 books Feels: 🦋 1 butterflies Romance: 💞 1 hearts Sensuality: 💋 1 kisses Emotional Depth: 💔💔💔 3 broken hearts Sexual Tension: ⚡️ 1 lightnings Sex Scene Length: 🍑 1 peaches Steam Scale (Number of Sex Scenes): 🔥-🔥🔥 really struggling how to rate this. There’s 5+ sex scenes but they are very, very short. They aren’t explicit. So I'm putting it as a 1-2 for open door sex scenes, but definitely not super steamy feeling. So I’ve been reading the chronological order found on Deveraux’s website. I’ve read The Black Lyon and The Maiden and think you can pick this up and read it on it’s own easily. Content warnings: cheating, physical abuse of numerous characters (bones broken, slaps, marking of face from force), rape of multiple characters including rape of heroine by hero, talk of committing suicide and suicide of another character on page, talk of abortion (remembered), death of characters on page, torture of multiple characters, death of a parent, miscarriage on page… Classic old school style – lots and lots of drama, plenty of plot devices, consent is not a focus. This story focuses on Judith, who was set to give her life to the church. Her father remembers her existence after his sons’ deaths and marries her off the Gavin. Gavin thinks he’s in love with another, Alice, so he hopes to be able to have both, Judith as a bride and Alice in his bed. This book is definitely the most frustrating I’ve read by her so far. I didn’t find much redeeming at all about Gavin. He was utterly annoying and selfish throughout the entire book. Content warnings aren’t a bother for me, even domestic violence but Gavin to me was just irredeemable. He talks about how he has never hurt and could never hurt a woman and then immediately afterward is so enraged at Judith he slaps her so she falls down and leaves marks on her face. I didn’t have much hope for him after that and he really just got worse and worse. I’m still not sure when exactly this book takes place? I think it’s 1501. King Henry is mentioned. Now, I know many love this book. I respect that. I think if I had read this during my HR initiation phase (I will always have a soft spot for McNaught after all) I would be more attached to them. But looking at them through my current lens, I am left with annoyance and zero emotional attachment to the characters. I give 2 stars because it has provided me with entertainment, nonetheless, perhaps in some morbid way and I also enjoyed the part where Judith was extra sassy to Gavin after this return to his castle where he dumped her days after the marriage. And here’s some random snippets that drove the book into the ground for me. “But Alice did not turn because she knew that Ela was too fat to mount the horse by herself.” “They sit in their upstairs solars and sew and gossip while they eat honeyed fruit and grow fat. They are lazy and stupid; they have had everything they ever wanted.” “If I remember correctly, I just saw a hideous dwarf of a woman with rotted teeth and an incredibly fat backside.” “Alice Valence sat beside the fat, dozing figure of her husband to be, Edward Chatworth, and stared at the bride with all the hatred in her soul” I noticed a bit of fatfobia in the book The Black Lyon, but this book truly was obsessive with it. It really, really turned me off. I had someone search the ebook for me (thank you!) and it comes up 14 times! Each times is used in a negative way and it’s about multiple people. I just see no reason to discuss someone being fat like it makes them a bad person when they all seemed to have plenty of personal flaws that could have been used instead. “He did not make love to her, but used her body. He was beyond thinking of her as anything but what he desired and so desperately needed. He moved on top of her, on thigh forcing hers apart. He kissed her again, hard. When Gavin felt the tiny membrane that stopped him, for a moment he was bewildered. But he plunged on, oblivious to the pain he caused Judith. When she cried out, he stopped her lips with his and continued. After he finished, he rolled from her, one heavy arm across her breasts. It had been a release for him, but for Judith there had been nothing resembling pleasure.” “...but was relieved that she was still with him. She seemed to be in another world and did not hear him turn onto his back. The sheets were liberally sprinkled with blood and Gavin frowned at them. He knew he’d hurt her, but he didn’t understand why.” “It was true he had no love for her but he had used her harshly. A maiden did not deserve rape” At least he calls it what it is. “But Gavin did not fall asleep immediately. He knew that this was the first time for this soft woman he held, but in a way he felt as if he had just lost his virginity, too.” How ridiculous. Of course he would make this about himself. “He’d raped her once, used the pain of her hair twisted around his arm to command her to him the second time. Even the third time, he had had to act against her initial protest. Yes she laughed and gave his brothers gold ribbons – gold like her eyes. If she gave such passion to him whom she freely admitted she hated, what would she be like with a man she liked?” Oh yes, since she’s had sex with you because you forced her, I’m sure she will have much more sex with everyone else! Of course, she’s had such amazing sexual experiences I’m sure she can’t wait to do it with everyone! “He knew Judith had no idea how she affected a man. She was like a child. Everything was new to her. She looked up at the man with nothing hidden, nothing held in reserve. She laughed openly at what he said, and Gavin could see the man took her friendliness for more than she meant it to be” Of course, laughing at a joke, or simply smiling and being polite will make the man assault her, a married woman. SHE must of course change her behavior, guard herself from every expressing something that could be taken as interest. “He found Judith, minutes later, sitting beside Miles on a bench in the garden, Gavin ignored his younger brother’s maelvolent scowl. He didn’t want to argue. All he wanted was the be alone with Judith, to hold her as they had last night. Perhaps then his head would stop throbbing.” Another selfishly motivated behavior. Absolutely clueless to anything Judith is going through. “Perhaps Judith did have a reason to be cool to him. Their marriage had started on the wrong foot. It was too bad he had had to strike her on their first night, too bad she had entered his tent at the wrong time” Perhaps she did have a reason to be ‘cool’. Perhaps it was because you’re an absolute idiot Gavin. Perhaps it’s because you raped her. Perhaps it’s because you don’t believe anything she says. Perhaps it’s because you are cheating on her. Perhaps it’s because you hit her so hard she fell down and marked her face. BUT of course you can’t take responsibility for that either. It’s too bad you had to hit her. She made you do it, I’m sure. “A woman is like a hawk. You must starve it until it is eager for food; then it will be easily tamed.” Just oozes romance… What did it matter if he raped Judith again? Hadn’t he enjoyed it the first night? He undressed quickly and slid into the empty bed. He didn’t want to rape her again. He fell asleep remembering the way she’d clung to him when she’d been frightened It’s all about him. His enjoyment. He never, ever thinks about her. “Women were created to tempt men. They are the devil’s own” Literally Judith has just been passed from man to man being abused, hurt and all she wants, I’m sure, is to be left alone. But whatever you have to tell yourself so you don’t have to take responsibility for any of your actions.. And as she lays there miscarrying Gavin’s child that he refused to believe was his he comforts her repeatedly by saying, “There will be more children” . I. JUST. CAN’T. Then, after he says he loves her, Judith is shamed by everyone into forgiving him. “Because you are wrong. That man loves you, has told you so, yet you won’t listen to him. I have been on your side throughout your marriage, but now I’m not” REALLY he’s literally beaten her, raped her, cheated on her, been repeatedly cruel to her, even played a part in her falling and having a miscarriage but he finally says he loves her once and she better forgive everything or she’s the asshole. “Can’t you forgive him? You make great demands on him” SHE’S LITERALLY STILL BLEEDING FROM MISCARRYING HIS CHILD THAT HE REFUSED TO BELIEVE WAS HIS!! “How can you hold him responsible?” “Why don’t the two of you stop fighting and make some more babies?” Just...wow. Also, wasn’t divorce super rare in the 1500s??? “Divorce was not uncommon, but Judith and Gavin had been married only a short while” Not uncommon? Not a big deal? And towards the end of the book “You are my wife and my property, and I plan to treat you as such. There will be no divorce.” And the book ends with a ridiculous kidnapping plot that doesn’t even feel complete. Sex (I had the large print version so page numbers are off) p 25 – hero has sex with his mistress p 105 – rape p 115 – sex p 142 – sex p 242 – sex p 360 – Judith’s mother has sex p 459 – sex p 515 – sex There’s at least one more but I stopped noting them.
