Fascinating, maddening, more like a "thought experiment" than a novel ... I liked it -- although I felt that I was being held at arm's length by the text, never asked or expected to engage with the characters as people, or the plot as events relatable to my life and our times. (Perhaps I just need to work on that, however: the idea of people being lead down the garden path of murder and treachery by false information, and blatant appeals to their sense of themselves as "special," and above the law, is probably pretty au courant ...) That the Author was having a bit of fun at the Reader's ( my ) expense. Which is still ok, if the Author's private joke results in such a fascinating insight in the past. In the absence of a time machine, this is probably the closest I'm ever going to get to experiencing the Year of Our Lord 1399, as famously ineffectual King Richard II is run down to earth and deposed by his nemesis Henry Bolingbroke, soon to be King Henry IV. As these great events take place, offstage, we are focused on London -- more precisely, the parish of Clerkenwell, outside the walls of the City of London -- as various Londoners scheme and plot, on behalf of themselves and the usurping Henry, and fall foul of the schemers and plotters, and go about their daily business. Ackroyd is just marvellous on the past: the smells, the tastes, the streets, the clothing, the prayers, the language. Sometimes, it's like reading a work that is half-written in a foreign language, and yes, maybe he sometimes overdoes that, but I liked it. I liked it as a constant reminder that the characters are the same, yet different from us. That the past we are observing is a foreign country. And boy, do they ever do things differently there: the plot (such as it is) hinges on the layers upon layers of the machinations of a DaVinci Code-style plot by Illuminati-wannabes who see profit and self-advancement in the cause of Bolingbroke. But that's a MacGuffin: the real pleasure here is following the course of the 22 Londoners who go about their business, following the course of forgotten streets and paved over rivers, in a medieval London that is like a palimpsest of the modern city, shadowy marks written over the modern-day map. I've avoided reading professional reviews of the novel, as I didn't want to have my own reaction influenced by the thoughts of others. But searching to confirm one suspicion ( That the confident and professional footnotes in the final, "Author's Tale" at the end are almost all clever fictions, invented by one Mr. P. Ackroyd; the villainous William Exmewe is a complete invention. ), I did a little search and discovered that one scholarly work on the novels of Ackroyd is called My Words Echo Thus: Possessing the Past -- and that seems like a perfect description of this entertaining, challenging novel.
