The story of ‘a mouse called Wolf,’ by Dick King-Smith is a lovely tale of the life of a musically-inclined mouse called Wolfgang Amadeus. The Story demonstrates how even the weakest and smallest child has the potential for something great, they just need to try. Wolfgang Amadeus mouse, also called ‘Wolf’ has the unique talent among mice in his ability to sing (rather than squeak). Through his discovery he builds a relationship with the old lady who owns the house, Mrs Honeybee. Mrs Honeybee regularly plays the piano and overtime a duet is created. In the final section of the story, Mrs Honeybee falls over, injuring her ankle, which results in Wolf discovering how to use his talent to not only get help but later, whilst waiting for her return from the hospital, to compose his own piece of music. There are many facets and stages that occur throughout the story. The first 2 chapters cover themes of perceived inferiority and difference and later the strength of difference demonstrated through the development of an unusual relationship between a mouse and a human. This relationship develops despite them not sharing the same language. Later the story demonstrates how such friendship and positive reinforcement enabled the mouse to fulfil his potential in composition and song. Themes including animals, difference, friendship and the importance of perspective are covered in this novel; as such many tasks in literacy can be gleamed from utilising this book. One task could involve chapters 4 and 5 which involve fear, both from the cat and the mice. A rather amusing scene takes place during the frightful moment where the cat was chasing the mice, however, in the process, the cat injured itself. However the cat perceives his injuries to be due to the cunning mice and as a result of such trauma develops a fear of mice. However, the mice remain unaware of this newly created phobia and as such remain frightful and dutiful to its presence. These are important chapters for KS1 children and a literacy task could be used to get the children to explain why and how such difference of perception has occurred between cat and mouse. The themes of fear could also be explored in creative writing involving the children to write what they think they would do themselves if they met a mouse and also what the mouse would feel and do as well. The theme of difference is also an important issue to be discussed as it is very relevant today; this book demonstrates how appreciation of difference is important not just to foster friendship, but also talent. This can be seen in how Wolf’s friendship with Mrs Honeybee not only allowed his discovery of his talent to sing but also to eventually create his very own piece of music. Such discussion could be useful during citizenship lessons. Finally, this book is a good resource to connect to music lessons. Not only in reference to Mozart but also in encouraging children to create their own lyrics to songs, which was demonstrated in the book through songs such as three blind mice (or singsong mouse). This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
