This (which I have read) is a self-contained parable from The Brothers Karamazov (which I’ve not read). It addresses the conundrum of an omnipotent and loving God allowing the existence of evil. Can it all be blamed on free will and the desire for happiness? It also contrasts institutional religion and warped theology with the simple faith Jesus taught. Ivan imagines Jesus returning during the time of the Spanish Inquisition, in a story rich with New Testament parallels. There are occasional interjections from his brother, Alyosha. Jesus Jesus comes quietly and unobtrusively, but is immediately recognised by the people: “ The Sun of Love burns in His heart, and warm rays of Light, Wisdom and Power beam forth from His eyes, and pour down their waves upon the swarming multitudes of the rabble assembled around, making their hearts vibrate with returning love. ” He performs familiar miracles, even by a touch of his garment. He restores the sight of a blind man, and raises a girl from the dead. The Inquisitor But the Cardinal Grand Inquisitor sees all. “ He is tall, gaunt-looking old man of nearly four-score years and ten, with a stern, withered face, and deeply sunken eyes, from the cavity of which glitter two fiery sparks. ” Arrest and Sentence Without Trial Jesus is arrested, imprisoned, silent - and instructed to remain so. He is told that he will be found guilty and burned at the stake the following day. The Inquisitor expects the crowd of Jesus' followers to support this (just as Pontius Pilate turned the mood of the crowd). Picture: The auto-da-fé (public penance of heretics and apostates) in Plaza Mayor, Madrid in 1680. By Francisco Rizi in 1683. Devilish Institution The Cardinal Grand Inquisitor, and by extension, the Catholic church, want to protect themselves, rather than allow the people to be free. He tempts Jesus, just as the Devil did in the wilderness, and mockingly quotes Jesus' words and actions, explaining why he was wrong not to do as the Devil suggested. The Inquisitor thinks God’s work is complete, and that people “can never be free, for they are weak, vicious, miserable nonentities born wicked and rebellious”. Feeding them is enough. Earthly bread. Not the bread of Heaven that Jesus promised. The Inquisitor fears the consequences of Jesus (rather than the church) having thousands of followers. "Whom or what shall we worship?" “ There are three Powers, three unique Forces upon earth, capable of conquering for ever by charming the conscience of these weak rebels—men—for their own good; and these Forces are: Miracle, Mystery and Authority. Thou hast rejected all the three. ” - by not succumbing to temptation in the wilderness, through pride and overestimating the qualities of mankind. The Inquisitor has a dark view of mankind and how to enslave them to the whims of the Church, willingly. “ Oh, we will take good care to prove to them that they will become absolutely free only when they have abjured their freedom in our favor and submit to us absolutely. ” Judas Rewritten Jesus was betrayed unto death by a kiss. Forgiveness can come from a kiss as well. Read it For Yourself I read two versions in parallel: * David McDuff, Penguin Books, 1993, in a modern style: here * HP Blavatsky in 2005, with more classical flounces, on Gutenberg: here . Related Reading I’m grateful to Michael pointing me to this, in the context of my review of The Faith of Donald J. Trump : A Spiritual Biography, HERE . I was reminded of Ursula Le Guin’s justly famous and troubling short story, The Ones Who Walk Away from Omeals , which I reviewed HERE . Not Forgetting I’ll be in trouble if I don’t include this Expect the unexpected.
