Horror fiction does not really need monsters. They take life in the most devious and dangerous place known to us : the human mind. The levels it stoops to and the terror it unleashes can make even the boldest denizen of netherworld pause for a second. On a humorous note, there was this cartoon that the New Yorker published following Donald Trump's proposed Muslim ban where the Devil sat on Trump's shoulder and said 'Whoa, Donald - you're scaring me, man." As long as carbon based bipeds walk this planet, a shadow of such horrors will always walk with them Robert Dunbar's novel explores such depths of horrors in our mind in the isolated pine barrens societies of New Jersey. They are called 'pineys', an isolated society of men, women and children who live deep within the pine barrens. Poverty, unemployment, malnutrition, murder, incest and death are rampant among them. They scour the forest for a livelihood during daylight and drink themselves to a stupor at night which sometimes inevitably leads to violence both sexual and otherwise. They are wary of outsiders and anything that has a touch of modernity which includes - medicine, science and even electricity. The gene pool being limited also means that inbreeding results in bringing forth children who are deformed physically and mentally. Within this already dismal ditchwater of human affairs also runs another tributary, one that carries very murky contents. It is a legend which has been haunting eastern US for centuries now : the Jersey Devil. Robert Dunbar does an excellent job at meshing together lore and fiction in this novel. His protagonists are not monster hunters but unfortunate individuals who try to grope their way out of this miserable existence of theirs. The horror is not fully revealed at one go but keeps coming and going throughout the chapters. They are also extremely graphic and sometimes made me cringe a bit. The other fantastic part of the novel is the setting in the pine barrens, there is almost always an air of foreboding and danger that lurks among the pines. There were occasions where the author used your characters and then abandoned them a few chapters later and also a few threads which he did not fully tie up. This was one factor which left me a tad dissatisfied. Recommended if you like a graphic horror novel.
