4.5 ☆ Survival...is an infinite capacity for suspicion. Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy may just be the quintessential espionage novel. Paranoia, double-dealing, and betrayal are par for the course for those who wade into international and increasingly amoral murkiness. Le Carré had written before about double agents but Tinker escalated the intrigue factor by incorporating a mole, a deep-penetration agent who may have laid in wait 15 to 20 years before actively assisting his Soviet master. “It’s the oldest question of all, George. Who can spy on the spies?” With Tinker published in 1974, le Carré returned to his George Smiley protagonist after nearly a decade-long hiatus. Several characters had also been revived from his earlier Smiley novels and with all of their ages frozen in time in order to launch le Carré's Karla trilogy. It isn't necessary, however, to read the preceding Smiley books. Smiley had been abruptly pensioned off one year earlier from his post as second-in-command to Control at the British Secret Service. In the year leading up to his departure, trouble had been brewing. The Circus was in the doldrums and there was loose talk of scraping the existing outfit entirely and starting elsewhere with a new one. ... Product had slumped; more and more of it had turned out to be suspect. In the places where it mattered, Control's hand was none too strong. "I refuse to bequeath my life's work to a parade horse. I'm too vain to be flattered, too old to be ambitious, and I'm ugly as a crab. Percy's quite the other way and there are enough with men in Whitehall to prefer his sort to mine." But by Christmas of last year, Control had died and Percy Alleline had succeeded in his campaign to win Control's position. It's December once more, and Peter Guillam has interrupted Smiley's deliberate efforts to forget the calamities of his last year in the Service. An agent has shocking intel for Smiley's ear -- there's a mole in the Secret Service. Everything has to be reviewed in the light of this new knowledge and Smiley has been tasked with the job of catching the traitor. “I once heard someone say morality was method. Do you hold with that? I suppose you wouldn't. You would say that morality was vested in the aim, I expect. Difficult to know what one's aims are, that's the trouble, specially if you're British.” The Soviet official known as Karla could be the puppet master. Smiley is one of the few who had actually spoken with Karla. “Look... we're getting to be old men, and we've spent our lives looking for the weaknesses in one another's systems. I can see through Eastern values just as you can see through our Western ones. ... Don't you think it's time to recognise that there is as little worth on your side as there is on mine?” Tinker delved deeply into England's fading role on the global stage, moral ambiguities, and ultimately betrayal. But as I've come to expect of le Carré, this was also a gripping intellectual puzzle that had been eloquently written. I read Tinker slowly because I had to take care to follow le Carré's understatedly-written crumb trail. This was my fifth installment in the Smiley series, so I've already been battered emotionally and I was sufficiently braced to face whatever disillusionment le Carré would unleash with Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy. My only quibble was that the bait used in the final trap hadn't been detailed and that omission seemed to weaken the chain of evidence. ... [Smiley] wondered whether there was any love between human beings that did not rest upon some sort of self-delusion ...
