BR#3 Poems are something I never thought I would say I enjoy, but after reading a book of selected poems by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow my opinion on them has completely changed. The writer of the poems in this book Henry Wadsworth longfellow uses pain and sadness to make a sad thing beautiful. He uses things like death to make you realize how important and beautiful life is. I have never before wanted to read poetry because every time a teacher has made me read it I have hated it. This book has changed my view on poetry, I understood every poem and enjoyed almost all of them. I still can't believe how Mr. Longfellow managed to fit such a meaningful story into a page and a half of writing. I found this book making me really think and also working to understand where the writer was coming from.This book is 223 pages and I thoroughly enjoyed each and every one of them. The author used setting extremely well in a poem called “Burial of the Minnisink”, I could really picture the beauty of the setting in my mind and it made me feel calm and peaceful. A quote that shows just how great the setting was described is, “ Far upward in the mellow light rose the blue hills. One cloud of white, around a far uplifted cone, In the warm blush of evening shone; an image of the silver lakes, by which the indian soul wakes. “ I loved this stanza of the poem so much, it makes me think of a gorgeous place where I would really want to be and also see the beauty of. Another poem called “The Wreck of the Hesperus”, really stood out to me, it was a very powerful poem with real tragedy and sadness. It used a very solemn tone even though it was very tragic. The author could have over described and exaggerated it but instead he used a solemn tone and it really made the poem impactful. “O father! I see a gleaming light, Oh say what may it be ?But the father answered never a word a frozen corpse was he .” Even in a stanza as intense as this one the author used very formal language instead over over exaggerating it. In conclusion I thoroughly enjoyed this book and I would absolutely recommend it . Even for those who like myself don't like poetry I would still recommend it .
