Personal Response: I believe this book is good, but it has a lot of setup for the future. I am hoping the next book will follow more on Gerard and Qualinesti, because there was very little of it near the end. In the beginning I was confused because the story was from many characters point of views, but then they started to meet up and it all came together. I look forward to reading the next book in the series, and possibly going back and reading previous series. Plot: There are many main characters, but it starts off with Galdar, who meets Mina and restores his sword arm in the name of The One God. Galdar and his troops follow Mina who leads them into battle for a victory against the Solamnics. They then spend most of the book traveling to Silvanesti where they hope to penetrate the shield. Tasslehoff Burrfoot has been dead 30 years, until he uses an artifact to travel forward through time to speak at a funeral. He meets Gerard, a Solamnic Knight who is duty bound to honor a man’s last wish. They travel to Qualinesti to meet Palin Majere and deliver the artifact to him. He wants to meet with a colleague in Solace to inspect the artifact. Palin believes that since Tas went forward and didn’t sacrifice himself, he messed up the past. Palin scares Tas and tries to send him back to his death, so Tas runs away to the Citadel of Light. While their, Goldmoon somehow changed back into her younger self. Beryl discovers the artifact is in the Citadel, and she travels out to obtain it. Silvanoshei is with is mother when they are attacked by ogres, and he is sent to get help from the Legion of Steel, only to get knocked unconscious and fall in a ravine. When he awakes, he is inside of the shield that protects Silvanesti. He then becomes King and learns the politics of court. When Mina and her band of warriors make it into the shield, he captures and falls in love with Mina. She helps him kill Cyan Bloodbane, who was disguised as Glaucous, the elf who maintained the Shield Tree. She then helps him to take down the shield surrounding Silvanesti, but leaves before he can see her. Mina has a large number of forces that are entering the area to help conquer Silvanesti when the story ends. Characterization: Palin Majere is a broken wizard, and has lost everything. So when Tas shows up with a magical artifact. When he uses the artifact, he doesn’t see any history past the chaos war and blames Tas. He believes that since Tas didn’t die, it caused a rift in time, and yells at Tas to go back and die. When Tas runs, Palin realizes what he has done, and tries to find him to reconcile. He understands that he was too harsh, and tries to calm down in the future. Marshal Medan is the leader of the Knights of Neraka in Qualinesti, and was sent there by Beryl. He is a strict man, but also has some compassion. He has fallen in love with the Queen Mother, Laurana. He is seen as following what Beryl says, but he likes the people of Qualinesti, so he plots against Beryl. He lets Palin and Tas escape, and makes Gerard his servant. At the end of the book, he arrests Laurana so that he can protect her. Setting: Dragons of a Fallen Sun takes place in many different areas. They include Solace, Qualinesti, Silvanesti, and even the woods around Silvanesti. Having many different characters make the story jump around from place to place. It takes place after the Chaos War. No definite time or date was mentioned, but it follows some time after Dragon’s of a Summer Flame . Recommendation: I would recommend this book to high school seniors and up because there is some graphic content. In addition to the graphic content it is an all around difficult read. I would also recommend it to people who enjoy fantasy books and can persevere through parts of the story that are boring. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
