“UP WITH LIFE. STAMP OUT ALL SMALL AND LARGE INDIGNITIES. LEAVE EVERYONE ALONE TO MAKE IT WITHOUT PRESSURE. DOWN WITH HURTING. LOWER THE STANDARD OF LIVING. DO WITHOUT PLASTICS. SMASH THE SERVO MECHANISMS. STOP GRABBING. SNUFF THE BREEZE AND HUG THE KIDS.LOVE ALL LOVE. HATE ALL HATE” I’ve had a sad and happy week. I just finished reading John D. MacDonald‘s A Tan And Sandy Silence, one of the celebrated crime writer’s 21 stories featuring charismatic, extremely likeable boat bum, amateur philosopher, optimistic cynic, involuntary womanizer and ‘salvage consultant’ Travis McGee. I have now read all the McGee novels. Forget James Bond with his paper thin personality and cruel vigilante traits or fat headed Hercules Poirot and his crime-solving by numbers technique. McGee, who lives in a boat called the Busted Flush, which he won in poker game and which is moored at Slip F-18 at Bahia Mar Marina, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, is the real deal. He also drives a Rolls-Royce that’s been converted into a pick-up truck, called Miss Agnes. He’s either a Korean war or Vietnam war veteran, doesn’t like working and only gets off his boat when he is low on cash. He has no real ambitions. A flawed hero with a healthy reality check and a supernatural coolness, all American and yet infused with a socialist outlook. And I mean socialist. McGee makes a living by retrieving lost fortunes for people who can’t go to the police. He is a bruiser and has absolutely no compunction about killing people when he deems it necessary. Not for money, mind you, but for justice. I know, it’s a big word. But between getting laid, old Travis has a pretty astute eye for everything that is wrong with the world, with his world, with Florida. And he profoundly dislikes liars, real estate developers and moneyed people who appear to be doing nothing but spend. In A Tan And Sandy Silence, one of the meanest, most violent McGee novels, the hardboiled boat bum attempts to find a woman he once had a fling with. McGee sleeps with lots of women, usually damsels in distress or happy go lucky beach bunnies. He sees sex as a kind of therapy, both for himself and the women he shares his bed with. So 60s. And he never ceases to comment on young beach bunnies, especially when he hangs out with his sidekick, the fat, hairy economist Meyer who also lives on a boat. “I kept to the far right lane and went slowly because the yearly invasion of Easter bunnies was upon us, was beginning to dwindle, and there was too little time to enjoy them. They had been beaching long enough so that there were very few cases of lobster pink. The tans were nicely established and the ones that still burned had a brown burn. There are seven lads to every Easter bunny, and the litheness and firmness of the young ladies gamboling on the beach, ambling across the highway, stretching out to take the sun, is something to stupefy the senses. It creates something which is beyond lust, even beyond that aesthetic pleasure of looking upon pleasing line and graceful move. It is possible to stretch a generalized lust, or an aesthetic turn of mind, to encompass a hundred lassies – say five and a half tons of vibrant and youthful and sun-toned flesh clad in about enough fabric to half fill a bushel basket. The erotic imagination or the artistic temperament can assimilate these five and a half tons of flanks and thighs, nates and breasts, laughing eyes and bouncing hair and shining eyes, but neither lust nor art can deal with a few thousand of them. Perceptions go into stasis. You cannot compare one with another. They become a single silken and knowledgeable creature, unknowable, a thousand-legged contemptuous joy, armored by the total wisdom of body and instinct of the female kind. A single cell of the huge creature, a single entity, one girl, can be trapped and baffled, hurt and emptied, broken and abandoned. Or to flip the coin, she can be isolated and cherished, wanted and needed, taken with contracts and ceremonies. In either case the great creature does not miss the single entity subtracted from the whole any more than the hive misses the single bee. It goes on in its glissening, giggling, leggy immortality, forever replenished from the equation of children plus time, existing every spring, unchangingly and challengingly invulnerable – an exquisite reservoir called Girl, aware of being admired and saying “Drink me!,” knowing that no matter how deep the draughts, the level of sweetness in the reservoir remains the same forever. There are miles of beach and there were miles of bunnies along the tan Atlantic coast. No, McGee is not politically correct. Another reason why I like this man. he continues with his favorite past time, cynically commenting on development and the modern life, the human zoo. When the public beach ended I came to the great white wall of high rise condominiums which conceal the sea and partition the sky. They are compartmented boxes stacked high in sterile sameness. The balconied ghetto. Soundproof, by the sea. So many conveniences and security measures and safety factors that life at last is reduced to an ultimate boredom, to the great decisions of the day – which channel to watch and whether to swim in the sea or in the pool. Classic MacDonald. And this disdain for middle class aspirations extends to our hero’s lifestyle. As he rejects the advances of a fabulously rich single woman, he muses, A lot of the good ones get away. They want to impose structure on my unstructured habits. It doesn’t work. If I wanted structure, I’d live in a house with a Florida room, have 2.7 kids, a dog, a cat, a smiling wife, two cars, a viable retirement and profit-sharing plan, a seven handicap and shortness of breath. Invariably, McGee‘s sarcasm extends to financial institutions. The lobby of the Southern National Bank and Trust Company takes up half of the ground floor of their new building on Biscayne. It is like three football fields. People at the far end are midgets, scurrying around in the cathedral lighting. The carpeting is soft and thick, dividing the lobby into function areas through the use of colors. Coral, lime, turquoise. The bank colors are pale blue and gold. The girls wear little blue and gold bank jackets with the initials SNB on the pocket, curled into a fanciful logo, the same logo that’s stitched into the carpet, mosaiced into the walls, embossed on the stationary, and watermarked into the checks. The male employees and officers up to ambassadorial rank wear pale blue and gold blazers. Everybody has been trained to smile at all times. The whole place looks like a huge, walk -in dental advertisement. There is probably also a bank song. With commentary like this, the plot is almost secondary. McGee goes through the motions, separating the femme fatales from the dames with heart, weeding out the sociopaths from the merely greedy, commenting on race relations, Cuban society and of course sex. Then towards the end of each novel, he does some heavy lifting, almost gets killed, gets lucky and knocks out the bad guy with the full force of his brand of McGee justice. Florida’s slide towards doom and Jeb Bush is not halted by McGee’s actions, but perhaps, we might want to think, it is slowed for just a few beautiful breathless seconds. Then he’s off on another mission of sexual healing, sailing his ship down the coast and into the islands, disappearing into the void he created for himself. McGee would never have used facebook, would have resisted mobile phones, forever in search of friendship, quality of life, clean air and the next, slightly illegal haul. Above all, in almost every story, McGee bemoans the death of the American environment by fast and profit orientated development. In Bright Orange for the Shroud he comments: Now, of course, having failed in every attempt to subdue the Glades by frontal attack, we are slowly killing it off by tapping the River of Grass. In the questionable name of progress, the state in its vast wisdom lets every two-bit developer divert the flow into drag-lined canals that give him ‘waterfront’ lots to sell. As far north as Corkscrew Swamp, virgin stands of ancient bald cypress are dying. All the area north of Copeland had been logged out, and will never come back. As the glades dry, the big fires come with increasing frequency. The ecology is changing with egret colonies dwindling, mullet getting scarce, mangrove dying of new diseases born of dryness. McGee lived from 1964 (The Deep Blue Good-Bye) to 1984 (The Lonely Silver Rain). Each of his adventures was color coded. In the later novels, McGee becomes increasingly depressed about the violence in America. MacDonald’s last work was commissioned by the The U.S. Library of Congress. The resulting essay, Reading for Survival, is a conversation between McGee and Meyer on the importance of reading.The 26-page essay was released in a limited edition of 5,000 copies and can be found online here. There’s a couple of lukewarm Travis McGee film adaptations and there have been rumors that Oliver Stone and Leonardo Di Caprio were going to tackle the first McGee novel, but nothing has materialized as yet. Like I said, sad that I have plowed through every one of McGee’s adventures. I will just have to start reading them all over again. Read more on Noir and Pulp on my blog The Devil's Road my link text
