When the Bob Whites of the Glen want to raise some money for UNICEF, they decide to hold a combination exhibit/sale of antiques owned or donated by their families and neighbors. Digging around in an attic, they find a key with a message in a stick figure code, and decide to adopt the code for themselves as well. But some antiques are very valuable -- and some of Trixie’s neighbors want some of that money for themselves, by any means necessary. This is an older Trixie Belden book than the previous one I read. My copy is an original 1961 Cello Book, which I’m sure I got at a library sale but which is clearly not ex-library itself (it never would have lasted this long! These books were not designed with longevity in mind. And weirdly, my copy is not listed as an edition here on Goodreads -- my cover is different from the one I had to choose). This book definitely felt more dated than the later one, which was published in the 1970's (ugh, the treatment of the two Japanese-American brothers is just cringe, cringe, cringe). The story was a little less than in the later book, as well. There’s some mystery, but the code plays a fairly small part, and most of the story is about Trixie’s family and friends and day-to-day life (dress shopping, housework …). I enjoyed it, but it also felt a little long. I was also put off by the beginning, when the school principal tells the Bob Whites that they might not be able to be a club any longer. Granted that this is taking place in 1960, but were schools allowed to tell students what they could and couldn’t do at home, in their own free time? It’s not like the club was associated with the school in any way. But the antiques sale for UNICEF is driven by the Bob Whites having to prove that they’re a “good” club and not a gang. That seemed incredibly out of line to me. Now I’ve run out of Trixie Belden books that I own, so I’ll see if I feel inspired to read any others once the libraries reopen. I’m sort of curious to read the first one in the series, but I’m not sure how committed I feel to any others.
