“But a blow! What woman can bear a blow from a man, and afterwards return to him with love? A wife may have to bear it and to return. And she may return with that sort of love which is a thing of custom. The man is the father of her children, and earns the bread which they eat and which she eats. Habit and the ways of the world require that she should be careful in his interests, and that she should live with him in what amity is possible to them. But as for love, – all that we mean by love when we speak of it and write of it, – a blow given by the defender to the defenceless crushes it all! A woman may forgive deceit, treachery, desertion, –even the preference given to a rival. She may forgive them and forget them; but I do not think that a woman can forget a blow. And as for forgiveness, – it is not the blow that she cannot forgive, but the meanness of spirit that made it possible.” ---- Can You Forgive Her? is definitely Trollope at his finest, and one of the most complex, very well written, compelling, and entertaining Victorian novels I have read this year. Needles to say I have become a huge fan of Trollope and his writing style since I read He Knew He Was Right with a good friend of mine in August, and despite our different views and opinions, in the end I realized that Trollope might be the Victorian author I was looking for all this time, so to speak. Not only have I found very Austenian, likable characters—Jane Austen is one of my all-time favorite authors, so you can tell I am in my element while reading Trollope's stories—in each novel I've read, but I've also fallen head over heels for his narrative that has been getting better and better throughout my short, yet meaningful Trollope journey. Trollope kicks off this novel with a strong statement, WHETHER or no, she, whom you are to forgive , which means that it doesn't matter who she is at this point, but only that you are meant to forgive her. Then he says, if you can , which, after reading her story (you must know this is a massive, 800ish-page novel), is almost insulting. After all, I can't picture anyone not forgiving her—if there is anything to forgive to begin with. But who is she , by the way? Here is where things get interesting, because we are not talking about only one character or only one story, but three different stories that somehow have something to do with each other. A woman who is single but about to get married, perhaps to the wrong man; a second woman who is married to someone who she never fell in love with, but who (the woman) is actually in love with someone else; and a third woman, a wealthy widow who doesn't rule out the possibility of getting married again (will she be able to tell the difference between a man who really loves her and a possible gold digger?). Three women, three stories—the reason way this book is rather long—some decisions that each of them needs to make, their consequences, and only one final question: can YOU, reader, forgive her (them)? Enjoy it! P.S. If you are interested in listening to the audiobook, there is one available on Audible that I'd wholeheartedly recommend you listen to. It is narrated by Timothy West who does an incredible job and brings this story to life. Actually, he also narrates the rest of the Palliser series as well as the entire Chronicles of Barsetshire series, and of course, other standalone novels by the same author—guess who will be listening to as many novels by Trollope as he can in 2023. “She had thrown off from her that wondrous aroma of precious delicacy, which is the greatest treasure of womanhood. She had sinned against her sex; and, in an agony of despair, as she crouched down upon the floor with her head against her chair, she told herself that there was no pardon for her. She understood it now, and knew that she could not forgive herself. But can you forgive her, delicate reader? Or am I asking the question too early in my story?”
