This book is apparently considered the best of Derek Raymond's Factory series of philosophical-noir crime novels, and also the most repulsive. When Raymond's publisher first read it, he threw up on his desk, or so the story goes. While I don't know if that's true or just perverse marketing, I can certainly attest to the plausibility of that anecdote: Raymond went a bit crazypants with the gore on this one. Think American Psycho with more disease and bodily fluids. To be fair, all the gross-out passages are (mostly) offset by the depth and humanity of the protagonist, a nameless sergeant who cares more about justice for the weak than pleasing his superiors. In this novel, the victim (Dora Suarez) was a young woman dying of AIDS, who was viciously murdered the very night she was planning on taking her own life. The protagonist gets to know her through her diary, and in a classically "noir" way falls in love with her memory as he tries to bring her killer to justice. Some of the book's best writing is during her diary passages and the sergeant's reactions to them. That isn't enough, however, for me to agree that this is the best novel in the Factory series. As good as the style of writing is, the structure is actually quite poor. There are many drawn-out conversations that don't really advance anything, where the story is just spinning its wheels. For example, take the novel's many interrogations, which all follow the same pattern: the protagonist will demand that a particular lowlife give up some information. The criminal will plead ignorance, and the sergeant will launch into an elaborate threat about how difficult things will get. Their police station, I should mention, is nicknamed "The Factory" for its reputation of working suspects over. The criminal will appear genuinely frightened by this, but will then continue to plead ignorance. The cycle repeats itself a few more times, and then the conversation ends. Also, the concept of the diary entries (as well-written as they were) was already done in Raymond's first Factory novel, He Died with His Eyes Open . In that novel, the victim had left behind personal cassette recordings instead of a diary, but the "voice from beyond the grave" effect was exactly the same. Because of these flaws, I actually found this book to be weaker than the first two Factory novels, which is a shame because with some tighter editing, I Was Dora Suarez could have easily been the best. Perhaps no one at Raymond's publishers had a strong enough stomach to edit it properly?
