Gosh, that last chapter. Sigh. And you can start celebrating the updates are over. Now let's start LotR :) Buddy read with Jen the unexpected party Get it? the unexpected party, as in chapter one's title. Oh I'm hilarious. ---------------------------------------------------- OK let’s do this. But first let’s talk about something totally unrelated but totally is. So I don’t know about you guys but when I watch a sporting event, no matter what it is, and I see these world class athletes doing their thing, all I think about is I couldn’t possibly do this. That’s why they are the ones doing it and I’m the one watching it, but once in a while comes these, well there’s only one word for it, Legends. These legends when predictable, still unstoppable, they do the hardest things the easiest way, they don’t do things to show you they can, they do it so you know you can. Mr. Tolkien is a legend, The Hobbit is a legend and Bilbo Baggins is a legend. There’s so much I want to say but above and beyond all, If somehow you haven’t read this book and you stumbled upon this review please do yourself a favor and go read it instead of this, because it’ll be devastating to know that I cost you precious time you could and should spend reading The Hobbit. It’s rare to read a fantasy novel and relate to its protagonist us much us I did. Hero, or as I said legend are words associated in our minds with pictures of smart strong characters, with someone who spent a life in training or maybe a chosen one destined to change the world. Although technically Bilbo is chosen, the way the story address it and develops around it you don’t think of him as a hero, at least I didn’t, not more than I would think of myself if I were in his position, and here where the story gets me, because I do feel I’m in his position from the very beginning. I think Bilbo managed to be this unusual yet relatable hero, because of how human he was in this inhumanly world, how nice he was or at least tried to be to Gandalf and the Dwarves even when they made him uncomfortable and how he saved them even when they needed saving from themselves. I can see myself reading this for my kids one day, and it won’t be boring, it’s still going to be an enjoyable and fun journey, because it’s gold and gold does not rust with time. This story is associated with only beautiful things in my mind, in fact the whole time writing this review I can’t help but think of sunny spring fields and cold breezes. I loved the world in this book and I mean this book, because I haven’t read the other Middle Earth books but I still love it, it was so vast and beautiful, it wouldn’t be the same journey if it was set in a different world. I feel I’m not doing the other characters justice because so far I only talked about Bilbo but the truth is I love them all. Gandalf is probably my favorite besides Bilbo but I also love Dwalin, Balin, Kili, Fili, Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and Thorin. The other character I loved is Beorn, I don’t know why but I just did and the whole thing with him and Gandalf and how the Dwarves didn’t come all at once, I really loved that part. I watched the movies and I enjoyed them but they didn’t reflect the joy I had reading this book. The movies were darker, they were more about war but the book was more about the journey. This is probably the only time a movie has been bigger than the book but to be fair the movies built the story to be a prequel to The Lord of the Rings and they had a lot more than what was in this book to build upon. The movies hold the main story of the book and I’ll be happy if every movie adaptation was like this, they all should. I have to say that the cinematography and all the landscapes were exceptional and it reflects the beautiful world in the book. The other thing I loved about the movies is the soundtracks, I cannot express how much I loved that, it was one of the best things about the movies, because I loved the poems in the book and the movies didn’t disappoint on that account, the best one has got to be The Misty Mountains Cold, it was one of my favorite parts in the book, and the music in the movie made it perfect, I only wish they made a bit longer. Every time I hear it, I want to grow a beard and go on an adventure.
