I remembered watching “Sesame Street” a lot when I was a child and I used to collect a few books that featured the Sesame Street gang. One of the books that I got was “Another Monster at the End of this Book” by Jon Stone, along with artwork by Michael Smollin. This book is the sequel to “The Monster at the End of this Book” and it’s such a hilarious and cute story! The book starts off with Grover and Elmo discovering about the monster at the end of the book and Elmo wanted to see the monster. But Grover didn’t want to see the monster at the end of the book and he spent most of the book trying prevent both him and Elmo from seeing the monster at the end of the book. Wow! I never would have expected to enjoy this book as much as I did! Even though I grew up watching “Sesame Street” when I was little, I didn’t really collect that many books that were based off of “Sesame Street.” But I found this book to be so adorable and hilarious that I just could not help but fall in love with this book! Jon Stone did a fantastic job at writing both Grover and Elmo as they are both extremely faithful to their characters from the TV series. I loved the fact that Grover is being shown as the cautious one as he does not want to see the monster at the end of the book (although kind of justified since he had the same problem in the first book). Meanwhile, Elmo is shown as being the one who is excited at the idea of seeing the monster at the end of the book. I also loved the relationship between Grover and Elmo as Grover acts like an older brother who is trying to protect Elmo from the monster at the end of the book, while Elmo is the younger sibling who is very curious about the world around him. Michael Smollin’s artwork is completely faithful to the characters of the “Sesame Street” TV series as Grover and Elmo look faithful to their designs from “Sesame Street.” I also loved the way that Michael Smollin drew the humorous moments in this book such as showing Grover trying to block the pages by either putting up building blocks or gluing the pages together to prevent the reader from turning the pages. Overall, “Another Monster at the End of this Book” is a fantastic sequel to “The Monster at the End of this Book” and if you are a huge fan of “Sesame Street,” then you will definitely enjoy this book! I would recommend this book to children ages four and up since there is nothing inappropriate in this book. Review is also on: Rabbit Ears Book Blog
