Georgette Heyer's only collection of short stories, Pistols for Two offers eleven charming tales, each a little bon-bon that both satisfies and tantalizes. Compact and self-contained, each of these stories will involve and entertain the reader, before bringing matters to a satisfactory conclusion. The delights contains herein include: Pistols for Two , in which lifelong friends Tom and Jack find themselves confronting one another across a dueling field, fighting for the right to court a woman whom neither of them really loves. Heyer's delicate but pointed sense of humor is in full force here... A Clandestine Affair , in which Lord Iver and Miss Elinor Tresilian, two bitterly estranged lovers, find themselves reconciled while trying to prevent the elopement of their respective wards. This was a very satisfying tale of love lost and found... Bath Miss , in which Sir Charles Wainfleet finds himself in charge of the mischievous Miss Massingham, when he agrees to do a favor for his mother's friend. The chance meeting with Wainfleet's fiancée may have felt somewhat improbable, but the heroine of the piece was delightful! Pink Domino , in which Mr Wrexham of Lyonshall finds the woman of his dreams at a masquerade ball, while trying to protect his younger sister from a fortune-hunter. I was surprised that Heyer used the "love at first sight" trope, as she usually avoids it, but its inclusion here did not seem inappropriate. A Husband For Fanny , in which the widowed Mrs Wingham mistakes the intentions of the Marquis of Harleston, and almost loses her only chance at love. One of Heyer's rare romances involving an "older" woman... To Have The Honor , in which Lord Allerton comes home from war to discover that his estates are badly mortgaged, and that he is expected to marry his wealthy cousin. A tale of two young people who love one another, but won't tell each other... Night At The Inn , in which two young people find themselves staying at the same sinister inn one foggy night. Far more gruesome than the other stories in the collection, this was more of a mystery-thriller than a romance... The Duel , in which the impetuous Miss Dorothea Saltford finds her way to the home of Lord Rothersfield late one night, in order to beg him to spare her brother's life in an upcoming duel. Sheer improbable fun! Hazard , in which Miss Helen Morland is won in a game of cards by the Marquis of Carlington. I have never been fond of this plot device, and this was the sole story in the collection that I didn't love... Snow Drift , in which Miss Sophy Trent enlists the aid of that bored man of fashion, Sir Julian Arden, in reaching Bath in time to "win" a fortune. Another road-trip adventure par excellence! And finally, Full Moon , in which Lord Stavely unexpectedly finds himself assuring Miss Annabella Abingdon that she does not have to elope with her best friend in order to escape him...
