richard asks mary anne if she wants to invite dawn over for dinner one night. mary anne agrees. when dawn arrives, richard asks the girls to help him plan a surprise birthday dinner at chez maurice for dawn's mother. they arrange for flowers, balloons, a special cake (i thought the schafers didn't eat sugar?), etc. mary anne & dawn are excited are the special evening, but mary anne is a little confused about richard's motives. sharon is only turning 43. mary anne doesn't know why he doesn't wait for a more momentous birthday. sharon is happy & surprised by the dinner. there is a little bit of foreshadowing when she fusses a little extra over the replica stoneybrok high school class ring mary anne gave her as a gift--more than she fussed over dawn's day planner gift. (note to anyone thinking that a day planner might be a good gift for that disorganized slob in their own life: truly disorganized people won't actually use the planner, so don't waste your money.) but the big surprise happens when the waiter brings out the cake. a diamond engagement ring is slipped over one of the candles. this is how dawn & mary anne find out that their parents have decided to get married. sharon is a little frustrated, because she'd said, "no rings," & she didn't get to choose when to tell dawn about the impending nuptials, but she gets over it. dawn & mary anne are totally psyched & start planning a lavish wedding, with themselves as bridesmaids. sharon & richard clarify that they were just planning on a quickie small ceremony at city hall. everyone agrees to compromise on a small ceremony that foregoes some of the more traditional elements (wedding dress, wedding party, etc). mary anne & dawn manage to make it through the whole weekend without spilling the beans to the other babysitters. they finally tell them the news at the next BSC meeting, & everyone is really excited...kristy maybe a little less than everyone else, because she's always been a little jealous of dawn's special connection with mary anne, but mary anne thought ahead & slips kristy a note about how special their friendship is. kristy is happy again. & of course everyone is going to the wedding. i really don't see wanting to have seven giggly tweenagers at my weddings, but...whatever. the B plot involves the arnold twins. they're not getting along very well. carolyn is really social & outgoing & is always hanging out with her friends, haley, vanessa, & charlotte. (i thought charlotte was tight with becca ramsey? where's she in this story?) marilyn is clearly jealous of carolyn's bustling social life. but she tells the babysitters that she has a special friend at school named gozzie kunka. she's "foreign," hence the weird name. her father works for the government & she just moved to the states. she has an accent, but marilyn can understand her. gozzie is pretty sophisticated & has had all kinds of worldly life experiences, like surviving an attempted airplane hijacking (turns out the "hijacker" was just joking) & eating frogs' legs. eventually it comes out that both girls are angry & jealous of each other. carolyn thinks marilyn bosses her friends around & that their father prefers her because she's good at music. marilyn thinks carolyn & her friends shun her & that their mother prefers her because she's so popular. mary anne casually suggests that they stop sharing a room...which kind of seems to be over-stepping boundaries, in my personal opinion. if i had an afternoon sitter who planted an idea that huge in my kids' heads, i would not be pleased. thankfully, the arnolds have a guest room & a sewing room, so the girls can each have their own rooms. & mrs. arnold seems to love to spend money, so she really lights up at the idea of re-decorating. (i always imagine that her best friend in town is mrs. prezzioso.) the arnold twins are each allowed to decorate their rooms however they want, & they're a lot happier after that. carolyn agrees to get marilyn into her special girls' club on a trial basis. she'll be eligible for full membership if she can tone down the bossiness. marilyn admits that gozzie kunka doesn't really exist--she was just an imaginary friend so marilyn wouldn't feel so lonely with carolyn & her friends. all of this foreshadows developments taking place when the schafers & the spiers combine homes. dawn lets slip that everyone is going to be moving to her farmhouse & mary anne loses her shit. she does not want to move. she's afraid she's going to have to give up tigger, since sharon hates cats. finallt richard makes her understand that it only makes more sense for the smaller family with the smaller house to move into the bigger house, & he makes clear that tigger isn't going anywhere. mary anne is somewhat placated. dawn wheedles a bit & convinces mary anne that it will be awesome for them to share a room. take it from someone who has a sister: it will not be awesome. but mary anne doesn't know that. she agrees, even though there's a bucketload of foreshadowing about what a bad idea this is. the book ends with the wedding & sharon throwing the bouquet. both dawn & mary anne reach out to catch it...
