Holy Mackerel I've had this book lying around for a while. I'm pretty sure it was a discard from my high school library, which means it could have hypothetically been haunting my persona for some 15 odd years! Pete Townshend's actually not a bad writer- when his stories are good, they have a Denis-Johnson-bleakness-like quality, with a spare and morose and empty style. And I also liked how meta/post-modern all his autobiographical writing can be, in scenarios where "Pete" is a character and the narrator is Pete's friend or a reporter. Because they are in the guise of fiction, the stories have a certain honestly and art that is lacking from the usual mush rock autobiography: "In spurts I answer fan mail and business letters, play snooker, strum my guitar into a cassette machine, pray for forgiveness and think about what a total mess I've made of a life that had everything, and everyone, going for it... I'll read for two or three hours, then have a bath before I doze off properly. The ritual of lying down to sleep is just that, a ritual. Did I hear the buzz of a fly? Sometimes I imagine what it must be like to sleep where rats run, where insects crawl over you and into your coat, where the nightmarish visions are real and not delirium brought on by self-indulgence." The metaphor of a horse gallops through various stories, which I quite liked, not for the metaphor itself but as a connector or theme to stories that, while mostly dealing with a rock star and his history, sometimes depict other lives and fantasies. Actually, it's the fantasies/surrealism in this collection that dragged for me, such as in "the Plate," the story of a detective voyeur, or in some of Townshend's more obtrusive metaphors-for-metaphor's sake ("a narrow man with eyes like the eyes a child sees when he stands on his head and looks into a mirror.") Well, that doesn't sound so bad out of context but the piling on of metaphors gets to you. Fantasy and surrealism are fine and dandy. But when you end a book with a horse-fucking dream scene told in total earnestness you're going to be the subject of my ridicule. And the truth of the matter is while the stories were fine I put one aside for several days with only a few pages left, so uninvested was I with what happened. I plan to read more of these books I've had lying around for centuries in the near future.
