A long time ago, I went on an epic quest to find a book that I couldn't recall the name of. During my quest, someone had brought this novel to my attention. Even though this wasn't the novel I was thinking of (that honor goes to When God Says No by Reina Sasaki ), I still really wanted to check it out, but was just unable to. Until now! ( As a star basketball player in her last year of high school, Nancy Takahiro's life is about to change forever. Faced with the college recruitment process and unsure of where her skill will take her, Nancy is not prepared for meeting Raina Webber, an All-State shooting guard whose passion for basketball is matched only by her talent. When Nancy's father and Raina's mother move in together, the girls are faced with the challenge of negotiating their already intense friendship and rivalry. As Nancy's love for Raina grows and both prepare to leave inner city neighborhood that has nurtured them, they find themselves looking toward a future that is no longer easily defined. Set against a backdrop of racial tension between the Asian American and African American communities of Los Angeles and infused with tenderness and passion. The Necessary Hunger explores not only the intricacies of the game of basketball, but also the very nature of the relationships young women create in the face of the odds that are stacked against them. ) ~ Blurb From Goodreads I found Nancy to be interesting. Despite her and Raina being friends and having some things in common (such as their love of basketball, coming from a divorce type situation, and so on), the whole situation of Raina and her mother moving in with her and her dad is still a huge shock to her and she does struggle to adjust. It's a very believable way to react. Now you have to see your friend almost all the time, you may learn some things about them or their family that may shock you, you get the idea. Even though her having a crush on Raina and being a lesbian is kind of a big part of her character, they're not the only part of her character. For example, in addition to her character arc of having to adjust to a new living situation and trying to navigate her last year of high school, she loves basketball, is unsure of her future partly because she's scared to leave the comfort of high school, likes to eavesdrop, comes from a divorce-type situation, is a mediocre student (including being bad at math), and so on. Speaking of characters, I loved how this novel developed some of its side characters. I loved how they had their own distinct personalities and problems to deal with. For example, Nancy's dad is a supportive goofball who has constant disagreements with another coach at the high school he works at about whether the coach's son or another football player who is more skilled and popular should get more play time. I admire its subtlety and complexity. For example, Nancy has experienced racism multiple times in her life, but rather than go on and on about how racism is bad or have it be shown through super unrealistic means, the novel spends just enough time on these moments to establish a believable action and the impact of that action and that's it. I also like how it doesn't try to pin the cause of issues like racism and the like on one person or one group. For me, I think this strategy also shows that the novel understands that its audience can handle nuance and grasp things without needing to be extensively preached at, which I seriously respect. I loved the scenes of Nancy and Raina interacting with one another. Despite them being friends, they're still able to learn new things about one another and allow one another to see familiar things in a new light. These scenes are so fascinating, including the scenes where they play basketball together and just let their passion for the sport come out in full force. The ending was awesome. Even though Nancy didn't get everything she wanted (like wanting to be in a romantic relationship with Raina and wanting to go to the same college as Raina), she still manages to have a good college career and manages to secure a good job. She also remains somewhat close to Raina, who also scored herself a good job and college career. Wow! Not only was it a realistic and satisfying ending, but it also goes to show that even if things don't work out as you envisioned, you can still achieve greatness, which I think is a great lesson, especially for young adults. There was one moment however that felt rather cheap. So in chapter nine, Nancy and her crew get into an argument in the parking lot of a movie theater with some bigoted surfer guy named Brent for supposedly messing with the girls that go to his school and it gets more and more heated and just when it seems like a full on brawl is going to happen, two cops suddenly appear and the older cop of the duo basically solves the problem by establishing that he knows Nancy and is a fan of Nancy and and telling everyone to go somewhere else. Yeah. I'm not even kidding. Like, he just happens to know who Nancy is and just happens to be a fan of hers. While the fame of Nancy and crew was established before this point, the arrival of the police has no set up and the actions of the older cop solved the problem way too easily, making for a moment that severely contradicts the grounded and down to earth tone that this novel is clearly going for. I think the best solution would be to have Brent's buddy Rick or a random bystander say, " I'm calling the cops! " and run off, then later on, have Brent charge at Nancy and her crew, forcing the latter (along with the police) to do some quick thinking in order to protect themselves and arrest Brent. I hated most of the basketball scenes. Like, the make up of nearly every basketball scene is like, ninety-five percent technical terms (like head fake, lay-up, etc) with no context behind them and five percent actual description. I understand that Nancy is a basketball fanatic and it's very much in-character for her to use these terms, but it's still very annoying, especially for someone like me who has very little knowledge of basketball. I don't know about anyone else, but for me, forcing the reader to stop every five seconds to look up a term just to understand what the hell you're talking about is not a sign of good writing. Overall, The Necessary Hunger was a very raw, very real slice of life novel with some great characters that made me really thankful that someone brought it to my attention. Overall Grade: A-
