Here's why I tried it in English on e-book and just couldn't ... Starting once again with the cover, which sets the book like three centuries away from its real time. I believe the book was meant in late Middle Ages - at least in the country it takes place in, hence why the brute male lead and the roughness of behaviours. But the cover of the Portuguese edition takes us to Barroque society and the lack of morals of a court like Louis XIV's. Just why? The plot exploits the portrait of an abuser, thankfully handsome enough for the author to pull out a romantic novel around his sickness and try to make it look exciting: Gavin drew back his arm and slapped her. An hour before he would have sworn that nothing could have made him harm a woman. Gavin was instantly contrite. He was sick at himself and what he had done . He knelt to help her stand. Gavin grabbed a handful of Judith’s hair and jerked her to him. “I will take whatever I want whenever I want, and if I take it from you, you will be grateful ." And, in the same night this woman was raped by her husband (right after the wedding, and by a man she had just met), the author throws this at their encounter, once he insists on a second round of what he had just had: Before long she could bear no more kissing. She ached all over, and she pulled his hair to better meet his mouth. She fastened on his lips hungrily, with greed. No, seriously. I cannot tolerate anything romantic coming in the aftermath of a raping. I was disgusted while reading it. I cannot imagine how on Earth it might be sexy that two people just met, and attraction is overwhelming, but he lets her down, so she doesn't want him, or is not ready, so she clearly says "I don't want to", and he raped her, and a few hours later the woman who's virginity was brutally taken by the man who she just overheard saying that he loved another woman (also hours before) is so bewitched by him that she wants to bring him closer and kiss him deeper. It's just not believable. Also, it perpetuates the idea that woman must endure man's worst behaviour in order to find true love , either they're able to change him or not. What I read is criminal. Ok, it was 1501 (the dawn of Renaissance), but still, even if he could not be charged, or if other woman like the maids would be indulgent towards his deed, how would the victim be so willing to experience such brutality again? I mean, this could be a novel on sick people, but it is supposed to be a love story. The author is fully aware of what this is about: He’d raped her once, used the pain of her hair twisted around his arm to command her to him the second time. Even the third time, he had had to act against her initial protest. Yet she laughed and gave his brothers gold ribbons—gold like her eyes. If she gave such passion to him whom she freely admitted she hated, what would she be like with a man she liked? This foolish idea that women play hard to get, and that in the end of the day we just want a passionate man to force himself on us, has made many victims throughout the years. This has to stop. There's no way rape can be romanticized in any way. It is an abomination which makes the rapist into a criminal and the raped individual into a victim. No lovebirds in this scenery. And there's no point and blaming the year of the events, since the book was written in 1981, and also I believe there were good men in every time of History. This Gavin simply isn't one of them. Please, enough. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
