I don't think short-form fiction is where Francesca Lia Block most thrives. Most of these stories don't really say anything meaningful or even all that memorable for me at this point in my life, and they often highlight Block's weaknesses rather than her strengths. For example, stories like "Tweetie Sweet Pea" (which is unfortunately not a strong opening statement at all) go all in on her more cutesy and precious tendencies, and since they're so short, she isn't really able to ground them in the realism or pathos necessary for balance in the way she's able to in her longer works. Also, a lot of the stories tread similar themes as her novels, where they are usually handled in a much more nuanced and developed way, meaning they come across as quite flat and pointless here, perhaps cute in the moment but not really having any staying power. I will say, I found one story in this collection to be quite excellent, which is what saves it from being a two-star rating, and that story was "Dragons in Manhattan." It's easily the longest one here, and it's so much better for having the space to properly tell its story. The main character, Tuck, is a teenage girl with two moms living in New York who has never known her dad and decides to sneak away to San Francisco to find him. At first, this seems like a fairly typical narrative, though Tuck is a great character and Block makes even the expected beats in her story engaging. However, things take a surprising turn when Tuck finds out her father is transgender and is actually one of her mothers, meaning their family has been complete all along. For a cisgender woman in the early '90s, Block handles this topic with a level of compassion and progressiveness that is pretty impressive. Sure, a couple things about the way Tuck's mom's transition is described might be written a bit differently today, but, overall, it's a really sweet and identity-affirming story that further cements Block as an author who has always tried to champion diversity and inclusion in her stories (while also occasionally being too obsessed with thin pale white girls as protagonists for her own good).
