This one would be about 2 1/2 stars for me, but Goodreads doesn't let you give half stars, and lists 3 stars are "liked it," which is not the case. Short version of my review: The blurb for the book makes a dull non-event of a story sound like it is an epic tale of resistance, and it is not. The writing and dialogue feel out of touch, not just by today's standards but also by those of when the book came out. I cannot recommend this to anyone. Long version of my review: I had sought out books about human resistance on Earth fighting back against aliens after conquest, and this one was recommended to me. I had never previously read any Robert Silverberg, but I was familiar with his name in a context of "classic" scifi authors, supposedly up there with Asimov, and also had a weird childhood memory of wanting to read his book Nightwings (probably because of the comic book character). This book started out rough for me. First, the initially-introduced characters seemed weirdly boomer-ish (in a cliche way) about their views of things, such as the "Colonel" complaining about the immorality of people in L.A.. I kept going, thinking that maybe this was intentional, to make him seem out of touch, but nope... that type of things keeps coming up, and it keeps coming up presented as an apparent virtue. The hippie woman, judged by the main characters for wearing hoop earrings and sandals, eventually settling down years later and being accepted, the people who chose non-military paths in life being viewed as black sheep in the family and morally corrupt because... they went into computer science? Even the dialogue just isn't how people talk, and it really wasn't how people spoke in 1994, when this book was written. "Oh, Ronnie, Ronnie, you scamp, you miserable rogue..." That's a father speaking to his adult son. This adult son gets referred to as being a rogue and a disappointment for DECADES. For anyone reading this who wasn't alive then, and thinks that maybe people in the 90s DID speak like it was 1932... they didn't. Kurt Cobain was dead by then. We had two Terminator movies out. The Crow was about to come out. We had already rejected 80s hair bands and the world of American Psycho (the time frame, not the book or movie) were far in the past. We weren't calling each other scamps and rogues. You weren't consistently referred to as a "mutant" for being into computer science. We also didn't have people in their 20s referring to porn as having too many "waggling fannies". I have never in my life read a book that felt so very much like it was written by a boomer. That's not inherently a bad thing, but in this case it feels like every trope of how a boomer might potential write is actually present here. Beyond that, the story is not as advertised. "When aliens invade, a generations-long struggle begins against an impenetrable enemy in this sci-fi epic..." "But, one family at least—the Carmichael clan led by Colonel Anson Carmichael—will never give up the resistance. THE ALIEN YEARS is an epic story told over multiple generations by master of thoughtful science fiction Robert Silverberg. Can ideas of freedom survive in the face of an overwhelmingly powerful enemy?" This Carmichael family sits up in the hills, watching 50 years of alien control, consistently patting themselves on the back about how superior they are to others, and talking about how they are a major player in the resistance... and that's about it. We keep being told, but nothing is shown, because nothing happens. We don't even get into deep philosophical debates about why nothing SHOULD happen yet, but just throw away, brief, unnatural conversations, and then we return to a geography lesson about California. 369 pages, and the first step towards an act of resistance by the Carmichael family happens on page 338. At that point, for the brief half down pages or so of resistance, we get told things with little detail, but the book switches from past tense to present tense, and then switch back to past. I THINK that was intended to make those six pages feels more immediate and tense, but it just feels jarring. Then... SPOILER... The aliens leave. We get some very heavy handed talk of them being a bit like God, mysterious, unable to be understood, very very briefly, with the last 30 pages or so almost feeling like a different writer wrote it. It just feels like the author was so set on his (alleged) 10,000 words a day output, that he just rambled for 369 pages, projecting someone of his age into a world where he feels morally superior, and nothing happens, no characters get any real depth, no characters are fleshed out, no philosophical questions are actually explored, and then we're done. Maybe Silverberg's other books are better. Maybe they are written better, with better characters, better dialogue, better plot. Maybe his other works show that he deserves to be in the pantheon of great scifi writers. This book, however, does not support any of that. In some ways, I'm amazed it was ever published. It reads much more like a currently selfpublished book (interlude: self publishing isn't bad, but does allow for some people to put out tons of garbage too, cluttering up the field from the talented selfpublished authors) that desperately needed developmental editors and beta readers.
