The question here, or maybe dilemma, is what do we know about other people. Or maybe, how much can we know or do we really want to know? For instance, we all know that there are things between our parents, secret or private things that we will never discover, just as our marriages (or relationships) have their own private histories and secrets. There are parts of our family history that will never be revealed to us, such as why two members don’t speak or have something between them that keeps them a bit distant from each other. And what would be our reaction if we did know? How would other people react if they discovered your secrets? That is the question that this book plays with. Marshall is and English professor at small college in a New England college town who picks up one of his female students hitchhiking in a snowstorm; instead of taking her directly to her apartment and then going home, he invites her to a diner and begins to contemplate adultery. (A side note here: why is it always an English professor? That’s what I am and I wish that a professor of some other subject to be accused of lechery. Oh, right, it’s just that we know poetry…) From the diner, he calls his wife, Sonja, and lies about where he is and with whom, even though it’s not yet necessary. Meanwhile, unbeknownst to him, Sonja is already having an adulterous relationship with her boss; they work together in his real estate agency and often sneak off to play naked hide-and-seek in the unoccupied properties. Marshall´s colleague, Jack, has been accused of rape by the roommate of the student who Marshall picked up, not to mention also having a potentially homicidal wife. Finally, the chapters in the first half end with mysterious letters from a man, “M”, who writes to an equally mysterious woman while reporting on the mental decline of his wife. This mix is what fuels the questions of how much can we ever know about the lives of others, or even about ourselves, what we admit to and what we’d prefer not to. For example, Marshall is haunted by his vague memory of the night when his mother left; he was only three years old at the time, and like most three-year-olds, he couldn’t quite grasp what was happening nor can he clearly remember it now as an adult. This was an entertaining read but not a great book for me. It read like one of those late-night soap operas, Dynasty or Dallas, where every second chapter ended with a plot twist; someone suddenly revealed something that someone else didn’t know about, a plot twist which made me either want to gasp at the sudden revelation, or gag because I was getting tired of this after a while. I solved the mystery early on, but it’s not fleshed out until the end. I think it’s worth reading in any case; Ann Beattie is one of those authors who I always saw in the bookshops when I lived in the USA but never got around to reading. (She may have been overshadowed by the other Anns, Tyler and Patchett.) I’m glad I had the chance at last and hope to come across others of her books in my used-book searches.
