I've been reading Gardner's Perry Mason books off and on for decades. Many years ago, I was an intense fan of the series, and read them all. Now, after a lot of water over the dam, I'm looking at them again. I still love the general setting: the characters of Perry, Della, Paul, Lt. Tragg, and Hamilton Berger. That, and the ingenious plots, are why I read Perry Mason. This is number 80 in the long series, from 1969. It is among the last written, and it shows. There are a few interesting parts, but on the whole, it is quite dryly written. It also has holes in the plot. Vey briefly, Diana Douglas and her brother Edgar are both employees of an import business in San Francisco. Money is missing and Edgar may have embezzled it. There seems to be a blackmailer in LA who has wind of the story, and uses the code name 36-24-36, evidently someone's measurements. Edgar was involved in an auto accident and is in a coma. Mason agrees to help Diana. Before long there is a murder in a hotel room and Diana is arrested. The murder weapon, a gun, was owned by Edgar. Characters: Franklin Gage, runs the Escobar Importing company in San Francisco. Homer Gage, nephew who helps run it. Diana Douglas: employee of Escobar. Edgar Douglas: brother of Diana, also employee at Escobar, now in a coma. Moray Cassel: the blackmailer. Stella Grimes: female operative of Paul Drake. Joyce Baffin: secretary at Escobar. We meet some policemen and a trial deputy. No Hamilton Burger. I did not much like reading this book. The writing is bare bones, too dry. The plot is clever however, and has some interesting features I won't go into to avoid spoilers. But there is also a big coincidence that fuels the plot. It's striking to see "modern" features in a Perry Mason novel (this was written in 1969), such as mention of a computer system, credit cards, Miranda rights, and reference to a telephone in a car (extremely rare in 1969). Why are the police so impersonal? Where's Sgt. Holcomb? There are no interesting interactions with Della or Paul Drake. There aren't many suspects, and the real murderer is not a surprise, but the plot gets quite involved at the end. An extra aspect of the plot is revealed very late. Perry dopes it all out - quite unrealistically I'd say. And the title -- what "fake"? Diana goes under an alias for a while, but there is nothing "fabulous" about that. There is a brief interesting side case: Mason defends a young Negro from robbery charges. He would have been convicted except the real robber confesses. Is Gardner saying something about civil rights and racism? That even Perry Mason can’t overcome bias? On the whole, in spite of a few novel aspects, I can't recommend it. I have the sense that the complicated plot could have been better handled in a longer book.
