The premise: Nonnie Anderson is an unusual woman of the 1920s (and still more unusual for a Black woman of the 20s) because of this: she’s college-educated. That’s what it means to be an Anderson: you go to college. You don’t raise your voice. To hurt one of them is to hurt all of them. Kill your snakes. She lives in the South with her sister Bess's family. She's in love with her childhood friend, Tracy Deen, who is white. Oh, and also this: she's pregnant with Tracy's child. And as she tells Tracy-- she's "glad" about it. Nonnie herself is a fantastic character--the kind of quiet focus and emotional solidity you don't often see in protagonists. She believes what she believes and she's going to do what she wants, but she's not going to make a thing about it. Against this solid wall of determination, we have Tracy--a man who really doesn't know what he wants, or what's good for him, or what is involved in ethical human interaction. On the one hand, he loves Nonnie. Has always loved her. They're so deeply integrated into each other's psyches that neither of them can conceive of their own identity in the absence of the other. On the other hand, he's a white man in the South in the 1920s, and he's been taught certain things. And he really struggles to reconcile those two realities. If he believes Black people are "other," if he believes they are nothing like him and "his people," if he believes they are inferior to him--how can the person he most admires, the person closest to his own heart, be Black? So, some days, Nonnie is the girl he loves-- the girl who is the only thing that "gives his life meaning." The thought of her existing in the world was what got him through his service in the first World War. But sometimes-- usually when she is out of sight, when he's surrounded by his white family and friends-- sometimes, "Nonnie was only a name. A name and an obstacle. A colored girl blocking a white path." First he tries to rationalize these two opposing feelings by saying Nonnie isn't "really" Black-- she's so light-skinned, he argues to himself, she's practically white! But later, as he feels the pressure on all sides to marry his (white) girlfriend, he decides to rationalize it by relegating Nonnie to the role of the concubine in his mind. He tells himself she doesn't matter. It was just sex. Look, it's a book about miscegenation in the 1920s. Obviously, this doesn't end well. This relationship, this fetus, is a lit firecracker thrown into the pressure pot of this small, Southern town. It's an incredible book. It has a powerful message, and it's not quiet about it. Lillian Smith could easily have titled this book This Is Fucked Up because she is screaming that message aloud. I can't even imagine the impact this would have had when it came out in the 1940s. At the same time, it's not hard to find uncomfortable parallels in modernity. Oh, also-- there's a minor lesbian character (notably, Smith herself was a lesbian). Smith gives no fucks about avoiding controversy. She's going to do whatever the hell she wants to do, and everyone else can get fucked if they're upset about it. I guess she's a little bit like Nonnie that way. TL;DR: Lillian Smith is a badass and she nailed it.
