When Robert Cormier won the Margaret A. Edwards Award for young-adult literature in 1991, an award that generally cites a specific portion of an author's library of works as deserving of commendation, three of his novels were cited: The Chocolate War , I Am the Cheese and After the First Death . But what caused the committee to select these three novels in particular? Why not The Bumblebee Flies Anyway , Beyond the Chocolate War or Fade ? Ten years later, would the Margaret A. Edwards committee still have chosen to highlight the three books they did? Might there have been other titles, instead, or perhaps additional cited works to reflect a further ten years of distinguished literary contributions by Robert Cormier? No one can know the answer to that, of course, but I am convinced the passing of years and introduction of more titles from The Master, Robert Cormier, could never have wiped After the First Death from the list. For in my hand I hold a book that is more than a book; I hold the epicenter of heartbreak so utter and profound the most agonized wail in the human chromatic scale could not express it. I hold a monster that does not know it is a monster, and is all the more dangerous for it. I hold the raw weeping, angst and inner blackness of despair that cannot be relayed all at once, could never be taken head-on that way and understood for all its haunting depth by a human being. And so The Master sits you down and agrees to tell the story, to lower you down the well into the companionless depths of darkness where the remains of the human heart can scarcely be recognized as such. To reach that point, the journey is long, the wait while being lowered is unnerving and accompanied by a sickening sense of foreboding that never lightens, never feels any better. To understand it all, the horror of plain, unretouched truth must be presented to you piece by piece, consideration by consideration, moment by moment and answer by answer so unacceptable you wish there were an escape to be had. But there is no escape here; only the heartbreak when it finally hits, when you understand the truth, at last, for all its dizzying import, the devastation as palpable as a bullet tunneling through your chest. When you can hardly breath for the point-blank impact of the truth, you'll know you've arrived. God help those who do. Freedom fighting is a dangerous business. As the rich get richer with no fair way to spread the wealth to all citizens in every nation, revolutionaries come together on common ground in underground schools, where the frills of the wealthy's education are tossed away in favor of more serious, focused drilling toward specific tasks. What does it matter if a young man can do calculus if his only purpose in life is to strap a bomb on his torso and die? What need has an indoctrinated soldier fighting for his country and people to learn the intricacies of world literature, or recognize the philosophical attributes of characters such as Oliver Twist or Hamlet? Freedom fighting is alive and well, and surely always will be in one form or another, and the trainees taught at underground schools preparing for the bloody upheaval of revolution are capable, in the end, of causing more destruction in even the world's most stable government systems than leaders and laymen can dream. Miro and his group leader, Artkin, are ready for what is to come when they board the bus full of kids, routed to take more than a dozen five-year-olds to summer camp. The two revolutionaries have done their homework and know the bus's schedule, know the best location to board the bus and take control from the driver, and do so without incident. But immediately there are unforeseen wrinkles to work around, as there are with even the most airtight plans. A young woman driver, instead of the man who usually drives the bus? Miro, only a teenager himself, was ready to blast a bullet into the head of the man, but a woman? He's almost never even looked at a woman. How is he supposed to execute one? But no matter, the plan goes ahead with no need to kill Kate Forrester, at least not right away. As the bus's tires squeal to a halt midway across the towering bridge where Artkin had planned to stop all along, hanging high over the gushing waters of the river below, more than a hundred feet up and inaccessible by any straightforward method of rescue, the standoff has begun, even if the authorities have not yet been notified of the impending crisis. Don't let your mind linger too long on what happens now; it will be dangerous for your mental health. The government is drawn into the deadly game of negotiations and bargaining, of course, and not apart from Artkin's will. His intent was always to place himself, Miro and the bus of panicked children in just this situation, literally high and dry and no more than a few feet from grisly death for the kids and their innocent driver. It was Artkin who alerted the authorities of something big going down involving a bus full of kids taken hostage, and now SWAT teams, special units, military officers and high-ranking generals are in on the crisis, pacing where solid land holds the promise of safety for all those children vulnerable to the blast of a madman's firearms should the mood strike him. If the government is to believe Artkin is serious about his demands, then lives must be sacrificed on the continuously bloody altar of revolution, and the only lives on hand to ritually bleed are those of the five-year-olds, scarcely aware they are sheep treading toward the slaughter. How many nightmares can the murder of a single child set off, mercurial ripples of death and destruction lapping against other lives that then ripple out and poison still others, circling back with no end to the suffering? What damage, then, can multiple murders of the innocent inflict, bullets tearing through tiny chests and hearts and heads, young human matter never meant to rend and splatter, not intended to fray at the seams until the indifference of old age arrives, and with it the slow withering of natural death? The potential energy of a million dreams cut short, more than a dozen individual futures smashed into shards of useless brokenness like glass panes dropped from a skyscraper, is what sits on the bridge keeping the world in unmoving dread, a symbol of the suffering that may be coming, the suffering that is coming. There is no negotiating with terrorists, but there is no leaving a bus of children to be tortured and killed by an enemy of the state, either. There is only official operations hiding under cover as renegade movement driven by lawmen and military who won't bow to protocol when it's children whose lives are on the line, the men instigating the action the only ones whose reputations will be on the line should it fail. But how can that ever work? How can it ever work without innocent bloodshed? It isn't the threat of young blood spilled to appease the demands of another country's radicals that holds After the First Death together, pushing the narrative forward swiftly and unobtrusively. It's the strong, sturdy content the author writes into the story, like heavy-duty girders designed to keep aloft the weightiest external matter. It's the lesson Miro learned as a child in the refugee camp when the only toy he owned, prized as a gift from his older brother, was stolen in the night while he slept. Who would lift a toy from a sleeping child that has not a single other possession to his name? That didn't matter for Miro, because they were never going to find it. What matters is the lesson he learned from it: "Do not seek to own anything, do not try to make anything belong to you, do not look for pleasure in anything. It will be taken from you sooner or later just as you must take from other people." Living in a land of affluence, the loss of a cherished toy, no matter by what means, can almost always be made right. What does a minor exchange of money for another toy mean in the larger scheme of things if it can soothe a small worried brow, or cause to cease the tears of a boy or girl missing their favorite plaything? But Miro doesn't come from that world; his thinking is different, it had to be different if he was to survive. It's a big part of the mindset that has led him to this terrible day on the bridge, holding a gun both proverbially and literally to the heads of children like he once was, but of much more privileged backgrounds. Having always the mindset of never taking ownership over anything in this world, living only for the homeland that has been disrespected internationally but can finally be compensated for its travails, is what it takes to lead a busload of youngsters to the tipping point, knowing death most likely awaits. What hope does Kate Forrester, the bus driver, have to go on now? The writing is on the wall for her; it isn't hard to figure out her life is most expendable of all the hostages, and she has been lucky to be allowed to live until now. It's the children, in truth, who keep her alive, for Artkin, Miro and their cohorts have no knowledge of young ones and even less awareness of what American kids need in order to remain calm in a tense situation. If Kate can help assuage a few fears temporarily and keep the hostages docile, then she's worth the trouble of allowing her to live a few more hours. But Kate is no fool. She knows her elimination could be given the go-ahead at any time; her time is borrowed, and with that awareness comes the desperation of needing to stay alive no matter what, the instinct that if all others die the world can still prevail, but if oneself dies it is the end forever. There is a bus of unmined assets sitting around her, however, little hands and brains whose capabilities in some respects, at least, are beyond those of adults, and though it may be a wan hope, it is a hope nonetheless in the midst of pessimism stretching otherwise to the four corners of the earth. "Sometimes a kid could do something an adult couldn't do, squeeze into a place an adult couldn't squeeze." This is true at all times, in all places, but what can that understating do for Kate and these tiny wards she never signed on to look after for more than the time it takes to drive a bus to camp? Is it of any importance at all? Kate Forrester's most interesting thoughts in her hours of sitting and staring, unable to do anything but pat a few downy heads and stroke a tearstained cheek or two when the kids' distress grows especially intense, are about her burgeoning realization that the moments of deepest despair in dreading the death that likely awaits her come right before she is buoyed by unexpected surges of hope. It's the hope of desolation, she knows, when she has accepted things can't get worse and she's going to die, so she knows she has nothing to lose. In those moments, unseen options come to light and crazy stunts she could try begin romancing her affections, even if they would put her and the children in great peril. Without fear of causing her or anyone else's death needlessly, convinced they will probably all perish anyway, it frees Kate to hope again, though it is hope born not of reason, but fatalism. "She caught her breath, pondering a new thought: the possibility that hope comes out of hopelessness and that the opposite of things carry the seeds of birth—love out of hate, good out of evil. Didn't flowers grow out of dirt?" Such thinking prods Kate to count and recount what assets she retains aboard the deathtrap bus, and there are more than she knew she had when the voyage began that morning. Isn't there always room for a little cautious hope? But Kate hits the nail on the head when an audacious plan she constructs can't seem to get going because she's having a hard time forcing herself to commit unreservedly to decisive action. Why can it be so hard to act even when we've reasoned endlessly about it and know we're doing the right thing, that the risks are worth the reward even if both are extreme? As Kate reflects, "...she wished there were a way she could rehearse her bravery." It's the one component of any plan that can't be rehearsed or trained: the gumption to move at the point of entry and get the action started, regardless of consequences. But even with all the bravery you'll need, plans fail so easily. Yes, they do... Told in two primary alternating sections, After the First Death feels, at first, like a disjointed story, pieces not fitting together properly as in a normal book. That's because there's so much the reader doesn't know, so many horrors to be revealed. You can be thankful you don't know the truth before you do, a short-lived mercy among atrocities, like drugged chocolate bars as prelude to a bullet in the skull. The pieces will coalesce soon enough, and you, as I did, will reel from the heartbreak that accosts your soul like a militant nationalist on a suicide mission, knowing full well it will take you both down in the end. There's no escaping the haunting nature of a break in the human psyche when it comes, when the tragedies we could have prevented and the guilt feasting nonstop on our soul are too powerful to keep at bay any longer, and the miracle of lucidity crashes down around us like the destruction of a priceless palace. It blows our minds because we cannot imagine bearing the guilt, either, the weight of unintended consequences crushing us, at last, when the one we can't live without is snuffed out like the dying flicker of flame on a wilted candle wick. This is the horror Robert Cormier writes about. This is the horror above all others, the last refuge of empathy in a world desensitized to everything else. It is why After the First Death is a story you will never be able to let go of. And why, no matter how hard you try to shake it, it will never let go of you. And there it is; I have now read the last of Robert Cormier's young-adult suspense novels, barring future posthumous releases. The Master is gone, now, a casualty of pervasive lung cancer at age seventy-five in the year 2000. No more novels to strike our souls with unrelenting grief, make our hearts ache and mourn so strongly for people we never knew that we feel like we are going to pieces, too, like we are breaking apart and there's no way we can ever be put back together again. It's a feeling of being completely, indivisibly alive that not everyone can understand or appreciate, being part of the universal pain of a life in which the "good guys" don't always win, yet it doesn't prevent us from trying our luck and hoping for something better. After the First Death and Robert Cormier's other novels remind us indelibly that hope isn't to be trifled with, and isn't to be taken for granted as if it will wait there for us whether we embrace it or not. Hope is a fleeting entity, disappearing so easily if we take our eyes off it for a second, and After the First Death will have you holding it closer than ever, as you might a beloved friend or family member after experiencing a realistic nightmare about their death. You won't ever read another book like After the First Death , of that I am sure. I could never adequately express its greatness with my words, but then, I don't need to. The story explains itself better than I ever could. Prepare yourself, though, because after reading this book, you will never be quite the same.
