This book is a very well thought out meditation on some of the sayings from the gnostic Gospel of Thomas, one of the Nag Hammadi texts. I wouldn't say this is a Christian book, though. I don't know much about Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (later known as Osho), but this is basically Eastern philosophy/spirituality, not Christian per se . Of course, Rajneesh is of the mindset that all religions at their core are the same, once you dig through the surface stuff that gets laid over the basic spirituality, things like cultural norms of the time, certain interpretations, and so forth. So, in that sense, it is Christian. He of course is talking about Jesus much of the time, but he has him on a level with the Buddha and other enlightened souls. This could be Christian teachings through the lens of a Hindu/Eastern mind. This doesn't bother me at all, and in fact I agree with that viewpoint. But beyond just agreeing with him, I think this is a very valuable book. in it, he touches on Eastern enlightenment, esoteric Christianity, Zen, Sufism, psychology, and more, and does so in a very convincing manner, full of stories and parables, with both humor and clear explanations, with many fresh ideas or at least fresh ways of presenting them. This book sort of hits you between the eyes. Here are some short excerpts of the clarity and profundity that comes along every so often in this book. The whole text is full of thoughtful ideas, but these are among the gems that truly make the book worth reading: “What will happen to the world when you are not there? When you were not there, what was happening? The world was a little more at peace, that's all. When you are not there, there will be a little less trouble in the world, that's all— because one uneasy person will have disappeared, and he was creating uneasiness in others.” 204 "We exist in the eyes of others: our identity consists of the opinions of others; others' eyes are the mirrors, we look at our faces in others' eyes. … Meditation means closing your eyes; not looking at the reflection but looking at your own being. Otherwise, the whole day you are engaged with others. In the night also when you sleep, either you are unconscious when there is deep sleep, or you are again engaged with others in your dreams." 158 "Nobody is at home because everyone is knocking at each other's door" 168 “The greatest and the deepest distinction is between male and female. Have you observed that you never forget if a person is male or female? You may forget the name, you may forget the religion, you may forget the face completely, but you never forget if a person is a man or a woman. It is impossible, it seems, to forget. That means the deepest impact on your memory is left by the division.” 188 "Obsession with the outside has to be broken. No need to escape to the forests, that will not help, but in twenty four hours you have enough moments to look within." 336 "Don't expect! All expectations belong to the world of Death, the dimension of time and space"
