I read The Guns of August and decided to read the author's other books as well. I found this book by chance and started at once because of Barbara's prose style. This book also served my interest in Arab-Israel conflict and history in general. This book takes you on a journey. A journey covering all the ingredients which were necessary for the final recipe known as Balfour Declaration. She likes to uncover the roots of the matter from each and every perspective. This was exactly what i wanted. A clear picture from the beginning. Moreover I was given an assignment for a book review on any book. I chose this book. Here is my review: INTRODUCTION: 1. This book was first published in 1956. The author is famous for her history books. Her book The Guns of August won a Pulitzer Prize. This book is about the interplay of Bible and Sword i.e. Religion and Military and the role they played in the arrival of British in Palestine and subsequently the Jews. This book traces out the history of Britain to find out exactly how and when the idea of Jewish return to Palestine came into existence. It all started much before the Zionist Movement. SUMMARY: 2. This book starts with British people trying to find their ancestors. Who came to Britain in the beginning of time and from where did they come here. Myths were circulated about the first man to be from modern day Palestine. Myths became reality and were accepted as truth. On the other hand priests were trying to find how Christianity came here. This was also somehow attributed to a man who came from Palestine. So the attachment with Palestine was fixated on the minds of British people. This attachment was transformed into pilgrimage to Holy Land with the guarantee of salvation and forgiveness. Then came the time of Crusades to aid their brethren from the wrath of Saracens. Lords Shaftesbury came into the picture around 15th century as part of Puritan Movement. He was a literal believer of Bible in which it was written that people of the Land of Israel have to be returned before there can be second advent of Jesus Christ. He was part of the government and pushed this idea forward. Puritan Movement ended but this idea remained. The problem was that Jews themselves did not want to return. They believed only Messiah could make them return. This belief took time and rise of anti-Semitism to change. The idea of Jewish return to Palestine was pushed further and further. It was promoted sometimes for religious reasons and mostly for other reasons. It found its way to the British Parliament as well. Baron Rothschild of France funded different settlement projects. Finally in 1882 the pioneer Jewish settlers were established in Jerusalem. But this was all before Theodore Hertzl who was the father Zionist Movement. He wrote Der Judenstaat (“The Jewish State”) in 1885. After which he started struggling for the return of the Jews. He failed in several times but didn’t back off. Finally he was told that Jews can make an independent state in Africa not in Palestine. He agreed but his supporters didn’t. Hertzl died at the age of 44 before even the Balfour Declaration. After him Weizmann took this movement further. Syria which included Palestine at that time was strategically very important to British. It was a passageway to East. Mediterranean Sea to Red Sea was the main passage. British supported dying Ottoman Empire till the very last. This support was stopped in 1914 when the Caliph decided to be with Germans in the First World War. Weizmann had a meeting with Balfour and the former highly impressed latter. Balfour was now convinced that the time had come to fulfill the words of Bible. Balfour had studied Bible since childhood and was an avid believer of Return of the Jews to the Promised Land. After the First World War, Balfour Declaration gave the Jews their promised land. British tried to disown the Declaration later but it was too late. Britain was not able to carry out the Mandate until 1946 when the issue was put forward to United Nations. CONCLUSION: 3. Barbara has a unique style of telling history like a story. This style maintains a grip on the reader. She remained unbiased throughout the book telling the things the way they happened from different perspectives. Sometimes just for the fear of not missing something she has provided extra details. I wanted to study the roots of the Arab-Israel conflict, which holds a major place in global geopolitics, and this book served my purpose very well.
