8/10. What is abolishing man? What is causing not only the masses, but even the cultural "leaders" themselves, to become utterly lost in a morass of words and irresponsibility? Where have standards gone? Where has the Good gone? And does anyone know what the word "duty" means anymore? The above cultural assaults have been attacking objectivity, specifically the objectivity of language and morality. First, it is claimed that my words have no connection to the objective world, especially in relation to moral matters. If I call something "good" or "honorable", that is only my subjective opinion. When this belief is generalized to society, there can be no possible cohesiveness . All pursue their own ends, and no one can tell anyone what they should do. Therefore, with a lack of the "ought" in life, everyone proceeds to not pursue goals based on thought and duty, but instead due to instinct. Thus their emotional desires overwhelm them, and then drive them to the basest pleasures: porn, junk food, soda, weed, and booze. When language is subjectivized, all of our cultural heritage goes in the muck. Plato thought this, Aristotle that, and Kant the other. But who cares, as those thoughts were just their opinions . Do you see why the vast majority of Generation Z lacks drive and motivation today? If objective truth is denied, all meaning in life is denied. There is no Good to pursue, nor Evil to avoid. There is just a massive blank slate world, and I can do anything in such a world. But how do I choose what to do? I cannot choose, because there is no means of choice, as there is no Good and Evil. There is only what I want . And if I like cookies, Coke, cocaine, and the L.A. Chargers, then those become my "values". When all values are subjectivized, the only values become comfort and economic progress. These are said to be "good" in and of themselves. They are said to make people "happy", despite the fact that 1/3 of our populace is swallowing pharmaceutical pills day after day because they are not "happy". So economic progress is pursued and the attempt is made to conquer Nature — to conquer hunger, death, and poverty. These are said to be solvable. This is the professed end of our cultural "leaders". What is the end state of their goal? It is the complete knowledge of not only how to manipulate all things, but to also manipulate all humans as well. For they tell us that a human is within the natural order, just as much as a centipede is. Once humans can be modified at will through genetic engineering, neuronal control, and environmental conditioning, the question becomes: how should we modify them? The answer is usually said to be that we shall "maximize their happiness". But this cannot be justified with their own morality. For if all is subjective but comfort and material pleasure, then there is no Good nor Evil. Therefore there are no values to lead such human modifiers. Furthermore, because these people have zero spiritual values, their values can only come from a natural human Being (our constitution) itself. But if the constitution of humans is infinitely modifiable by their own technologies, then no values can be derived from a human nature, as they will have destroyed it. Therefore, the techno-utopians have no other values but the whims of their emotions. We are the plaything of the lowliest desires. To conclude, the subjectivization of morality leads to nihilism in thought and action. It destroys the willpower of all thinking beings. The only answer is to accept the fact that there is an objective Good to be pursued, given the nature of man. When one nears the Good, one rejoices in the exercise of the virtues. From this exercise, happiness is derived. Therefore, one must not chase happiness, but instead virtue. The only other path is listless and depressive nihilism.
