"Americans were brought up to respect what was new and progressive—and more often than they wanted to admit, they died for their faith in what was bright and shiny." Yes! 4.5 stars . Great fast paced and fun mind controlling awesomeness from the Koontzter. The plot in this one centres around two villainous individuals who want to seize power over others through mind control . There's no shades of grey with these two as is so often the case with Dean Koontz baddies. We have Salsbury , a twisted and nasty little scientists, who gets off on his ability to control overs. Then there's his employer, Dawson , a full on megalomaniac hellbent on world domination. This leads them to the town of Black River , who's population become Guinea pigs for the dastardly pair. A small group go unaffected by the drugs pumped into the water supply and it's their job to unravel the sinister plan and put a stop to things before it's too late. It's all very dramatic and there's some particular dark stuff in this one. Although a brilliant scientist, Salsbury is a full on psychopath who gets off on his ability to toy and play with others. This leads to some pretty unsettling scenes, so if you trigger easily this may not be the book for you. The plot is fast-paced , as is the case with most Dean Koontz novels, and he keeps things dark and edgy. This is a hallmark of his early novels, before he got really religious and started to become preachy with his readers. It's why a lot of people tend to stay away from his newer stuff and it's a rule I tend to stick with. There's also no mutt taking centre stage, which has become an annoying feature of his stories throughout his career. "I’m an old-style liberal when it comes to most things. But this liberal line about compassion for the criminal—that’s ninety percent horseshit." The characters are fairly consistent and do engage the reader to some extent, even if they are a bit one-dimensional. But character work is never a strong point for this author and in my mind it's what stops him from being considered a great. Sorry, but not sorry Koontz fans. But what this story has going for it is the dark and dastardly vibe and narrative that keeps the reader fully engaged. The locations catch the imagination and there is enough action to make Night Chills a page-turner. It's certainly amongst my favourite Koontz books and if you're a fan of his then definitely give it a try. Oh and one last thing... I am the key [image error]
