Oh my, is this a cross-over genre that combines deep description of core personality for 5 or 6 main characters, but also at the same time hums a hypnotic mood. The platform of the place being one of concrete strong structural base for contentment and "good intent" belief countered with a dichotomy of constant singular antithesis to all that is "normal" and of "natural" wholeness. This is Norah Lofts near the end of her career. She is experimenting in somewhat a reversal of her normal chronological order of seating a house at its beginning and then proceeding through the centuries for its events and occupants. In this one we start in post war modern England with a family of now handicapped abilities and wholeness. And then after just a few chapters, we revert to the beginnings for their house which they have bought near Baildon (Bury St. Edmunds actually- England Suffolk)to start a new life in the countryside. That house is Gad's Hall. It's the 1840's for the entire remaining sections of the book and this is only the first in a series. How she completes this 5 women and 1 boy 1840's family (plus Jenny and Will which are the help)is so masterful, that I can only give it 5 stars. It's not perfect in the light of action level comparison for moderns but much deeper at core. Poe has gotten literary acclaim for his moods. This one is just as good. Plus it combines immense minutia of trade, husbandry, cow auctions, corn markets, and dozens of patterns of manners and occupations of time for that period. All within economic class constraints and the processes of courting and marriage eventualities for 4 female offspring. How that is worked and more highly patterned by the females as much as the males, is pivotal. But what gives it that extra star is the voids. Lofts doesn't need to be gross, pornographic, vile in chewy blood-letting scenes, or highly descriptive of the menace in play. Not at all. But IS IT THERE. Unsaid and known at the same time. Among them in their midst. And in fact, the onus of what really has occurred is far more deeply scored upon the understanding of the reader for those peculiarities of the voids of admittance for the process. Modern readers of horror, or romance, or sci-fi. or grit. madness/insanity might think this book is mild and slow. Some, I read in reviews, think that this pace of "eyes" can be tedious. Not I. Can't wait for the next one in this series which is waiting for me to pick up today. The Haunting of Gad's Hall is HIGHLY anticipated.
