David Brin’s The Transparent Society lays out the hypothesis that freedom can only be ensured through accountability, derived from openness and criticism, of those in power (i.e., governments, MNCs, “management,” etc…). As we enter the information age, new technologies provide increasingly powerful tools for openness. Despite our desire to selectively endorse, to ensure accountability, and constrain, in light of privacy concerns, these tools through regulation or censorship of information, inevitably innovation will create ubiquitous and undetectable devices to capture and store information. Brin presents the choice between allowing only those in power access to these technologies and making these technologies available to everyone. Under the second scenario, a “transparent society” guarantees freedom through the accountability of those in power. Brin develops a strong case for the value of accountability through openness and criticism by contrasting open democratic ideals of Pericles, Locke, and Jefferson with the closed fascist ideology of Hitler and Stalin. He argues that transparency is increasing in the information age by citing anecdotal examples of the surveillance technology, from video cameras on Baltimore streets and Safeway databases of shopping records to low-flying drones developed by the US military and subdural transponders that can be inserted in humans. Furthermore, he describes society’s desire to use these technological tools for curiosity’s sake, safety (exposing muggers hiding in the dark) and convenience (ensuring that the local grocery store has enough Coca-Cola). Finally, Brin supports his advocacy of a transparent society under these conditions with the compelling example of the inevitability of management watching employees and choice of letting or not letting stakeholders watch management whose actions may have much greater implications for the company’s success or failure. There are two tenuous assumptions in Brin analysis: on one side that technology will inescapably outpace the ability of governments to secure privacy and on the other side that sufficient reciprocal transparency can be assured in a transparent society. Brin simply equates numerous new methods for capturing and storing information with the inability to concurrently regulate privacy and guarantee liberty. Brin fails to explain why the transparent society model assures the latest innovative technologies will be available to all instead of just those in power. The Transparent Society engages the discussion on freedom and privacy in the information age with a provocative argument for accountability through openness to protect liberty. However, greater justification of the government’s inability to secure privacy and the transparent society’s ability to enable sufficient reciprocal transparency is required to tighten the case.
