Some books stand the test of time. Others remain a mere snapshot – closed-circuit artifacts that reveal particular attitudes of an era but fail to find footing in the here and now. It is difficult to imagine a time when the military academy route was as much about privilege as that which leads to the Ivy League. This is the case with End As a Man , a novel that follows a fall semester in a prestigious Southern military academy in 1940, a stone’s throw away from America’s involvement in WWII. Through the inchoate perspective of freshman Robert Marquales, the story exposes the chaotic, self-centered student body of an elite institution that prides itself on order, uniformity, and service. The plot itself, in which a minor incident off campus leads to a wider scandal, seems secondary to the vivid characterizations that people it. These character sketches – the religious boy who wets his bed, the scofflaw who hides behind his father’s money, the fraternizing womanizer – get to the crux of the story. These men are boys. Eighteen, nineteen, twenty – it doesn’t matter. While they try to survive the rigors of discipline and structure, they can’t help but indulge in their own selfish fantasies and cling to their inherited beliefs. The mandatory bracing, cleaning, and push-ups are paired with cigarettes, liquor, and brothels. Calder Willingham (who went on to share screen credit for the adaptations of Paths of Glory and The Graduate ) does a fantastic job of representing this world, coupling natural dialogue with military speeches and personal letters, all of which speak to the characters’ truth. Ironically, that truth is rooted in lies, albeit lies passed down from one generation to the next. In fact, the off-putting points-of-view make the book refreshingly honest. The students express parochial opinions on race, sexuality and gender, and the pushback, if at all, is minimal. This is the snapshot that Willingham captures – the attitudes of the pre-Civil Rights era, when white Christian, heterosexual men not only pulled the levers of power but also believed in their right to do so without question. The result, to put in modern parlance, is entitlement. The Academy is rife with entitled young men who, once making it through the hazing horrors of freshman year, masochistically inflict that very horror on the incoming freshmen for their remaining three years. As Marquales navigates this terrain, he finds himself unwittingly at the center of a boys-will-be-boys scandal that results in the expulsion of a small platoon of upperclassmen. Conveniently, General Draughton’s final speech on those consequences washes away the stains of youthful indiscretion with the promise of resolute manhood. “Gentleman, I have said this before and I will say it again now. No youth can pass through four years of The Academy and not end as a man.” It might be nothing more than old-fashioned chauvinism, but it’s also damn good rhetoric.
