I enjoyed this book more then the first one in the series. It didn't feel quite so long, or as slow. It does deal a fair amount with politics, but nicely spaced out. And I enjoyed the new characters. Especially Vaijon. I could sympathize with him in the beginning of the book. I think he is probably one of the more complex characters. He knows intellectually that he should not feel superior to non noble knights. And he knows intellectually that he shouldn't be prejudice against Bahzell just because he is a hradani. But he is. I love how this is handled. I love how his emotions are described in the beginning and how the emotions are dealt with, and what he turns into. I don't want to say anymore because I don't want to spoil anything, lets just say he is awesome! I also liked the addition of an awesome fighting female. Kerry was pretty cool, and I like how she had scars from fighting. I thought the interplay between her and Bahzell was pretty cool. Anyways, this book also involes Bahzell's homecoming. I enjoyed seeing his family and the other hradani react to him being a champion of Tomanak when they feel the same way about the gods as Bahzell did. They are all a little less hardheaded then Bahzell though. Weber is also extremely good as creating detailed worlds that don't follow the standard tropes. Yes, the dwarves are the metal workes and miners, but they are also heavily involved in trade and they may live under a mountain, but so do humans! The half elves, while not the villians of the story are Definitly Not Nice, and elves isolate themselves as much as possible. The origin stories of the different races are also quite interesting and honestly I would love to read more about Wencit of Rum and his Past. He is a very interesting character, what with being over 12,000 years old and all. I admit, that I have started the third book in this series and I am not liking it nearly as much. But I think it might just be a bit of an overload having just finished the first and second ones. I might have to try reading something else in between. I wouldn't suggust reading these books all at once, but to space them out because Weber includes a ton of detail about the world and it's past. Maybe a little too much at times.
