3.5 I have a universe in my head. Families huddle there in secret, sheltered places. Civilizations reside. The laws of physics hold it together. The laws of chemistry keep it going. I have nothing to do with it. No one governs it. Foxy emissaries glide from alleys to archways on immoral, mysterious missions. No one’s in charge. I am infiltrated and besieged, the unprotected target of sneaky attacks from within. ………smirking faces go about their nasty deeds and pleasures surreptitiously without confiding in me. It gives me pain. Victims weep. No one dies. There is noiseless wailing I was oddly reminded of the character Alec Baldwin played on the sitcom Friends while reading this book. Because of the stark dissimilarity, but also somehow the strange similarity his character shared with Bob Slocum, our anxious, the unendingly nervous protagonist here. Alec Baldwin’s character had this schmaltzy penchant for unrealistic, needless ‘positivity’. The personification of human saccharine, ever inclined to put a positive spin on every single thing. ‘He called the Long Island Express Way a Concrete Miracle’. He’s like ‘Santa Claus on Prozac, at Disneyland,…..getting laid’. You get my drift. He is overly enthusiastic. While he is representing one end of unrealistic positivity, Bob Slocum, our hero here, is representing the other. The noxious debilitating end where everything revolves around the words ‘seem’, ‘feel’. ‘afraid’ and is barren for anything remotely positive. Both are in terrible need of tranquilizers. Both aren’t familiar with pragmatism. Both need to take a deep breath and just let things be, without putting a label on anything and everything. No doubt this is a brilliant, confounding piece of work, and a difficult book to pull off. Heller’s use of language is genuinely inspiring and exceptionally strong. He is intelligent. He's playful with the language. But how much of this you can take, the repetitiousness I mean, is the deciding factor as to how much you’ll like this novel. It's incessant insecurity and bitterness and repulsiveness page after page after page. I was thinking this could possibly be the most thinly plotted novel I have read, and then I was reminded of The Road by McCarthy. Over time, I will be able to look back at books like this, which is exuberantly artistic in the use of language, but with very little going on, with some hint of reverence for the unfathomable use of the language and at its ‘moments’, filling me with melancholy, which is profound and not patronizing, yet too repetitious and unhappening. If you can look past the monotony, which I’m convinced was the point Heller was trying to make? There's a story of loss and longing here. Half way through this I kept thinking if Holden from The Catcher In the Rye grew up and had kids, this'd be him. But that's not accurate in someway, for Holden was brave to search for something of meaning in his life during his teenage years. Bob Slocum isn't brave. He's meek and can be easily eased into uneasiness. He lacks sternness. He is amorphous. The repetitions of modern urban life and the invisible malignant innards of urbanity and the ‘prosperity’ that arises from peace and harmony is evident here. You know the drill. Regular paychecks, vacations, materialistic longings well-met, yet bottomless yearnings. Very first-worldly but mostly an expose of restlessnesss that arises from restfulness. The main character , like anyone who finds the present joyless, is shackled to his childhood, nostalgic for the past despite being fairly not uncomplaining about it. He has mommy issues. He has daddy issues. He concocts conflict within his mind and tussles with his boss, daughter, and his wife. He befouls his future through abject overthinking. He is strangely drawn to his boy more than anyone. His fondness is immoderate. All in all, Heller’s artistry is the shimmy shine here. His ambition to explore the malignancy of peace, after exploring the malignancy of war in Catch-22. And a convincing one at that. I mean, that in itself warrants exhorting. I hope you give this one a go. Not faultless, but an effort of immense vitality, where the subject matter is the exact opposite.
