Rounded up 4.5 stars Pike of course has his way of going all otherworldly and existential that has a way of making me feel utterly confused and naive which starts to bore me but delivers everything else so perfectly it more than makes up for it. Angela Warner is new to town, living with her grandfather while her parents go through a divorce, and she's been invited to a party by her best friend Mary Blanc's boyfriend Jim Kline, quarterback at Point High School. Three months and things seem to be okay in this town if only a little dull. Mary shows up at the party with a loaded shotgun and blows away linebacker Todd Green and head cheerleader Kathy Baker in all gory detail. Her next target...is Jim. Angela tries to stop Mary and hears her say she has to kill Jim because...he's not human. In plain clothes, Lieutenant Nguyen stops Mary from shooting Angela when she finds Jim and tries to protect him. Jim gets a bullet in the leg and Mary a shot wrist and a concussion from the butt of the officer's gun hitting her in the back of the head. The next morning, Angela goes to talk to Mary after getting Nguyen's permission after he questions her. The girls have a conversation where Mary tells her best friend that she killed Todd and Kathy and tried to kill Jim because they were no longer human...they were monsters. Angela thinks Mary has just gone crazy once she goes through an explanation of why she thinks the teens were responsible for killing people. Mary tells Angela to stay away from Jim. At the funerals, Jim approaches Angela and wants to talk to her about Mary. Angela can't get Mary's words out of her her head but says yes. She can't help being attracted to him... Her other friend Kevin listens to Angela's story about her conversation with Mary. He thinks it might have something to do with kids getting sick from drinking the water that comes from Point Lake, a water source said to be created by a meteor. Angela isn't sure what to think when it's clear that Jim has an interest in her and it leads to a walk by the lake, hot and heavy kissing, a flirty chase where Jim hurts his arm and then bleeds all over Angela and she can't help but be turned on. That night she starts having strange dreams and the next morning, learning from Kevin, that a football player on the opposing football team is now paralyzed from the neck down. The Point player responsible named Larry was said by Mary in their last conversation to be a possible suspect for being a monster...after being in the company of Todd, Kathy and Jim. With Mary still in jail, Angela tries to discover what is the truth behind all of this. Is her best friend going crazy? Are Jim, the other football players and cheerleaders really monsters? Angela finds leads to give her the answers but in the end...she'll wish she had never heard the name Jim Kline or moved to Point. For anyone who has not read this, I can't go into much more detail without spoiling the whole story but it has all of the typical Pike craziness and horror and sex paired with understanding of the human condition. The story becomes heartbreaking and macabre to finally end on such a poignant yet utterly depressing ending. Monster is one of the best Christopher Pike books I have read so far. Visceral and gut-wrenching. I highly recommend it.
