I think StM warned me against books with (!) but did i listen? Nope! Cause I'm an idiot. there's not one but TWO OW in this book. For once hero's non-celibacy would have been understandable IF he didn't think he betrayed his idolized OW by having sex with heroine! No, he wasn't thinking in terms of love! He felt he betrayed the OW (Isobel, his brother's wife, the love of his life, surprisingly not the one he was currently in a public relationship with, fucking bastard) when he had sex with heroine, yet it didn't stop him from fucking limitless number of OW! And heroine was of course a virgin! Which I'd have understood, since she loved him, he didn't. BUT I mean he actually DISLIKED her, she's a 16 year old kid, who does that? He was very verbal about how she's the last woman he'll ever sleep with because he has class, and she's way beneath that, she's pretty but immature and classless. Yet he was jealous as fuck to see her move on! Double standards at it's best, because he had no problem parading his girlfriend in front her! I don't know WTF he wanted, Eating cake and wanting it too comes to mind. Also, he cheats on Lilian, who is his girlfriend, he's thinking of marrying her, and he sleeps with heroine without breaking it off with her! The actual OW is of course, heroine's sister, hero's SIL, who he's in love with, she is his THE ONE, so he can never love anyone else, and why he avoids commitment. He says "i'm sorry, Isobel" after having sex with heroine, I don't know HOW elese you can interpret that, and then he tells heroine she reminds him of Isobel. I think subconsciously he let the truth out. Heroine IS the 2nd best, she's the imitation copy of Isobel and that is why hero wanted her, and had suddenly an epiphany that it was her he loved all along! Erm, NO!, do you want me to remind you all the time you humiliated her in front of your OW, and friends and then told her how unattractive you found her? This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
