How to say this nicely... This is the first novel I have read as a more aware adult person (yes after seeing how this review ends I decided I needed to make that more open ended). It's kind of painful to listen to an abridged audiobook, I imagine the only thing harder than listening to it would be to actually be "the guy" editing the book, prepping it, for the abridgement i's castration. [EDIT: Seriously, what is wrong with me?] How on earth you could do that without thinking you're kicking the author repeatedly in their gonads (I'm sorry, gonads just sounds much much nicer than their vag. Just go with it - it's not just because I'm a dude but actually imagining someone kicking and/or cutting [More edits: Yes, I'm losing it, it went a little dark back there, now the light is missing] the mess out of a woman's vagina is a little bit too much for me... it's a bit much for me looking at me typing this right now... I'm so happy my brain is having this moment with what I'm typing vs. what's I'm thinking right now [sarc] [was that sarcasm for me or for you? Did I intend for the audience to read it as sarcasm, or for me to know I was kidding... I was kidding. I mean I thought I was kidding - lord jesus, protect me] , it's awful I want it to stop. I'm finishing this here. Done. Now. Ok.) is beyond me. I have a few too many moments where I just can't accept the content due to the missing parts. Maybe one day when I'm feeling pretty sad [Sadder than what? Than this!?] and alone I will buy the eBook off of Amazon... or a used copy (hey it's 2013, it's OOP) and wait for days for it to show up in the mail (perish the thought) - my Prime expired a few weeks ago, I'm still upset about it, no I can't afford the $80 right now - don't judge me! Ack! More violence to genitals just hit me. I'm out. This is getting too weird... pretty much like how I feel about the book right now. I've gotta go. Man, I am going to look back much later from now and think I was on something... unfortunately I wasn't, this is me sober. Painfully so. [I swear, I'm not a drug addict. Wait isn't that the first thing drug addicts say? Ok how about, I am drug free. Wait that still implies... damn, I've lost this battle] I even look like a hot mess in my own words. I know, fabulous. Peace. [Holy crap dude...]
