Lupe comprises yet another Catholic horror novel from the 70s, such as Rosemary's Baby , The Exorcist , The Omen , etc. Thompson's stream of consciousness prose takes a little to get used to, but once the story gets going in ernest, it really takes off. Our main protagonist, Emily Blake, starts the novel with her and her husband David buying an old Victorian house in San Francisco, one which features strange noises and voices at night. This, however, is not a haunted house tale. David, a dermatologist, soon starts having a torrid affair with one of his patients ('you know, sometimes when you examine them you know they want it' gag, gag) and Emily finds out about it. For some strange reason, Emily's BFF Marianne takes her to visit the titular Lupe, who is a 11 year old kid living in a poor part of town. Little Lupe promptly makes serious sexual advances on Emily, mentions the name of David's squeeze, and tells her he can get rid of her. For the next few weeks, Emily keeps seeing little Lupe around town in the strangest places and recognizes that it was his voice she kept hearing at the house they bought... Entering into mild spoiler territory, (but no more than the back blurb on the cover), David's squeeze suddenly burns to death, in a chair, behind the locked doors of her house. The cops are stumped, as is the medical examiner. After some digging, the cops know about the affair and therefore have a motive for Emily, but not how the murder was done. Finally, and this is where the novel gets really interesting, Emily is arrested and tried for murder by witchcraft! And what a trial! An interesting take on Catholic horror for sure here, especially as the trial progresses. Lupe does have some good creeps and the trial was super. The lead characters, however, are a pair of putzes. Emily just wants to get her man back and feels it must be something she did for him to be screwing around. Please. David has few if any redeeming qualities and really is quite the asshole. Taken together, pretty hard to root for either one. That, and the offbeat prose kept me from bumping this to 4 stars, but it is better than a straight 3. The paperback version also has a great 'peekaboo' cover.
