I have a special place in my heart for books in which the narrators are animal. It's so interesting when an author attempts to give a voice to an animal and I admit that it's not as easy as it sounds. When I saw this book in my school's library, I was immediately intrigued by it and once I read the blurb, I decided to give it a try without a second thought. After I finished it, I must say that it wasn't what I expected, but it was still a very interesting book. As the title says, this book is a memoir of an old thoroughbred horse, named Sweet William. The horse is the narrator of the story and throughout the book, he recounts the trials of his life - which was by no means easy. Since he was young, he encountered many difficulties but most importantly, he had to face humans' cruelty and abuse and mistreatment. Despite his name, Sweet William is anything but sweet. He's actually a pretty bitter, obnoxious and misanthrope horse, who is far from perfect and well-behaved. Even though this might seem strange, this is exactly why he was such an interesting character and narrator. It's makes total sense that he acts the way he does. He had been traumatised by many things in his life and he suffered a lot at the hands of cruel people. He is a tragic and complex character and I really liked the way the author portrayed him. It was interesting to follow the story from his point of view and to see that his behaviour was driven by his experiences and feelings about humans. It provided insight into his psyche and it highlighted his personality. I admit that at first, I didn't like his bitterness and negativity but soon I was intrigued by his characterisation and I understood why he was portrayed like that. I sympathized with him and I even encouraged his bad actions towards some people, at times. While I was reading about William's life, I was both surprised and disturbed. I expected that there would be some disturbing aspects in the book, but I assumed that there would be some light-hearted moments too. I was proven wrong. For the majority of it, the book was by no means pleasant to read. William's exploitation and abuse angered me and it's really sad to thing that many horses have to endure this. The book dealt with plenty mature and difficult themes and although it was harrowing, it made me want to learn more about William. The writing style of the book was simple and it described William's life in a very detailed way. It provoked some emotions and it made me visualise the events William desribed. I especially enjoyed the descriptions of nature and English countryside, they set a refreshing and lyrical tone to the story. The book was easy to read, but I must say that it dragged quite often. While I was reading some chapters, I got bored and I felt like it took me forever to finish them. Sometimes the writing felt quite plain and messy and I think that the author should have dived deeper into some aspects of the plot, because it seemed like they were brushed off. The second part of the book was less interesting compared to the first part. The first one was centered around William's life before he got bought by his master, while the second one focused on his life after. In the majority of the chapters, there was minimum plot development and there were just huge sections of dialogues between William's master and another character, named Ralph. I have no problem when the pacing of a story is slowed down due to dialogues, as long as they are interesting enough and as long as they serve a purpose to the developement of the characters or the story. However, the dialogues in the book contributed nothing to the story and most of them were uninteresting. Master and Ralph discussed repetitevely about their past experiences while William, who is supposed to be the protagonist and the narrator of the story, standed listening to them, without adding a single comment. Some of Ralph's comments didn't sit right with me, especially when he talked about his sister... I completely understand that he was meant to be written like this and I understand why the author portrayed him in an unlikeable way, but I wish he had focused more on William's life and comments. Last but not least, I didn't expect that the book would contain scenes about sexual activities between horses... I was very shocked and at first, I felt uncomfortable. I got used to them but this is another aspect of the plot that the author shouldn't bring that often. I understand their purpose, but there was no reason for William to be portrayed as a sex maniac. All in all, this book made me experience a range of emotions and overall, it was well-written and enjoyable (as enjoyable as it could be). It certainly was not what I expected, but I do not complain and I'm happy that I read it. It will most likely stick in my mind for a pretty long time and now I just want to read more books about horses.
