With Fancy as a friend who needs an enemy OH MY GOODNESS.... I am so weak at Fancy Taylor, and at the same time I'm hoping that this young fly diva gets it together! Fancy Taylor (Ms. Diva) at the ripe age of 22 thinks that her beauty and Miss. Kitty will always be the key to BIG DADDY FLY GUY! You know the one custom suits, gators, coupes, hundred thousand on his wrist. Sometimes life can be like a dream... with Fancy thinking this trick will FLIP her into the future Mrs. (((SCREECHING TIRES COME TO A HALT))) Miss Kitty may have allstar status, but she's being ran by a rookie and ruined by veterans in the league. LITERALLY Her sponsors come and go and I do mean L-I-T-E-R-A-L-L-Y! Ms. Diva is all that and a bag of NUTS! Sister girl is playing with a hand full of JOKERS! If it doesn't directly concern, pertain, or benefit Fancy SO WHAT! I mean what eles is there...Fancy is FINE, tight body, gear to the max. The problem isn't getting men to notice her, it's that she requires a certain caliber! Too bad that Fancy heart is so screwed up. Using sex to get love will only keep you in the same lonely place you were before. The two can't be confused. LOVE always comes with conditions in Fancy's case. With her as the big loser in the end. Can Ms. Diva recognize what the problem is? Our young Diva uses the genuine love of her friends in order to get what she needs at that moment. Desmond, who loves Fancy, and wishes she would love him in the same way. His collar isn't white, but when there isn't anyone else Fancy knows that Dez will be there for her. But as time goes she reveals her self and Dez finally sees her wicked ways. SaVoy, her Chrisitan best friend who wants to inject Fancy with God's wonderful message. SaVoy may be a beauty but she's also a virgin. Fancy resents the relationship SaVoy has with her father. Will Fancy dreams of an illustrious man interfere with SaVoy and her King? Tanya, although she's often left out. When there is time can Fancy remember that being a friend is being apart of their lives, even in a mininimal role. Rape, near death experience, scrounging to make it, and God's message being slowly planted we see some of Fancy's heart. Maybe next year things will be better. I like the way He's just a friend, and Somebody's gotta be on top weaved together. Okay Mary I'm all caught up and ready to see how this works out..
