# 1 2.5 *s #2 2 *s #3 2 *s #4 2 *s #5 3 *s #6 2.5 *s #7 3 *s Over all rating: 2.5 *s, C Now to get to the good stuff. I feel a bit sad I didn't really connect to this book. I had a thought while I was reading it maybe I should stop while I'm ahead and books like I Once Was a Teenage Fairy can stay forever unstained by memory, but then I thought I love the few times FB hits home too much even if they are a bit far between. The thing is you don't read Francessca Block for her stories or settings or even her characters so much (even though without them it is hard to imagine what any FB story would be), you read her books for the atmosphere she creates and, oh boy, can she create an amazing atmosphere. Using countless flower names, lyrical descriptions that could make the ugliest things turn beautiful, a hum of acceptance that runs through all her stories- it doesn't matter what color skin you have, whichever sex makes you happier. FB is like a mother sitting by your bed just as you're all warm and snuggly to read you a fairytale (though even fairytales contain nightmares). But FB rarely gets beyond 3 stars in my ratings despite the fact that I will buy any book just for having her name on it. That is because the atmosphere isn't everything someone needs and though FB does that part wonderfully, I am usually left needing more from all of her books. Anyway back to Girl Goddess #9. Perhaps FB was trying to tap into the inner child in all of us but I don't think any of her characters rang true for anything beyond the age of 10. Because I gobble up FB books like low fat chocolate I was a little irked with one repeated paragraph, though I suppose it's simply a return to the LA setting. The bit about a murderer breaking in through peoples windows in the valley was in another one of her books but I can't remember which exactly. One of many things that make FB great at atmospheres? "The chlorine was green smelling." The ways she goes beyond boundaries to mix senses, sounding a bit like a child in her will not to be ruled by rules. I might write a bit more on why I rated each story the way I did, I might not. Quite frankly most of them were forgettable- the characters, the plots. But somehow the words linger- amaryllis, iris, and rose; Cottages in the mountains with herb gardens and painted shutters and running children. Boys sneaking through windows, electric flowers...
