Oooh, boy, I have been in the mood for some trashy books lately. So I thought it was time to read some Scruples. Especially since there might be a movie or show soon? Gotta beat the rush. And what did I think? Yes, it's trash. But most of it is pretty good trash! We have: an awkward, overweight girl from an upper crust Boston family who goes to Paris and becomes a swan, as one only can in Paris; a California boy, who believes in beautiful women (taking beautiful pictures of them, and sleeping with them, which is just so cliche); and a French/Irish girl with mermaid eyes (whatever that means) who comes to New York to make it as a designer. Billy, our swan, goes to secretarial school and becomes the happy wife of an older man, the founder of the company she works at, of course. We have some further scandal from her when her husband suffers from strokes and becomes an invalid at their Bel Air home. But! Then she gets involved with a Hollywood producer and snore...The whole book turns into Billy, her hubby, and various people making a movie. This seems like it's straight from the author's actual life, so I can see how that would creep in there, but it took the book in a different direction that I didn't like as much. Spider, our California boy is equally boring. He's flat, he's typical, his story gives us nothing. Unsurprisingly, Chad Michael Murray is in talks to play him in the movie(? show?). He seems eye-rolling-worthy enough. Valentine, of the mermaid eyes, has a shocking relationship toward the beginning of the book, then spends most of the book in a boring affair. Who she ends up with in the end isn't a surprise, nor is it particularly pleasant. It's actually pretty cheese-filled. There's also a whole lot in the middle and end of the book about a journalist whose name I can't remember (Maggie?), and it doesn't say much about her that I don't think she's even mentioned in this Wikipedia write-up . She was about as pathetic as Spider, if that tells you anything. The book was still a fast read, and I did like the first third to half of it. I think I'm mainly giving it three stars because of the potential it had--money!, sex!!, scandal!!!--and not so much what it actually is--some boring characters, also some completely irrelevant characters, a so-so ending.
