Honey and Trixie are concerned about their classmate, Diana Lynch, who's grappling with an awkward problem. Di's parents have recently made a fortune, and her long-lost Uncle Monty has shown up on their doorstep from out of the blue. Now he's a permanent house guest, and an overbearing, controlling nuisance, which compounds the angst Di has been dealing with, coming to terms with her family's sudden wealth. Suspicious circumstances lead Trixie and the Bob Whites to wonder whether Uncle Monty is on the level. If he's not who he claims to be, what are his reasons for sweeping into the Lynch family? And how can they unmask him? * I sense Diana is more prone to melancholia and blues than Trixie and Honey. She's a non-academic, pretty girl, but she's no fool. Di recognises physical beauty for the transient asset it is. Some of her remarks and her general attitude indicates low self-worth and social anxiety. Sometimes she just feels bewildered, as the fringe-dweller who doesn't get the 'in' jokes yet. She craves acceptance and belonging, which she's beginning to get with the Bob Whites. * Jim thinks that Diana has a phobia about being rich. I guess it takes one to know one, since Jim tends to be a bit sensitive about his own reversal of fortune, especially when he's nettled. * Di is simply disillusioned by the pomp and pretentiousness of the new lifestyle that's been thrust upon her. She was never born to it like Honey, so all the showy bull dust is a source of grief and great loss to her. Although Trixie rebukes her for being depressed that she's rich, it's far more complex than simply getting over it. But Trixie doesn't really understand all the identity angst and bereavement involved. It's short-sighted of her to tell Diana how she should feel, however well meant. Trixie can be such a know-it-all at times. * Trixie and Diana both have good reason to envy each other. Each of them has all sorts of things which the other wishes they had. It adds unspoken tension, even though they are genuinely good friends. * Regan is a legend! I wondered why the kids get so anxious he'll resign as Wheeler's groom, just because some opinionated stranger breezes in to give his opinion. But I think I get it. They suppose that Uncle Monty is a horse expert, and fear Regan will quit out of pessimism and insecurity if his methods are questioned. Naw, he's made of far cooler stuff than that. * Trixie is her over-confident, know-it-all self. Tom Delanoy warns her not to go exploring a seamy section of Sleepyside unless her brothers accompany her. So what does Trixie do? She heads straight to dodgy Hawthorne Street alone. What an eye roll. * As far as I see it, Trixie owes Mart big time. He saves her life! (He surely has issues of his own, feeling unconsciously lower in the Bob White hierarchy than Brian and Jim. That's probably one motivation behind his large vocabulary. It's attention seeking behaviour. And in the same vein, wearing his hair in a crew cut rather than letting it curl like Trixie's and Bobby's is all a grasp for individuality.) * Some of the recurring cop characters are introduced for the first time. We get Spider Webster, the popular guy, and Sergeant Molinson, who seems to be just a regular officer at this stage. Spider's crucial role in this story dates the series a bit. It was written back in the time when policemen still stood at intersections, directing traffic on foot. * Wow, Tom and Celia are jolly lucky to be given a free trailer! What an over-sized reward for a very small tip-off. Surely it should be more of a permanent loan than an outright gift. In my opinion, Tom should gradually pay off its new owners. (Can't identify who they are without being too big a plot spoiler.) * We are told the Lynches fire Harrison the butler toward the end of the book. I'm guessing that must change before long, because I clearly remember his presence in later books in this series. * There is perhaps a slight continuity glitch, but nothing major. The story has skipped to late October, yet there's still a feeling the Bob Whites have only just returned to school. The last book ends in late August, when they were discussing their imminent return. Now, this story clearly needs to be late October, to include the infamous Halloween party, but I think it might have worked better without the inclusion of the school assignment about how they spent their holidays. * Bring on more! You can surely see I'm loving all the implicit psychological subtleties motivating the Bob Whites. Who even needs to discuss the actual mysteries.
