Being an advanced-class Twain reader at this stage (blowing on nails and polishing them on the lapel of seasoned reader's jacket in a confident Mark Twain way), I wasn't surprised (like Twain, I'm too cool to show surprise) that, in this take on a fairytale motif, a lot of his usual themes turned up: -the switching of two individuals to opposite ends of the social spectrum as in Pudd'nhead Wilson ; -the irreverence for church and state as in all his books but in Letters from the Earth in particular; -the theme of slavery as in Huckleberry Finn ; -the hilarious doings of an assorted gang as in The Adventures of Tom Sawer and in the short story, A Campaign that Failed ; -the depiction of friendship and love of adventure among boys as in 'Tom Sawyer' and 'Huck Finn'. I wasn't surprised to find shipping references either, as in Life on the Mississippi although no actual ships, steamboats, or large rivers feature in this story—which doesn't at all prevent Mark Twain steering a few in: "Time wore on pleasantly, and likewise smoothly, on the whole. Snags and sandbars grew less and less frequent…" Or this one, referring to the two royal servants who had charge of the pauper-turned-prince although they didn't realise a switch had taken place, and thought he'd somehow become feeble-minded overnight: "They felt much as if they were piloting a great ship through a dangerous channel; they were on the alert constantly, and found their office no child’s play…[eventually realizing] that they themselves were not in the best condition to take their ship back and make their anxious voyage all over again." They, and the rest of the henry viii's court (I was reminded of José Saramago tendency to drop capital letters this week, and he's been whispering irreverence of church and state to me since (even while I've been reading about Mark Twain's irreverence for church and state (which has me wondering if the two authors didn't somehow switch places with each other (or at least chat to each other across the century that separates them)))), are depicted in sumptuous detail, showing how much reading about court life Mark Twain must have done, but also revealing his main agenda: to contrast all that sumptuousness with the pitiful poverty of the world the pauper somehow grew up in—children had a poor chance of surviving such a life. So Mark Twain's story looks at what happens when the pampered prince edward (later king edward the sixth) finds himself down among his people and unable to climb up again because the pauper's borrowed rags, which he put on simply to experience one short adventure beyond the palace walls, prevent anyone from taking his princely claims seriously. That's another sharp point Mark Twain is making about birth and rank: they matter little outside their context, and their context can get on very well without them. Because yes, the pauper gets over his 'feebleness' and uses his native intelligence to solve issues which experienced people of 'nobler' birth and rank have failed to solve, showing himself to be a very noble boy indeed. Another noble person, though without nobleman status, comes to the prince's rescue when his light-hearted adventure outside the walls turns into a nightmare, and the story eventually ends as most fairytales do: happily. Although Mark Twain takes pleasure in informing the reader that king edward the sixth died very young while the fictional pauper lived a long and healthy life! This story could have ended a lot earlier than it did, it has to be said. But we all know Mark Twain liked making up elaborate adventures for boys, and he indulged himself to the full here. But me, I've concluded that I like his nonfiction better than his fiction. ……………………… If Mark Twain were alive, I'd feel obliged to apologize to him for all the parentheses in this piece of writing. He's a bit allergic to parentheses, as I discovered in a little essay of his I read during the week, The Awful German Language , although parentheses aren't found much in German, just parenthetical clauses which he finds 'awful'. Anyway, this is what he says about parentheses: "We have the Parenthesis disease in our literature, too; and one may see cases of it every day in our books and newspapers: but with us it is the mark and sign of an unpracticed writer or a cloudy intellect, whereas with the Germans it is doubtless the mark and sign of a practiced pen and of the presence of that sort of luminous intellectual fog which stands for clearness among these people." Unpracticed and cloudy or luminously foggy, whichever I am, I'll continue using parentheses whenever several strands of thought occur to me within the same sentence. And anyway, I think Mark Twain cheats with parentheses: he uses the emdash a lot, and what is it but a different type of parenthesis...
