“Nonnie was only a name today. A name and an obstacle. A colored girl blocking a white path.” What an eye-opener. Most of us are aware of the racism and the horrific crimes stemming from it that Lillian Smith explores in this novel. But what is so unique, so revealing, is the way, through a sometimes unsettling writing technique involving frequent shifts in point-of-view, she shows us what may have created the behavior we look back and abhor, why it went on so long, and consequently, maybe why so much of it is still going on. She shows us how racist attitudes were promoted, prolonged, and carried forward by families and churches using twisted interpretations of spiritual and familial duty through a vile form of mind control that’s still alive today. “… but eyes were hard and hating as they hunted a black victim to sacrifice to an unknown god of whom they were sore afraid.” Smith wraps all this in a gripping story--a story about the town of Maxwell Georgia, and all the different people in it, Black and White. It’s the 1920’s. Among others, we see a boy--lovingly raised by one Black servant and best friends with another, repeatedly told he must keep Black people in a place lower than his own, confused by his time in war, manipulated by his church leaders, suffocated by his mother. We see a girl, raised to be aware of how to survive amongst White people--not to be, not to do, not to disturb, always to fear; but at the same time encouraged to strive, to believe, to hope for better. How in the world do you hold both of those sides in your mind at the same time? Using what I saw as amazing insight and writing skill, Smith shows us what the people of Maxwell were thinking and maybe even why. Why they carried on the racism. Why they put up with it--how both sides of this racial divide felt they’d been backed into a corner to carry it on and put up with it. Lillian Smith was a White woman from a prominent southern family. You can tell when reading this that she knows. She’s heard these voices, heard these conversations. She was in a unique position to bring it to light, to speak the truth. And amazingly, in 1944, she did just that. Reading this made me think: each of us has things we know, things that we understand but that are often unspoken. Maybe it’s our duty to speak them, to write them, to tell the truths we know. It’s a brave thing Smith did writing this, but it makes you wonder--what could happen if we were all that brave? “In cabin and big kitchen through the hot hours, as irons thumped, thumped, fluting dainty ruffles, and oven doors creaked open and shut for bread to be lifted in and out, voices were whispering, ‘Lawd Jesus … Lawd … Gawd have mercy … Gawd Jesus help us …’”
