I thought that “Tracker” was a good book to read, because it taught me that death is a scary thing to have happen in your life. Especially if it is a family member or close friend that is about to or already died. It also taught me that if you are strong enough you can keep on doing what you have been doing your whole life so far. PLOT: “Tracker” is about a thirteen year old boy, John Borne, who lives with his grandparents. His grandpa is about to die from cancer but he does not seem like he is dying. Everyday John goes out and does chores and his grandpa comes out later when he finishes his coffee. Then deer season comes around and John decides to do the morning chores then hit the woods after when his grandpa comes out. John knows a few different ways to hunt for deer. He tries to sit and wait for a deer and after that he walks through the woods to track down a deer. John finally tracked a deer down and it turned out to be a doe. the doe saw him and ran away so he had to track it down again. Once he tracked the deer down again he trips on a root of a tree and the doe stands up and stares at him ready to die but he can not pull the trigger. The deer is standing there waiting on John to shoot but then John sneezed and the deer ran off again and John decides to track it again. CHARACTERIZATION: John is a farm boy, who lives on his grandparent’s farm. Clay Borne, John’s grandpa, has ruddy cheeks, a head of white hair, clear eyes, and steady hands. They are both main characters. John’s grandma is not talked about a whole lot so she is not a main character. SETTING: “Tracker” has no specific town, city or state but takes place on a farm and in the woods. “Tracker” also has no specific time period but it is probably during the 1950’s because on the farm there were tractors but not very big ones. Theme: The author’s message I think was death is scary to give or take in your life. You can still live your life to the fullest after a family member or close friend dies. I would recommend “Tracker” to seventh grade and above because some of the events that take place in the book are mature. Both males and females would enjoy this book even though its about farming and hunting.
