This book took awhile to grow on me, but by the end I was very attached to the narrator, Nancy Takahiro. I think what intially turned me off was Revoyr's tendency to narrate in real time (e.g. "Then I saw a man walk across the street. He seemed to shuffle for some unknown reason. I kicked a pebble dejectedly while dribbling my basketball. The wind blew through my hair."). That was a bit cumbersome. However, what I appreciate most about this novel is its honesty . Nancy Takahiro is super sympathetic because she's really sensitive and really pretty unsuccessful romantically. She has an incredibly intense crush on this fellow basketball player named Raina, who happens to live with her because Raina's mom and Nancy's dad are together. I dunno, I just really felt for Nancy because her love was unrequited, and although Raina's a wonderful person, she just doesn't feel as strongly about Nancy. It's kind of heartbreaking to watch this played out over the length of a year, but I was pretty game to see things develop, not in a concise, neat way like in movies. The way this book resolved was much more poignant and truthful. By the end Nancy and Raina drift apart--and not necessarily out of animosity. I just liked this book, what can I say? Also, I am very satisfied with Revoyr's take on race. She herself is half Japanese, so it's like, wow, she gets it. Like, Japanese Americans in SoCal--yep--my grandma went to Evergreen SBC down there. I dunno, just the way that she captures Japanese American culture in such a subtle way that only an insider would know how to do it. I noticed all of the subtle details that ring true for myself as a half Japanese American woman. What's fascinating about Nancy Takahiro is that she's a local celebrity because of her basketball skills, yet, she's not really connected with the greater Japanese American community and most of her friends are black and white. It's like, she's a racial outsider with a lot of her friends but also able to adapt to different settings? Like, I feel like that's the blessing and the curse of being a middle class Asian American. Revoyr does well exploring this. She also does a great job of exploring class difference. Nancy lives is a somewhat dangerous neighborhood, almost gets carjacked. Revoyr explores the notions of what it means for young people of promise to "get out" of environments like those (a la Arnold getting of the rez in Alexie's Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian ). Whereas Nancy and Raina can "get out" via full ride college scholarships, their friends with less of a safety net crumble before their eyes. It's pretty tragic, but also needs to be mentioned. The Necessary Hunger is a worthwhile read. I'm so glad someone recommended it to me!
