Another fantastic book. This book contains several stories. It begins with the Survey team that discovers the planet, Pern. They mark this planet as habitable. It goes through what they discover on Pern and that it is much like the older Earth from their histories. Then the story moves into the landing party and how they begin to move onto their new planet. It delves into the first Thread as it falls onto them killing many and destroying so much. You learn more about the dragonets and how they are used to create the Dragons that will protect them all from Thread. Then there is the active volcanoes which require the settlement to evacuate their current location in search of new areas of Pern to populate. You learn of the first Hold that is created. Then as people settle into their lives, they want to yearn to spread out so that they are not as contained and crowded. You glimpse into the history of the new Holds that are created and how and who took the reins to go out and create these. You get to witness the very first hatching of dragons and impressions. As they grow and get stronger they seem to be useless; not what they were created for. Then there emerges a leader who teaches them and makes them strong. He teaches them to fight as a unit. They learn to fly and fight thread and become useful. They become what they were created to be, The Dragonriders of Pern. The stories are exciting. You are seeing the history of Pern and how it began and how it transformed into what you read later. Again, I would not recommend reading in the chronological order that I am reading these books in if you have never read the Pern series. I am really glad I am reading it like this after having read the series several times prior. I am enjoying these early histories more than I did when I read in the suggested order. However, as a new reader of Pern, reading in the suggested order is highly recommended. This is such a fantastic world. It spawned my absolute love of dragons so long ago. I would highly recommend this series to any dragon and fantasy lover.
