In the beginning of the book, two cases are being investigated; the current one appears to be a KKK killing of a Jewish musician who is married to a black jazz singer. The cold case is a 12-year-old girl who went missing mysteriously 7 years ago and will soon come into an inheritance, if she is found. Our spunky female cop, Marty Hopkins, is jonesing to investigate the new murder case but is assigned instead to the cold case, both to appease the rich and politically powerful family involved and because her boss thinks it's a suitable job for a woman. The men in the book are, btw, overwhelmingly old-school. It isn't long before Marty finds that investigating the cold case comes with it's own risks and a clue ties the cold case to the new murder. There were several things about this book that, had I known them ahead of time, might have put it on my AVOID list but, once I got into it, somehow I was absolutely compelled to keep reading (hence the 4th star). I generally avoid mysterious killers who give themselves super-hero names and who are, or at least think they are, much smarter than the cops. If, in addition to that, the killer had turned out to be a continuing character and not solved by the end of the book I would have put this author on my DNR list. College professors Wolfe and Hart were both so incredibly annoying that I'm surprised no one shot them "by accident." And poor Deputy Hopkin's little gray cells seemed to hop around like jumping beans. She was so easily distracted by -- well, just about anything. Show her an interesting rock or "Oh, look, there's a squirrel" and she was off the trail of the killer. On the plus side, how many mysteries are set in Indiana? Although some Hoosiers may not be flattered. Indiana as it appears in this book is only a safe place to live, work, and play if you are a native-born white Christian. If you are not a cave enthusiast, at least one chapter of the book may leave you feeling a little claustrophobic, but limestone is my favorite rock and I was delighted to see it prominently featured in the book even if it meant a little spelunking.
