When Michael Alexander Eisner saw the cover copy on this paperback edition of The Crusader , he must have grimaced because it refers to a protagonist who leaves “Spain” in the 13th century. Naturally, the Iberian Peninsula of the 13th century was no more a country called “Spain” than the European Community is a country called “Europe” or the “Holy Roman Empire” was “Roman.” Iberia, as is well-presented in The Crusader , was a loose alliance of so-called Christian kingdoms and, at that point in time, there wasn’t even a dominant “Spanish” dialect. Eisner is quite correct to portray this because his “heroes” from Aragon and Barcelona do not speak the dialect of Castile that we generally associate with “Spanish.” The Crusader is a story framed by a unique type of exorcism. It is not the type of exorcism associated with this era where the victim is usually “saved” by being forced to face a righteous death. Rather, it is a type of exorcism more closely associated with the client-centered therapy of the late 20th century. Instead of calling it counseling (where the counselor asks questions to help the counselee solve her or his own problems), it is called confession (where, in this case, the confessor is trying to help the parishioner map out her/his own soul). I enjoyed this structure, particularly because the interludes and interruptions where the reader is allowed inside the head of the confessor/exorcist allow glimpses of the very human (dare we say “carnal”) desires that can even fill the mind of a so-called godly person. No, don’t mistake me and think that this is yet another discourse on priestly sexual abuse. It doesn’t deal with sexual issues with regard to the confessor, but it deals very much with ambition, self-interest, compromise, and doubt—important aspects for everyone. Another very welcome aspect of The Crusader was the fact that it demonstrated how that the history as told by the victor may actually be a convenient alibi for horrible atrocities or as a cover-up for compromise and cowardice. Readers looking for the equivalent of an action-movie will be disappointed in the lack of action/combat sequences in this narrative, but I can assert that the ones the author chose to describe are vivid (at times, gory) and necessary in terms of helping us understand the nature of war and what it does to those who participate in it. I found myself particularly fascinated by the taking of the Castle of Toron (in what is now Lebanon) and the detailed sortie against a catapult during the siege at Krak des Chevaliers. All of these were particularly well-done. Finally, I feel like the author did a great job of balancing blame for atrocities on both sides. I was fascinated by the heart-breaking story of the Templars who negotiated in good faith with the Muslims who, in turn, slaughtered the caravan [This is not part of the main story, so I’m not counting this as a spoiler.], even as I was horrified at the alleged Christian commander who slaughtered women and children with no remorse, long after the battle was over. Throughout the book, the gritty and realistic feeling was that I was there as a sickened observer in many of the “Crusader” battles I had only read summaries of in the history texts. This book will be highly recommended to my history students when we cover Medieval Iberia.
