Have set a goal to read every selection in this tome! I might be a glutton for punishment, but I want to finish in one year or less. On page 135. Have found good stuff in here that I wasn't required to read before. Love the biting tribute to William the Conqueror after his death. Also, enjoyed some of the ancient poetry. Have underlined quite a few lines, words, phrases, etc. Only a million pages to go. Up to page 255...starting up Chaucer has been a little bit rough. Oh Lord, I haven't even started work yet this fall. This is not good...maybe I'll have to read on my prep hour??? Damn that middle-English. At page 290...having to teach 9th grade English and attempting to read this is kicking my butt. Not so much the teaching, but the hours of grading horrible writing, but onto Piers Plowman (sp?)right now. Again that middle-English! Am questioning myself and my insane goal right now. Even freaking Milton will be a nice break from middle-English. I'm afraid to even look and see what unknown treasure/horror is coming my way in volume B. sigh Piers Plowman...Better than expected. Have completely lost track of what page I am on at this point in time. Briefly looked ahead to volume B, and I discovered that will probably be slow slogging as well. The only thing that will save me is previous reading of both King Lear and 12th Night. Sonnet knowledge doesn't hurt either. Although, I am a leary of reading entire Faerie Queen. Had to read parts for another class, but the whole thing. Back to Piers, reading plays is a lot harder for me than I was expecting. Still far more enjoyable than anticipated. So guess that is good. Trucking along...looking forward to jury duty next week. Will help me advance to at least page 400! Got called into jury...couldn't read a single page, had to listen to attorneys in suits talking. Am currently on page 5?? something...trucking through it now. I realized that I have only something like six months and over 2,000 pages! I am not watching any TV until this thing gets done. Why am I obsessing? A normal person could just put this down and walk away, but then I would wonder could I do this? Okay!!! Finally finished. I seriously have been reading this every spare moment I could. Like sitting at red lights kind of spare moments. I've been lugging the damn thing everywhere! Totally worth it though. Reread some great stuff and found some cool new texts. If you do this, word of advice...get through the old English and early middle English as quickly as possible. It speeds up once past Green Knight. Wouldn't say I highly recommend undertaking this project, but I wouldn't try to talk someone out of it either.
