I can’t believe the lack of enthusiasm in the comments/reviews!! Melville is one of the USA’s greatest writers. Here are my thoughts on "Bartleby the Scrivener" and "Billy Budd" in this collection of Melville stories. The story in Bartleby is as much a riddle as the character of the same name. IMO the story is about the narrator faced with a human conundrum who is both autonomous, albeit unconventionally and dangerously, and helpless and, yet, aggressive. The narrator goes through levels of reaction to Bartleby. At first, there is frustration and anger, then confusion, then escape, then deep compassion. Bartleby is a moral problem writ large: What do we do with societal issues that are beyond the ability or power of one man (the narrator) to address? In the story, the narrator meets this problem not in the form of my question just stated, but in the form of a person. So, what does Melville, who is an immensely moral writer, think about the problem. In the story of Bartleby, he is pessimistic. Bartleby leaves the scene. He makes enough of an impression on the narrator that the narrator tells his story. But that's all. "Billy Budd" is a very painful story. The pain it caused me, and I think also causes most other readers, is due to the helpless rightness or goodness or defenselessness of Billy who is so beautiful, simple, and childlike. Billy cannot even read. Billy attracts the attention of Claggert, a petty officer on the warship on which both sail. Claggert envies Billy’s attractive purity and either is naturally depraved and evil (my opinion) or his envy corrupts. Whatever the reason, he wants to destroy Billy who naturally has no inkling of Claggert’s nature. Melville is studying the problem whether creation has meaning. He uses Billy, Claggert, and Vere, and, to a degree, the three members of the drumhead court. Billy is as good as good can be, the evil is as natural and hypocritical as the historical Titus Oates to whom Melville compares Claggert (p. 29). When dispute arises as between Good and Evil, Melville inserts a human mechanism -- the Law. The irony is that the Law and its application by the persuasion of Captain Vere lead inevitably to a correct, yet immoral conclusion. Thus, our human solution fails. The only solace is the ironic death of Claggert, which satisfies the reader's urge for vengeance, but his death, in a double irony, leads to the achievement of his goal of harming Billy. Claggert’s death and the brief glorification of Billy's body by the Morning sun are not cosmic or even meaningful events. The story closes with dramatic and false newspaper clipping. Billy Budd is a story of such moral bleakness that it is no wonder it was found in Melville's desk and published only in the 1920s long after Melville's death. There is one positive factor, however, that redeems the bleakness. The reader, like Vere and the drumhead court, are moved and pained by the sense that a wrong has been committed. This is an emotional and inarticulate argument, as inarticulate as Vere’s dying words, for some kind of human solidarity and meaning The story is a masterpiece of literature. Melville provides information by which the reader has license to go outside the story to long for alternate endings. The scene, the black and white characterization, the context are so well-drawn even though one suspects the story verges on allegory. Once again, as in Moby Dick, Melville tells the story with long asides that serve in the end to build an entire literary world for the characters. Once again, Melville displays the most amazingly beautiful, though remote, periodic prose of a complexity that requires the reader to stay slow. I suspect that Melville, as a boy, was a superior student of Latin for his sentences and diction have the same clarity, pointedness, and length as in Latin's great rhetorical writers.
