Mallory and the Mystery Diary Stacey has moved back to Stoneybrooke and Mrs. Pike sends Mal over with a casserole. Claudia is there and Mrs. McGill sent them all to put some boxes in the attic. It’s there they find a bunch of antique objects and a beautiful (locked) trunk. Mrs. McGill wants to throw it away because it’s taking up space, but Claudia and Mallory object. Mallory ends up getting the trunk and taking it home. Since Buddy is having trouble reading, Dawn offers Mrs. Barrette one of the BSC members to tutor him. The triplets get the trunk open and inside are vintage lace clothes, hats, broaches, a blank book with pressed flowers, and a journal that belonged to a 12-year-old girl named Sophie in the 1800. Mal saves the journal for later, thinking that she hopes she can get Buddy as interested in reading as she is (she’ll be the one tutoring him). At the first session, Buddy keeps trying to stall Mallory. She makes up a game using the flashcards that whatever words he gets right he gives 1 minute of free time. He has trouble sounding out words and his sister can read better than him (She’s five. He’s eight). Mallory reads some more of the diary and finds out Sophie was very social and was in love with a boy named Paul. Sophie’s mother gives birth to a boy Edgar but dies afterward. The Grandfather comes into a lot of money but cuts off Sophie, her brother, and her father Jared because Jared is has a dark past. The Grandfather (Hickman) accuses Jared of stealing a valuable painting. Sophie is angry and didn’t think it was her dad. Vanessa and Mal talk about it and wonder if Sophie and Jared’s spirits still haunt the house and that’s why over the years the house has had such a large turn over. (Why would they haunt *this* house? Grampa Hickman, she said lived in a mansion? They’ve already said Stacey’s house isn’t that.) Kristy, Karen, Emily, Andrew, and David Michelle spent the afternoon exploring the fourth-floor attic and find what they think is Old Ben Brewer’s furniture and some old antique toys. (I’m not sure why this chapter was even added). At the next meeting they all throw around theories. Kristy wonders if Sophie’s grandfather Old Hickory (an old recluse who when he died left his nephew a fortune and told him not to give him a grave but he did anyway. Now his spirit haunts the cemetery). Dawn wonders if Jared is *the* Jared that haunts her secret passage. Then they say Sophie or Edgar could have stolen the painting, but Mallory discredits this theory because Sophie would have used the diary to confess not lie. Mal comes up with the brilliant idea to make reading fun for Buddy by bringing Archie comics and then having them make their own. Mallory thinks to try a séance to contact Sophie or Jared. But Madame Kristine is definitely no Manfred Bernardo. Charlotte teaches Stacey a lesson through a story that appears to be about one thing, but the pictures show something else that things aren’t always what they seem (people either but that’s another lesson). Mallory lets Buddy solve some Encyclopedia Brown mysteries and he’s good at it. So she tells him about the diary and they go over to her house. Buddy while looking for clues in the trunk discovers a secret compartment and in it is a confession from Old Hickory saying that he had the painting painted over and just let everyone believe Jared did it. He wrote the confession knowing one day someone would know the truth. Buddy asks how the trunk got to Stacey’s and Mal said maybe the nephew moved somethings from Hickory’s place to Sophie’s (Hickory owned both houses). Then Buddy says maybe the painting is still there. And it is, Mal finds a painting of ships with a ring showing. Stacey and her mom decide to hang it over the mantle. And Buddy he goes on to the middle reading level -the Robins- and he reads a chapter book (The Hardy Boys) with few mistakes. So Mal has the idea to take some of the treasury money and buy him a reward (the book the GOOPS) which I never heard of. My Thoughts: I am jealous! Stacey has a cool attic. Kristy has a cool attic. Attics have always been a fascination of mine because in stories and television shows the coolest and weirdest things are found in attics (like glowing Books of Shadows). I once had a friend whose bedroom was in the attic and we use to have sleepovers. Do you know what’s in our attic? Installation vents. Not very interesting. That and crazy squirrels that get a kick out of running back and forth (and also sounding like they’re tussling or oh GAWD I don’t wanna think of the alternative). Mal’s idea of bringing comics to read to show Buddy how fun reading is and then drawing their own comics was a GREAT idea! I use to love the Betty and Veronica comics. They’re still on my reading list and I’ve found quite a bunch of them on a favorite site of mine that has a the most MASSIVE selection of comics you will ever see! However, a little weird to wonder if an 8-year-old is in love with you and then think that wouldn’t be so bad. Uh YES, it would! I definitely have to give Mal points in this because the séance was also another cool idea! Not that I’d really know what to say if one of my grandparents or the spirits of my cousin’s twins started speaking to me through a host’s body (and I knew the person). But I really liked the mystery and it’s held up over the years. I remember how it was like OOO when I first found out what happened to the painting. For some reason, I even liked the cover of this one. Everything tied up nicely. I’m a HUGE reader so I was very happy that this one was extremely reading-related. Then I also liked diaries. I kept quite a few when I was twelve and thirteen and still have them believe it or not. Rating: 8
