What if James Bond were someone's grandma? Unexpected. I thought this would be a bit fluffy, and it was . But it also went a bit darker than I thought a book written in the late 60s about a widowed grandmother would go. It starts with Mrs. Pollifax recalling a feeling of uselessness so deep that she almost stepped off the roof of her apartment building. Oh. Yeah. That's not good. So it occurs to her that if she has nothing left to lose, she might as well shoot for the stars and pursue her girlhood dream of being a spy. I've often thought I'd become a P.I. or a bounty hunter after all the kids get gone. No one would see my shit coming... And with that in mind, she heads down to the local CIA office and tells them she wants a job. Due to a mix-up, she's brought on board as a courier. All she has to do is go on vacation in Mexico, act like a normal tourist, and then go to a bookshop and ask the owner for a certain book. She then comes home with said book. The end. But that would make for a terrible story! In this one, spoilery things happen, and she ends up trapped in an Albanian prison. With her is another spy who ends up badly beaten after interrogation and with a broken leg after a failed attempt to kill himself by jumping off a cliff. She has no training, no real skills, and no hope that anyone is coming to save them. But she does have a set of cards to play Solitare with and a big purse. One thing I do think readers should be aware of going in is that this is not an action-packed spy thriller. It actually does have a lot in common with Bond books, though, in that a bit of luck and a lot of determination not to die play a big part in the plot. And while Bond has a smarmy type of sex appeal, Mrs. Pollifax has kick-ass people skills. Plus, you know she makes it because there are 14 books in Mrs. Pollifax's series. I don't know that I'll read any more of these because spy stories just aren't my jam. But I'm not sorry that I read this one, either. Recommended for fans of your grandmother's CIA.
