While the tale here concerns the 'Jersey Devil', do not expect a typical creature feature; in fact, the 'creature' takes second billing to the moody, atmospheric Pine Barrens themselves. People tend to think of backwoods Virginia or such for isolated poor communities, but Dunbar presents perhaps an even more bleak account of communities in the Barrens. The Pine Barrens. A large swath of boggy land that immigrants colonized back in the 17th century, but the farmland is poor, 'bog iron' a failing industry, and now, tiny, isolated and very poor communities nestle deep in the Barrens, inbreeding and such. Much of the economy is underground, with moonshiners supplying the hootch and various welfare programs the bedrock of incomes. Our lead, Athena, grew up in NYC or thereabouts, largely raised by her granny. While attending college in the city, she ran into (literally) her future husband in a park in NYC while he was on leave from Fort Dix. She fell for the guy and moved with him back to his old homestead in the Pines. Athena's husband was one of the few 'Pineys' who decided to make something of himself, joining the military to bootstrap a new life. Unfortunately, he died, leaving Athena, along with her 'challenged' son, almost penniless, but with a tumbledown old house deep in the Pines. Athena works on the local volunteer ambulance service, serving the 'Piney's, as most hospitals and such just do not go there. We learn of her trials and tribulations, for she has a few strikes against her, at least for the Pineys. First, she is a black woman, and racism is alive and well there. Secondly, she 'sees herself as better' than the locals. The locals may have tolerated her when her husband was alive, but after that? Targeted harassment, like breaking the windows on her house. So now, several years after her husband's death, she lives with her disabled son in a boarded up (largely), falling down house, with only her sister in law as something of friend, who also largely takes care of her soon Matty. Dunbar refuses to bow to typical creature feature tropes, and while we are treated to some strange murders deep in the pines (campers, etc.), the creature itself remains understated, as does the carnage. What is this creature? Local lore has mention of it for centuries, but lets just say the accounts are not exactly trustworthy and vary tremendously. So, while a creature feature at heart, the story really focuses upon the saga of Athena. I loved the atmosphere and the inherent mystery of the Devil, but again, do not expect a typical slasher. 3.5, rounding down as the denouement to the tale I thought was lacking, and left too many strings untied.
