Sartre was - at the outset of his career, as well as at its end - a man without hope. Like so many socially-minded intellectuals of a practical cast in mid-century, Jean-Paul Sartre leaned seriously toward socialism, Marxism and even, briefly, communism. But practical people refuse not to act. And Sartre had few illusions, which made practical action for a better world imperative. And the inevitable disillusionment followed... That is why Les Mots, The Words, seems so sad to us now. Disillusioned and prematurely aged by the beginnings of a long series of strokes, Sartre could no longer act confidently or decisively. And without hope in his own - and mankind's - future, life was brutal. Sartre always had seen the end of his life as an impassable obstacle to self-fulfillment, the dark side of the dichotomy Being/Nothingness. For as proof of the perceived utter futility of the human predicament, the climax of his philosophical magnum opus, l’Être et le Néant states baldly, "Man is a hopeless passion." But at about the same time as that work, across the Channel, as Sartre’s discouraging words rallied France to alternative political action, T. S Eliot was urging in wartime London: Descend lower, descend only Into the world of perpetual solitude, World not world, but that which is not world, Internal darkness…. Had Sartre read, and heeded Eliot’s words he might have become a different person, in touch with his deepest emotions. But Sartre had already achieved recognition and notoriety at a very young age. So he simply became his persona. Clinical, aloof and detached - Cool. Sartre was cool when James Dean was a toddler. He thus inspired generations of the with-it and hip youngsters of the fifties, sixties and seventies. He assumed the role of philosopher without Knowing Himself - and thus mocked Socrates. Was that cool? Later books of his like this one find Sartre trying to play catch-up on that count. But he was a Johnny-Come-Lately to the game of self-knowledge. To know yourself you have to BE yourself. Sartre was a Matchstick Man. He utterly lacked everyday warmth, poor soul! But - in the darkness of postwar Britain, the best strategy for T.S. Eliot was to accept so many great losses in a spirit of faithful brokenness, admitting personal frailties before God, so that: the Darkness will become the Light. For Eliot followed the dictum of the cryptic Presocratic, Heraklitos: ‘The way up IS the way down.’ Hope from the ashes of hope. For through the darkness of Faith there comes the great joy of a New Day. As it came for Eliot, with a new marriage made in Heaven, and a joyous and dignified summation to his life. *** In the end, Sartre finished his life as he had begun his early years, WITHOUT hope. But as he looked back on his life in this at times light and charmingly whimsical book, he saw many lost childhood memories. But they were all mixed with the feeling that his life was slowly ebbing away without purpose or meaning. At least he had his many friends and the company of de Beauvoir. But uncompromising till the end, he rejected the ordinary hope that makes life bearable for the rest of us, because he rejected himself. In spite of this, in Les Mots we see Sartre opening up about his personal space for the first time - which he was to continue obliquely in his great study of Flaubert - l’Idiot de la Famille - the Family Idiot. For now he was no longer an untouchable and lapidary world icon. His disguise had worn too thin... Now he was just frail and human like us. But worn out by his despair. You know, there IS hope available even for Postmoderns like Sartre, and us. Postmodern branches, as Messrs Kierkegaard, Barth and Kung have proven, can be grafted easily and well onto Christian roots. To find out How to do this, all we have to to is Read their books - And Heed them well.
