Generally, I am somewhat skeptical when an author tries to inject him or herself into the narrative of the history or biography that they are writing about, unless it is their own of course. If done sparingly, I think it can help augment what the author is attempting to convey. In his book about George Washington and his enslaves persons, Henry Wiencek did this in multiple places: visiting Washington's birthplace, visiting Mount Vernon to learn about the lives of the enslaved people (this in itself is not bad - in fact I think it would be required research for a book on this topic), and attending a mock slave auction in Williamsburg. Some of this worked, but in totality the author kept popping up in what should be a story that takes place almost exclusively in the 18th century. Too much time was spent early on describing Washington's birthplace. Wiencek describes his meeting with the current owners of the home, and what they knew of Washington. I thought this was unnecessary and really did not add to the story of Washington's actions and thoughts towards slavery. I don't care what the house looks like now, nor what Washington's heirs several generations removed from him have to say. Wiencek's trip to Williamsburg (which was the Virginia capitol at the time that Washington was a member of the House of Burgesses, and thus Washington spent a considerable amount of time there) was even more unnecessary. While the town apparently has gone to great lengths to replicate how it appeared in colonial times, the bottom line is that Wiencek went to see it around the turn of the 20th into the 21st century. Even with extreme historical accuracy, it is not going to adequately simulate how an enslaved person thought nor how white slaveowners behaved. Even with people acting in costume and in period, as Wiencek notes, for the simulated slave auction, that is far different than someone being paraded out onto a block of wood in front of a crowd of white men and bid on. Wiencek does note that even this does not come close to approximating what that person could possibly have been feeling. My issue with this is that I don't think it added to the book. And, it gets away from Washington. Jaunts like this sometimes made Washington appear as a secondary character in the narrative. Where this approach did work is when Wiencek visits Mount Vernon and tries as best as possible to gleam some understanding of what an average day would have been like amongst the enslaved population there. He takes pains to learn what the 18th century farming tools were and how to use them, and quickly understands just how hard, monotonous, and unrewarding the work was. And what might be the worst thing of all: the lack of hope for those people. There was no end. They toiled for Washington (or whoever the owner was) until they died. Death was the only reason, barring some incapacitating physical injury or disability. How does one survive with no hope? Very late in the book, Wiencek makes an unproveable and, at least to me, surprising statement: "Washington was not a racist: he did not believe that the slaves were inherently inferior people;" (page 356). How can he - or anyone - make such a definitive statement? Is he saying that, since Washington apparently behaved more humanely towards the people that he owned than most other slave owners did at that time, that this makes him not a racist? The man owned black people, purely because of their skin color and that the state of Virginia allowed it! I do want to say that I believe there are degrees of racism. There are folks who are virulent racists, who physically and verbally attack those of a different skin color. And there are many who would never engage in such acts, yet harbor racial prejudices and exhibit racial tendencies. I am not saying that Washington was some evil, cruel man who got joy out of beating black people. No. He wasn't. In fact, when you compare him to even other Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson and Patrick Henry, he comes off looking almost enlightened in a way. Actually, had Wiencek went into a deep comparison and contrasting of Washington and Jefferson, I think that would have been a fine addition to the book. Wiencek, while at times a bit more favorable to Washington than I think he need have been, is not afraid to call him out for owning people, for operating a slave lottery, and for trying - while President - illegal means to bring back runaway slave Ona Judge. There are also conflicting accounts of how Washington treated them, with many accounts saying he was a better "master" than almost anyone else, while some depicted a less rosy picture. Wiencek is at his best when showing Washington's evolution of thought on slavery: going from breaking up families and trying to make injured slaves work, to being against the breaking up of any family, to trying to make end-runs around his wife Martha's family as they did not care what happened to the slaves so long as they profited by them, to freeing all of his slaves in his own will and searching for ways to move towards abolition. I believe that Washington was a strongly moral man who had a great sense of right and wrong, and realized that slavery was inherently wrong and that he had a moral responsibility to try to rectify what little he could. The steps that Washington took (which today obviously look wholly inadequate) were nonetheless radical for 1790s Virginia. I do like that Wiencek tries to keep the context and analysis of Washington confined to his own time, while also pointing out how hideous all of this was. Viewed from 1795 Virginia, Washington looks fairly benign and ahead of his time. Viewed from 1795 Pennsylvania, Washington looks like a typical Virginia slaveowner who relies on his slaves to bring him profits. Viewed from today, Washington looks horrible: a person who owned other people and, for at least the early part of his life, had little scruples about how he treated them or what happened to them. Perhaps, all three views are valid and, combined, provide a reasoned picture of Washington. Grade: B
