Before I say anything at all, I'm going to add two quotes that really stuck out to me and boil down Dennis Cooper's fiction to its essentials. I guess you either fetishize fucked up young guys or you don't. [...] And now that I'm fine, loneliness is far too heavy and painful a state to relive. Still, I'm pretty sure it's the truth. I'm completely alone. Not to raise my solitude over anyone else's. It's just scary sometimes. That's all I can say about that. Now, let's talk about Guide ! Unlike the rest of the books in this cycle, Guide feels a lot closer to reality than the rest of the books. It's a direct continuation of Frisk , where we follow Mr. Serial Killer, Dennis Cooper himself into another life. Another life where he doesn't live in his fantasy as much as he did in Frisk , but where he spends his time with people who either understand him or never will, and he prefers it to be the latter. Because of this, as well as the fact that George Miles is a real person, I'd say this book is at least semi-autobiographical. If I had to talk about the story, simply put, it's a book full of yearning and here violence is but a reflection of that yearning and an attempt at escape from it (but, as you can guess, he can't). What I like about it is that while there is no clear cut between what's fiction and what's reality, in the beginning of the book you get warned that Dennis is narrating and writing this. And not just this - there's a few hints scattered across the book where he tells you this is his desperate attempt at changing reality, at twisting it into what he wished it would've been. That he wished he wasn't just this lonely person, that he wished his violent urges meant anything but what they did (which is to say, that his need to love and be loved had gotten the best of him). In my humble opinion, it's definitely one of the great examples of how queer people feel about their love and the display of it - so to say, a pure, raw, vicious feeling that can only hurt both of the sides involved, and is better left hidden and unspoken. I always love media that portrays it like this, so it's needless to say this is one of my books of the year. Thank you Mr. Cooper, very cool!
