Friends. . . will you permit me to share with you the letter that I wished I'd have written to Ursula Le Guin? A letter that is so long overdue? If so, I submit it to you: Dear Ms. Le Guin, When I was a girl, in the very last week of the fifth grade, our class's most popular girl decided to take me on as a project. She thought I was embarrassingly innocent and incredibly boring, what with my poetry journal, my mystery novels and my two South American friends who could barely speak English. She thought these were deficits, thought I was a candidate for a make-over. With her influence and charisma, I was soon swept away from everything I loved and wanted to be. ( To light a candle is to cast a shadow ). My sixth grade year became a borderline nightmare of being mixed up with a fast pack of mean girls, led by this Queen Bee, who shoplifted from the mall and permitted heavy petting from boys and put her parents' Kahlua in our glasses and demanded we drink it. The week before seventh grade began, I severed all ties with this friend pack. ( The truth is that as a man's real power grows and his knowledge widens, ever the way he can follow grows narrower: until at last he chooses nothing, but does only and wholly what he must do. . . ). These girls took their revenge on me, and spread terrible rumors about me, too, but as I entered the seventh grade, I thanked God for the great stroke of luck that NOT ONE of these girls were in class with me ( He who throws away his power is filled sometimes with a far greater power ). On the very first day of school, a new girl reached out to me in friendship, and introduced herself as someone who had “just moved from California and had just buried a dog named Ged.” When I asked this girl (who went on to be my best friend for the next decade of my life) why she had named her dog Ged, she looked at me, horrified. She invited me to her house the next weekend and with great pride, her stepfather presented me with your EarthSea trilogy, the three original books that still sit on my bookshelves to this day. ( The hero is on the “right” side and therefore will win ). It turns out, this book became the most influential one of my life. I not only understood, quickly, why my new friend had once had a beloved dog named Ged; I understood that a person could, indeed, build an entire world with one thing: their imagination. I was a poet and a storyteller, but I did not truly understand, until I read this book, the power of the artist to elevate the human experience when they follow their truth with integrity. I finally had the great privilege this week to read this book aloud to my youngest child, my 13-year-old. Would you believe it. . . when I read the part of the story to my daughter when Ged is stuck in the tower with Serret (when he realizes it is she who has appeared to his mind in raven form), some twenty or so ravens suddenly landed in the yard around us? Those who doubt magic will never believe me, but I know you always understood that magic creates more of the same, and you will also understand that I do not lie. When those ravens landed in the yard, I sat there, enchanted, marveling at the magic of the world you once created, and how the old magic, of reading, could still summon you, like a spell. Ms. Le Guin, I hope that, wherever you are now, you are surrounded by magic.
