This was my first sampling of Alan Dean Foster, and I have to say, I've never encountered such overwhelmingly uninteresting writing (Yarbro comes close, but she isn't quite this bad). I actually put the book down mid-sentence. I only forced myself to get back to it several weeks later because it was a dam in the flow of my reading (I don't DNF books, and I only read one at a time). There was nothing here for me. (Alan Dean Foster seems to think very highly of Poul Anderson's writing, which I can't stand, so perhaps I should have known roughly what to expect.) The cover art (which I don't care for) has nothing to do with any of the 15 stories contained in this volume. One thing I consistently disliked about his stories was how he tries to paint an elaborate description of his characters, and in so doing, actually fails to get his vision across to the reader (at least this reader). Every time. On a similar note, he goes off on these unfortunate tangents that you can tell he thinks are clever, but they most certainly are not. An example of this would be in the title story: Mr. Foster incorrectly uses the term "hair of the dog [that bit you]." He then proceeds to expand on that, and it's just painful to sit through. In the same story, he refers to (what I can only guess are) a woman's breasts as "cumulus clouds" (she's a weatherwoman). I don't know how to properly express my distaste for this author's work, but some words that come to mind are: uninteresting, mediocre, immature/juvenile, predictable, vague, and pointless. Oh, and I think some of these stories are possibly meant to be horror but aren't remotely horrific. They're just plain silly (and not pleasantly so). ... "Operator Assisted Calls Are Charged at a Higher Rate" 5/10 ... "The Metrognome" 4/10 The concept wasn't the worst, but there are so many things wrong with the writing. The ending angered me. - Also, "Don't swear. Gee, that fantastic! Isn't that fantastic, Bill?" (What?!) ... "Thrust" 1/10 I hate sex (especially sex of this nature). It's a dumb story, even if you don't. ... "Pipe Dream" 4/10 This is just stupid. ... "Mother Thunder" 5/10 A messy attempt at explaining the history of Machu Picchu. ... "The Chair" (with Jane Cozart) 5/10 This one isn't terrible, but it's nothing special, either. Like a forgettable episode of "The Twilight Zone." ... "The Inheritance" 4/10 Is this supposed to be "horror"? "Humor"? What's the point of writing about despicable characters like these? In fact, most of his characters are unlikable, at best. It would be one thing if the stories were interesting, but they aren't. His writing is already bad, and his stories are uninteresting. Making such characters the main focus of his stories only serves to compound things. ... "Running" 5/10 A relatively unique setting, at least. ... "Unamusing" 4/10 Tell me about it. ... "The Thunderer" 4/10 ... "Pleistosport" 4/10 ... "Norg Gleeble Gop" 4/10 ... "Batrachian" 4/10 It was refreshing to find a character with a view of parties (and drinking) reflecting my own: "I don't like them... The people are noisy, they drink too much, and then they get silly and out of sorts. You can't learn anything from people in that state. They all act like preadolescents." But the story is still bad. ... "The Tessellated Tetrahexahedral Yellow Rose of Texas" 4/10 Oddly enough, one scene here plays out somewhat exactly like the briefing scene between General Roberts and Colonel Edwards in "Plan 9 from Outer Space" (c. 1959). In this case, it's a General interviewing a Major. He asks the Major: "Joe, do you believe in flying saucers, UFOs, that sort of thing?" After getting the answer he wants, the General directs the Major's attention to the map on the wall of his office, etc. Anyway, it was surreal. The dialogue isn't much better than that of "Plan 9." - The author uses the word "inlaid" twice in one sentence! "Many of those surfaces appeared to be inlaid with tiny squares and other geometric shapes that glowed like inlaid lights." - One character says: "Just because we got television out here doesn't mean we're ignorant, honey." ( Huh?! I think they meant to say: "Just because we don't got television out here...") ... "Collectible" 4/10 I honestly have no idea what this story is supposed to be about (beyond a young woman's obsession with dragons). The ending is incredibly vague. Am I to assume Pearl was merely delusional and that she unintentionally lit her bed on fire with a cigarette? If so, what's the point? Also, she doesn't seem "only seventeen." She's written like she's at least in her 30s. (Also, the author comes across as racist in the way he refers to one man on the bus.) ... Show more
