It took me a while to fully connect with Buchi Emecheta’s novel but once I did I couldn’t put it down. It marks a move away from her earlier semi-autobiographical work, charting instead the rapid shifts taking place in Nigerian society during the first half of the twentieth century, probing their devastating consequences for many Nigerian women, particularly wives and mothers. Emecheta tells her story through the experiences of Nnu Ego, an Ibo (Igbo) woman born in the age of “the white man” who’s forced to leave her rural home to marry a man she’s never met. Nnu winds up in Lagos, a British colony where her family are dependent for their livelihood on the whims of their colonisers. Brought up to believe that motherhood’s the highest honour women can hope for, Nnu pins everything on having children who'll be the pride of her old age, but as time passes her society changes beyond recognition and her dreams for her future fade away. It's a meticulously detailed, searing piece, first published in 1979 it’s also an excellent example of emerging Black feminist writing that both affirmed and fiercely challenged the assumptions of mainstream, white feminism. Through the small tragedies faced by her creation Nnu, Emecheta reflects on questions of colonialism, patriarchy and generational strife, and what it might feel like to be a woman whose values and traditions are slowly being destroyed. Emecheta’s narrative’s also a fascinating exploration of the tension between Western individualism and societies in which connection and community were once key to survival. A clash of cultures that, for Nnu, results in everything falling apart, leaving her to deal with profound loss, the loss of familial networks through which women like her gained their sense of worth and belonging, the loss of rituals of motherhood and mourning that once rooted her identity and sustained her through harsh times. Emecheta’s a great storyteller with a disarmingly direct style. She draws extensively on Nigerian oral traditions, and carefully links her narrative to earlier work by African women like Flora Nwapa whose novel Efuru provided Emecheta with her deeply ironic title. One of the most acclaimed Black writers of her era, Emecheta was included on Granta’s list of best British novelists and features as one of the BBC’s "women who changed the world", yet her writing is comparatively – unjustly - neglected, I hope the continuing republication of her work by Penguin opens up the new and wider audiences she richly deserves. Thanks to Netgalley and Penguin Modern Classics for an ARC
