2022 Re-Read I suspect Freddy's love language is gift-giving and that might explain a good part of his charm. 2020 Re-Read First, "ditto" my 2018 analysis of Freddy. I positively adore him. Second, I just adore this book. I've read it I-don't-know-how-many times over the last 9 years and it still leaves me in fits of giggles. That is, I think, part of the genius of Heyer. No matter how many times you read her dialogue, it is still genuinely funny. While she didn't write "classic novels" in the sense that you read her books to to learn about human character (though arguably you could), they are timeless gems that shine with good humor and clean romance. I gain more from every read! 2018 Re-Read Y'ALL, by strange coincidence, I finished re-reading this one 7 years to the day since I first read it. 7 years! That explains a lot. For example, what the heck is up with my 2011 Review? Did I think throwing in a French phrase would made me sound classier? Probably, actually. High school Amy had weird hobbies. (Learning French was not one of them, however, and it shows.) I've been binge-re-reading Georgette Heyer novels over the past few days which is a sure sign I'm stressed. I promise to take a break. At the same time, I am so glad I re-read Cotillion . (Though have I ever regretted re-reading a Heyer novel?) Initially it disappointed me. I almost didn't keep reading. I remembered the story as being my Third Favorite behind The Grand Sophy and Frederica but I couldn't for the life of me remember why. Freddy comes across as dandified and airheaded. 7 years and multiple reads later, I find still his avoidance of pronouns crazy irritating. I also found Kitty to be rather clueless and along the lines of Heyer's other Young Females...a comparison I had not previously drawn. Yet I did keep reading and I found the book even more enjoyable then I remembered. This is your typical Heyer plot, no doubt about it, but Freddy...Freddy remains unique among the Heyer Heroes. The thing is, Heyer's Heroes are charming. They dress fashionably, sport admirably, drive splendidly, and carry themselves with an air of hauteur. I love them for it. From Max Ravenscar, a known gamester, to Alverstoke, a seasoned flirt, to Marquis of Vidal, who kidnaps his love-interest!, Heyer's men fit the general stereotype of tall, dark, and handsome. Even Sir Richard Wyndham, who is not a womanizer, fits the brooding hero stereotype. And then comes along comes Freddy. I mistakenly accused of him of wearing yellow pantaloons in my earlier review. I should have known better. He would never do anything so improper as travel in such getup! By rights of personality and temperament, Jack should be the hero of this story. Not sweet and proper Freddy. Yet in Freddy, I think you see one of Heyer's most brilliant creations. She mocks her own storybook heroes. There is a passage where Kitty is talking to Freddy's sister about him and says, "I do think," said Kitty fervently, "that Freddy is the most truly chivalrous person imaginable!...and a great deal more to the purpose than all the people one was taught to revere, like Sir Lancelot, and Sir Galahad, and Young Lochinvar and - and that kind of man! I dare say Freddy might not be a great hand at slaying dragons, but you may depend upon it none of those knight-errants would be able to rescue one from a social fix, and you must own, Meg, that one has not the smallest need of a man who can kill dragons!" In the end, it isn't the dragon-slaying men of elegance and charm who win Kitty, but her sensible and none-to-clever cousin. When I first read this book at 17, I got some sense of this being a good thing. ( See below .) Yet now I find it even more brilliant. Freddy has a healthy, sweet relationship with his siblings and parents. He watches over the heroine but doesn't boss her around. He is polite and respectful but shrewd in his own way. In that sense, Kitty matches him. Neither character is drowning in sensibility. It is their innate sense of practicality, even when surrounded by emotional or dramatic figures and despite their own ridiculous adventure, that binds them together so well. Then again, perhaps one of the greatest charms of Heyer is that this theme of sensible characters in ridiculous situations holds consistently true throughout her work. It is a fluffy novel, sure, but it comes with a deeper message and one I find charming. (I might make this my Second Favorite Heyer Novel. Hard to say, I will have to keep re-reading ;) ) 2011 Review There are a few things you can always be certain of in life. Murphy's Law, taxes, and relatives. Particularly, the annoying ones. Every family has them, those people who can't really disown but would rather not claim blood with. Cotillion is a hilarious, romantic novel filled with relatives, romps, and regency romance. It is Georgette Heyer at her best, and I would say Cotillion is almost as good as The Grand Sophy. Kitty Charing stands to receive a great deal of money from her guardian, (the wealthy and eccentric miser Mr Penicuik) but only if she marries one of his grand-nephews. Kitty is not averse to the idea, as long as the right nephew proposes. In particular, the dashing rake Jack. When he doesn't show up, much less propose, Kitty concocts a crazy scheme to get herself to London and into Jack's path, she convinces her cousin Freddy into a sham betrothal! As his fianced bride, she has all the reason in the world to go to London and reaquaint herself with her "new family." But London holds more suprises for her then she could imagine, including biological French cousins, blond headed beauties, and her not-so-bright cousin Lord Biddenden, whose tyrannical mother is still pressing to ask for her hand. If I could, I would probably give this book 4.7 stars. The reason is Freddy's aversion to pronouns. It drove me CRAZY. He doesn't say, "I want to help." It is "Want to help." And not just once in a while, but all the time . It might not even have been that bad, if it weren't for the fact that the only other person who did it was Lord Biddenden, and he isn't exactly the brightest bulb. Foggy in his attic. It made Freddy out to be more of a dunce then he really was, though I suppose you were supposed to get a hint that most people didn't view him as particularly bright. Plus, when the reader first meets him, he is wearing yellow pantaloons . The thing is, though, I loved Freddy anyway. Maybe more then Charles in The Grand Sophy. He wasn't an amazing whip or a brilliant boxer or any of the stuff Heyer's heroes usually are (of course, he always dressed perfectly, that seems to be a must for a Heyer Hero) but he had a sweetness and a incorruptibility that I loved. He almost reminded me of Sir Percy from the Scarlet Pimpernel. He wasn't prideful, cocky, full of himself. Certainly didn't plan on marrying. He wasn't even a flirt, which I loved even more. He was simply a nice mannered pink of the ton , willing to come to the help of a lady, somewhat clever in his own way. But of course, Freddy wasn't the only character who made this book. Kitty really was quite adorable. Comparing her to the other two Heyer books I've read ( Arabella and The Grand Sophy ), Kitty was more like Arabella then Sophy. I liked her much better than Arabella, though. She wasn't pefect. She wasn't even one of those "perfect part of the time with an occasional issue". No. She was coniving, charming, well-meaning, likeable, troublesome and sweet! She had attacks on her conscious, was occasionally naive but also sharp enough to figure stuff out. Heyer is, of course, a master at creating characters. Everyone from Lord Biddenden (and his voracious mother) to Freddy's Father (who reminded me of Mr Bennet)to Jack himself! (No comment on him , I don't want to give anything away!) The plot was so good too! Very cute. Heyer has a way of handling rather awkward situations with a few well-placed words that are so much than the disturbing detail most modern books seem to think they need to sink into. It wasn't, perhaps, as rollicking funny as The Grand Sophy, but it was certainly better than Arabella, and overall I strongly reccomend it. Heyer is a delightful author for all ages, with wonderful characters and good plots. Enjoy! jouir de, prendre plaisir!
