Ok first off this book is not a light read or something that you'll just breeze through. It is heavy and there's a lot of technical and political jargon and time specific language that can make it trickier to understand in 2020 (or later of you're reading this after that). I realize that doesn't sound like the makings of a 5* review but bear with me. This is an incredibly important book. It helps us realize how valuable and fragile peace is. Also this book proves how important dissenting/differing views are to come to best solutions. There is no exaggeration that the world was almost completely destroyed in a nuclear war in the 60s. Reading about the back and forth and hidden upper level meetings that decided the US government reactions to nukes being moved so close to the US was incredibly fascinating. Honestly the US and the world at large is lucky that Robert McNamara was blessed with such a brilliant mind and that he was the Secretary of Defense at that time. If someone less pragmatic or more prone to impulse had been in that position...horrors beyond belief. Here's a quote from the Foreward talking about a Havanah conference bringing together former leaders of the US and USSR: "General Anatoly Gribkov, who had been in Cuba during the 13 days... Most alarming: in the event communications link with Moscow might be severed, Soviet field commanders were authorized to use tactical nukes against an American invasion. This last observation startled, and appalled, the Americans present. I was sitting next to Robert McNamara our Secretary of Defense during the crisis, and he almost fell out of his chair. The American Joint Chiefs of Staff (not McNamara, however) had been all-out for invasion. Had their advice prevailed, as McNamara later said, nuclear war would have begun on the beaches of Cuba and might have ended in a global holocaust." So yeah when one of the most important decision makers is blown away with how close things were to escalating beyond anything seen before (like 30+ years later), you know you're in for a very interesting read. A lot more information has come out or been declassified since this so we have a fuller picture. This is also a good example that we can all judge presidents and make assumptions about their motives. In reality we're unable to know the full picture and our quick outside judgements can be missing vital information that makes a huge difference in what we'd think. In history classes and other books I'd read it seemed that like JFK was not a good president because of various things. This book helps paint a fuller picture. I'm not saying he's the best president ever, I am saying he handled an incredibly difficult situation magnificently. And provided a good blueprint of how to form a decision committee that has multiple points of view. Sadly too often in our world today we all have times where we dismiss or ignore views different from our own. This is a good reminder that no one person, group, or thought has all the right answers.
