With The Dark is Rising , Susan Cooper sets the stage for a sweeping fantasy saga about nothing in particular. When Will Stanton, an English lad from an unusually large family, turns twelve, he finds out he is an Old One - a being of great and mysterious powers who can hop in and out of human time and space anytime he chooses. Occasionally assisted by Merriman Lyon, who was once called Merlin and is now passing himself off as an archaeology professor, Will sets off to assist The Light, who are good, because reasons, in their great struggle against The Dark, who are evil, because reasons. Will's quest is to do something and go somewhere, or more likely go somewhere else and watch somebody else do something that was important because it was. It does not bode well for this book that I read it only nine months ago and cannot for the life of me remember the plot, let alone the point. Maybe because it possesses neither. Cooper dazzles with her strong prose. With words that sound like music together, she tricks you into thinking you're reading a good book that has meaning and occasionally even makes sense. If you then run off and read the three remaining books in the sequence as fast as you can (I did), you might not notice until halfway through Silver on the Tree that this series is "full of sound and fury, signifying nothing." But sadly, this is the truth of the matter. Cooper tries to set up her two sides as absolute good and absolute evil, but her book either doesn't know or doesn't care what those words actually mean. There is little distinction between the behaviors of the two sets of characters. Both are after power, use violence and deception to achieve their ends, and view ordinary people caught up in their confrontations as collateral damage. And the critics compare this series to Narnia and Middle-earth, because England and pretty words. This is most manifest in the character of Will. He doesn't want any harm to come to his family because of him, but his feelings regarding them are alarmingly detached. I don't care if he's really a five-thousand-year-old inter-world traveler who is not their blood relative and only got plopped into their family because reasons. As far as he knew until literally yesterday, these are his mum and his dad and his siblings we're talking about here. He ought to love them, not just care about them in this cool, distant, holier-than-thou way. Not to mention that Will has no discernible interests outside of being an Old One, and doesn't even seem particularly enthused about that. He learns everything he needs to know about nearly everything in the universe over the course of a few minutes, and is never inquisitive about anything ever again. He is sedate and obedient to an unusual point for anyone. He's not close to any of his siblings or either parent. He doesn't seem to notice sports, science, action movies, comic books, rock music, or girls. In short, he is nothing like any twelve-year-old boy I ever met, and I doubt anyone else has met one like him either. He is bland to the point of being creepy. He is so devoid of personality he makes Harry Potter look like Howl Jenkins. And what does being an Old One entail, exactly? Saving the world. Okay, how? By driving away The Dark. How does one do that? Um...by, uh, chanting, I guess. And time-travelling, to get, uh, artifacts. The Things of Power. What do the Things of Power do? Well, they can block people. And when you put them all together, they make a humming noise or...something. Also, be sure to snipe at the good-hearted Anglican priest who's just trying to protect his flock. Silly man just doesn't understand that God and gods are silly superstition and the Old Ones are the real deal. The anti-Christian found in so much of contemporary fantasy does not start with Rowling, or even with Pullman. It starts here, in this book. It starts with Cooper. I feel awful skewering a Newbery book like this, but I really wonder what the committee was thinking when they selected this one. Perhaps they were too bamboozled by Cooper's beautiful prose to notice that there is no character development, no plot, no overarching theme, and no story. The next book in the series is Greenwitch , which is a lot better than this one if only because the Drews (remember them from Over Sea, Under Stone ?) are in it. In conclusion, this book and this series are an incoherent mess that have done nothing to merit the title of "classic" except be around for forty years - and that is only because their underlying ideology is compatible with the narcissistic gnosticism of our time. Not recommended.
