What I liked Debra Fine is an engineer-turned-small-talk-specialist. She's the perfect person to explain small talk in a way that engineers can understand. She individually analyzes the components of casual social interaction: choosing the right person to talk to, how to break the ice, how to demonstrate that you are listening, what to say about yourself, how to handle "awkward" pauses, how to exit gracefully, and many steps in between. Fine emphasizes morals . This is not a book of quick and dirty tricks. She explains that carrying your conversational weight is work , and that sincere interest in the other person is as essential as it is un-feignable. Her two biggest pieces of advice are (1) "take the risk" to start a conversation despite the possibility of rejection, and (2) "assume the burden" of making everyone else feel happy and comfortable. There is a certain tragedy of the commons in conversation: people often assume that someone else will handle making eye contact with the speaker, coming up with new topics to fill silences, and so forth. Fine's advice is to assume the burden: be the host, be the leader. I particularly liked the chapter on "The Graceful Exit." The importance and techniques of properly ending a conversation are not something that I've read about before. What I didn't like Organization. I get the impression that Fine loosely ordered some existing documents and then stapled them into a book. The chapter called "Keep the Conversation Going!" is entirely about starting conversations, not keeping them going. Also, the beginning of chapter 12 ("Make the Most of Networking Events!") seems drawn verbatim from a pamphlet advertising her seminars. Fortunately, the book doesn't suffer much from this style of organization—each piece of advice is fairly self-contained. There's not much in this book about deepening friendships. It focuses on business networking. When the final objective is making a sale or maintaining a contact, there is little need for a deep connection. Fine does mention that conversation is like "peeling an onion"—you should match the vulnerability of your disclosures to that of your partner—but doesn't offer advice about what to do if you want to encourage an intimacy.
