It's a sexy romp -- and a feminist manifesto -- but it's not great literature. Or a great love story! I have mixed feelings about FANNY. On the one hand, I adore wild sex and adventurous pairings. And this book has plenty of both! On the other hand, I resent Erica Jong's constant flaunting of her educational pedigree, her Manhattan posturing, the subtle snobbery that consistently undermines her feminist preaching. And I can't help but feel that there are (literally) hundreds of hard-working romance writers who sit down EVERY DAY and crank out love stories (some even set in the 18th century) that are more moving, more emotional, more authentic, and even better researched than this one. But THOSE authors didn't go to Barnard College on Manhattan's elite Upper West Side -- a school so exclusive they actually employ a small army of uniformed security guards to keep the riffraff at bay! So yes, I resented the book before I ever picked it up to read. And then, when the sex got hot, I found I didn't really mind. But at the end of the book, I noticed how empty it all seemed. Fanny's adventures are fun, but for all the sex there's really very little emotion to go around. There's no strong hero. There's no lasting commitment. There's also never, ever a time when Fanny seems even remotely concerned with the brutal poverty and starvation all around her -- liberating her own body seems to be her first (and only) priority. Even when she's trapped in a brothel, there's a surprising coldness in the way she catalogs the diseases that are slowly killing her female companions. Evidently it's okay to romp with working class women in bed -- but you don't want to get too close to them. While this sheds a lot of light on the modern feminist movement, it also makes for a very depressing and unemotional read. To sum up, Fanny is no Huckleberry Finn. This is a picaresque novel, yes. Fanny travels like Huck, but unlike Huck she doesn't really learn or go through any changes. Her book-learned feminist convictions are set in stone from day one. They don't grow over time. They aren't the result of experience. She sleeps around much more than Huck, but she's ultimately a lot more selfish and immature.
