This was yet another reread. Can't think how many times I've read this. Although this time I treated myself to a first edition hardback that I stumbled upon. This is, quite simply, one of my favourite books. It tells the story of musician Mike and his artist/illustrator girlfriend Midge, who move from the big city to a lovely cottage in a rural village in England. And so begins their adventure with adjusting to rural life, magic and a spiritual cult that may or may not be the bad guys. Like many of Herbert's books, this isn't really a horror in the traditional sense. I always felt that much of his work blended into urban fantasy territory and it's no surprise that Neil Gaiman was both a fan and a friend of Herbert, even writing the foreword of The Rats anniversary edition. You can see the influences. Ultimately, it's a love story. Mike and Midge are great characters, and the peripheral characters all play their part, albeit a little thin on depth. But the star of the show is Gramarye Cottage. It plays a significant role in the story and Herbert is so descriptive of the house, I assume it was from somewhere in his past. There is an illustration of the cottage on the inside pages. It reminds me of spending a summer holiday with my parents and my sister in rural Norfolk; a beautiful fairytale cottage, set in a wee village with thatched roof houses, country lanes and lines of hedgerows. We would walk back from the village each night with clear starry skies and bats flying around in the sunset. There was a small river at the bottom of the garden, a feeder to The Broads, with a row boat, and we would spend hours each day going up and down the river. It felt like magic to my sister and I, and any time I see this book or think about it, the memory of that holiday floods back. I love it. I originally read this in '92. How do I know this? I was on a holiday in our family caravan on the west coast of Scotland and as usual it was pishin' down, so all i did was read; this book being one of them. So one day, with nothing better to do, I decided to draw the cottage, and below is my effort with the date stamped "CS92". This hangs in my home office and every time I see it, I think of this book and my mind goes that magical summer with my family. So thank you Mr Herbert, you created something that will always make me smile.
