For a moment he wondered why such things were occurring now: could it be that the world sprung up around him only as he invented it second by second, and that, like a dream, it faded into darkness from which it had come as soon as he moved forward? A spiritual exhaustion links the architect, satanist, and serial killer Nicholas Dyer with the intrepid, contemplative Detective Hawksmoor. Both are tired, both are alienated, both suffer, both have fragmented families; both experience dissociation while staring into mirrors. They are drained vessels ready to be filled with larger, perhaps more transcendental concerns. Are they somehow, inexplicably, the same man? Dyer is from the 18th century while Hawksmoor is from the 20th. Dyer is a devious, contemptible villain, full of pride and vicious plans; Hawksmoor is a melancholy humanist given to strange longings and hallucinatory flights. The perhaps long-dead Dyer casts a long shadow; Hawksmoor is investigating murders that take place in his time while discovering the murders of waybackwhen. Time is a loop, apparently. The book itself is quite loopy. It may give its readers a case of the spins. The chapters alternate: then and now. Alternating chapters separated not just by centuries and perspective, but by radically different prose styles. And yet... chapters bleed into each other: the ending of one becomes the beginning of the next. Echoes and repetitions proliferate; there is a mental fusion between past and present. Space and time destabilize. Dyer is whipped by a prostitute; Hawksmoor dreams of his skin stripped from his back. And other such examples. Time may be a circle or a prism; the earth may very well be flat, two-sided, one person above being the same person below. Both unable to move beyond this flat fallen world. Inevitably, there is a dissolving... and then a merging. A disintegration and a reconstruction. If successful evil and failed good unite, what shall be the result? And his own Image was sitting beside him, pondering deeply and sighing, and when he put out his hand and touched him he shuddered. But do not say that he touched him, say that they touched him. And when they looked at the space between them, they wept. The church trembled as the sun rose and fell, and the half-light was strewn across the floor like rushes. They were face to face, and yet they looked past one another at the pattern which they cast upon the stone; for when there was a shape there was a reflection, and when there was a light there was a shadow, and when there was a sound there was an echo, and who could say where one had ended and the other had begun. And when they spoke they spoke with one voice... Peter Ackroyd is masterful and full of mischief. The book despairs; the author smirks. He who made the World is also the author of Death... * this so-called review is completely indebted to an illuminating article written by Edward J. Ahearn in the periodical Twentieth Century Literature, Winter 2000 issue *
