This was a cute fun listen that I really enjoyed. I had trouble putting this book down. The author gives a wonderful highly entertaining read and the narrator tops it off. What happens when you have a wonderful aunt you adore but drives you crazy and she is into matchmaking which drives you even crazy? Well of course you play along and try like the devil not to get caught in your own desire as you try to teach your aunt a lesson. The question here is who is really getting played the aunt or her nephew? This was cute and at times funny read that keeps the reader/listener invested as the narrator lets you see the side of a very rich man and an up and coming PR executive thrown together by a crazy old lady who just wants the boy she raised to be happy, find love and have some down time. He is always working and on the run from one meeting to another never taking time off. If things do not work out as she wants than she makes them. You are left wondering what she will be up to next and how Richard and Melanie will counteract her. Teri Schnaubelt did an outstanding job on narration she puts so much emotion into her audios. You could really feel what each character was feeling as she almost brings you to tears in the heartbreaking times. Her tones are even none high or low just a smooth even voice. I really enjoy listening to her and could listen to her voice all day. She has wonderful character voices which was easy to tell who was talking. The males had rich deep tones and the women had wonderful sexy tones. The aunt voice fit her age wonderfully. There is no background noise and if a break was taken you could not tell. She gives you a rich sexy read that at times will make you laugh. I was really hooked by this narrator on another audio I had listen to as with it she gave me a wonderful sweet listen that really touches you heart. Melanie is just a very lovely lady who gets into a few messes from time to time. She is very smart and very sexy. Sometimes she can be a little blonde (as they call it) or maybe she is just hope she is reading it wrong. She just wants to get her company up and running with a good start and knows having Richard as a client would set her up nicely. She has had bad luck in romance even worse when she started a relationship with a boss and will not fall in that trap again. She finds it hard to turn away from Richard but is doing her best until his aunt sets them up big time. Richard is happy the way his life is running the family company is his joy a few one night stands is all he really wants. When his aunt puts Melanie in his face wanting him to give her a job he finds it hard to not have her work her fingers over his body. Not going to hire her but he would love to bed her. He really is a nice and sweet man just hurt at a young age losing his parent was hard on him. Trusting in someone to stay with him is very hard. He does not trust easy. Melanie is one woman he finds it hard to walk away from. He is starting to think maybe he doesn’t want to. These two put their heads together when they believe his aunt is setting them up for more than work. Oh the mess’s one gets into when they deceive. This was a cute read and at times funny. It is a very entertaining story that holds your attention. I love the plot and the characters, Richards brothers are a trip. I cannot wait to read their stories. I am sure they will be as interesting as Richards. I have to wonder what his aunt will do if all three boys find their true love, will she go back to her first love or is it too late for her. If you are looking for a great listen this would be one you will totally enjoy. If you are looking for a great book to read it will get your attention. I won this in a goodreads giveaway. I thought I would get the audio which I really enjoyed.
