Re To Woo A Wife - Carole Mortimer kicks off her Bachelor Brothers Trilogy with this subpar stalkerific day at the HP office. The h is 27 and a former model who married a man 30 years her senior. The old guy died two years before the story starts and to all initial indications, it wasn't a happy union. The h has a four year old daughter who is a prodigy plot moppet and part of the daughter's inheritance is a huge chain of luxury hotels. The H is in his early thirties and his version of the lady buffet is sampling all the 'deserts' he can get he his hands on. His parents had a horrible marriage and his gold digger mother dumped him and his brothers after the money ran out. The H's dad tried to raise him and then he died too, so the H was left to rebuild the family fortunes while helping his brothers to grown into adulthood. The H and the h meet when they are separately meeting some mutual friends for dinner and the H is demonstrating his many, many variations all the ways he is a total desert sampling misogynist prior to the h's arrival. The h overhears him going on about how the unseen and unmet h is probably an ugly poodle and how their mutual friends are trying to set him up with some bad romance, now that the friends have tied the knot. The h overhears the garbage the H is spouting and she quickly takes off to the ladies room to spruce herself up. When she finally gets to the table, the H is overwhelmed by how stunningly attractive the h is and can barely keep his napkin in place to catch the drool. We get an utterly uninspired dinner conversation consisting of dubious innuendo and the H eventually decides that the h is some kind of high class traveling prostitute. The h learns that the H has been trying to find her for some reason and enlisted the forces of the h's evil stepdaughter - who is older than she is and tried to sue for custody of the h's daughter after the h's husband died. There is a step son too and the two of them told the H that the h would be at the hotel he finds her having dinner at. The H wants to buy the h's hotel chain, he has two brothers and they own a large conglomerate of leisure resorts and hotels. The h is guardian of her daughter's 51% of the late husband's hotel empire, but she usually goes by a diminutive of her real name and the H doesn't cotton on. The H also decides that he is going to stalk the h until she goes to bed with him, he figures he can afford even a very expensive prostitute, but that plan is slightly altered the next day when the H accosts the h and her daughter on the ski slopes and learns that the h is majority shareholder of the hotels he wants to buy. So the H switched tactics a bit and tries to seduce the h. It is clear that the h is not interested, but the H forces his presence upon her anyways and then tries to pull off a lot of roofie kisses and gropey moves. Wash, rinse and repeat this behavior for about four chapters. If you have a half a Captain Consult for every time the h tells the H she isn't interested in a temporary lurve club event and then another as the H tells her he doesn't do marriage and how much fun being a random pump and dump is for the self esteem, you will be well on your way to a massive morning hangover by the time we actually get to the purpose of the story. It turns out the h hated her husband and he was very bad in bed, she is paranoid and not willing to risk any physical contact events. The h was one of the world's most beautiful models and then her cancer ridden father embezzled money from his boss. The h was blackmailed into marrying the rich boss, who is described as being a lecherous 'collector' of beautiful things, or her father would rot and be ill in jail and die much sooner than he did. (Which given the farcical circumstances surrounding this whole mess, probably wouldn't have been a very huge loss.) The h never got herself onto birth control, tho she was well aware that she would forced to participate in coerced rape, so after her father finally died, the h couldn't leave because the dead husband would have kept the daughter. But fortunately he is now dead and her step children hate her and want to sell the hotels. The h agrees to sell and then the H's brothers, who are pretty funny in this book and unfortunately not so much in their own, get the h to admit that she loves the H, with him standing right behind her. This prompts the H to decide that this time he can pay for the cow, cause the h won't give out milk samples for free and the H proposes. The h marries him and we call all await the next book and hopefully get a more developed HEA. This one was highly mediocre and I kept waiting for the romance to start. The H was panting after the h for the entire book, but only because she was the most beautiful woman he had ever seen and he, just like her former husband, had to own himself a piece of that. There were way too many lame comparisons to lurve clubing ladies as being akin to sampling deserts and I think CM was trying for witty repartee, but it fell extremely flat. There was also the problem that the entire relationship build up between the H and h was him assaulting her in one way or another and the h fighting him off and then his brother's throw their two cents in and suddenly it is True Love. I wasn't feeling it and I was pretty bored, so this is a pretty mediocre day at the HP office and here is to hoping the next HP outing is better. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
