This is an interesting mix of mystery and political thriller from Greeley. A Cardinal is gunned down in Nicaragua, and dies in the arms of his lifelong friend, a wealthy woman whom many have been closer to him that his vocation would allow. After a miracle occurs connected to an item worn by the deceased, a push begins to beautify the martyred Cardinal Assigned with another priest to investigate the departed, is Father Laurence in the "devil's advocate" role. He knew and disliked the Cardinal since they were were teens; he resented the Cardinal's slickster charm and easy manner which led to his rise in the Church. What he finds involves Cold War Vatican intrigue in addition to the matter of his relationship with is old friend. This wasn't billed as a mystery like the Bishop Blackie Ryan books, but I enjoyed this aspect of it more than any of that series and consider this one of Greeley's best novels. People focused too much on the fact that Greeley was a priest and wrote about sex and tittered over every time a character cursed; everything he wrote was pretty tame, there was nothing lurid in this book or any of the dozen or so I read. What I enjoyed about his books was his inclusion of the priest "detective" behaving as such; taking the time to minister to people, seeing the nature of their character in how they act and interact with people... Here that is on full display as Fr Bar uncovers the good and the bad, and in the end those two things no longer mean what they did to him at the beginning of the tale. It was a great character arc for the central character in this novel.' I read this in the early 2000s after discovering Father Greeley's novels through a friend. Most are set in Chicago, and most feature priests or relate in some important aspect to the Church, and others were focused on Irish or Irish American characters. They were easy to find in used bookstores in Chicago but I later came to be surprised at how little they are known outside the region and now they are hard to find. I may try to obtain another copy of this book or a Kindle copy for a reread, I really enjoyed it.
