I don't think that I would recommend this book to friends who are not into the history of science fiction. It's more of a useful artifact for pointing how we got to now rather than being a good read in and of itself. The novel is interesting from a historical perspective because so many people thought the work was written by a man when it was written by a woman. (For what it's worth I can tell the difference, mostly because even now a large number of male writers fail to make their main female characters as compelling and human as Tiptree does.) I don't usually read other reviews in the middle of reading a book because they color how I read the book. Unusually I read the reviews of this book and how people described it as tragic/a real downer. And halfway through the book, that definitely made me think that Tiptree would kill off all of the characters in the book and the bad guys would win and there would be a massive genocide. While people die in this book, and it is not a shiny happy work, it isn't the bloodbath I feared. But jeez, otherwise this is like white feminism the sci fi novel. Like the Damieii (humanoid people descended from insects) definitely are treated as an exotic tribe of subhumans and have human "guardians" to "protect" them from being exploited by human beings. Those same guardians are astounded when the Damieii, at the end of the novel, wish to go into business for themselves and don't want to keep living their subsistence life. Like heaven forbid that they might want something like plumbing rather than to keep to their "traditional" lives and to have some personal autonomy. So this book had a very anthropological feel which doesn't really stand up in 2018. That said, it's a science fiction book that handles sex work in a more nuanced and sympathetic way than many other that I've read. And has a fairly nuanced main female character. There's just so much good science fiction coming out now that I can't justify other people spending the time to read this book. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
