Why Did She Have to Die? is one of those books that feels, while reading it, like a runaway ball of pure emotional energy that only picks up speed as it goes careening forward. Knowing very little about author Lurlene McDaniel before picking up this book, I had no way of knowing if she was a good enough writer to face the subject of a tragic death in the family with the skill that the topic deserves. Let me tell you this much, at least—she has everything it takes to write masterfully on the subject. A book like Why Did She Have to Die? is really all about the emotions, about appealing to the raw stores of feeling that we keep inside ourselves most of the time. The perceptive writing of this book probes old griefs of our own and taps into that pain to make the essence of the storyline accessible to us; after all, the story won't mean a whole lot to individual readers if we're unable to fathom on a deeper level the devastating situation with which eighth-grader Elly Rowan and her parents are confronted. In going back to our own very personal griefs and putting us back in touch with those overwhelming feelings, we are brought to understand all too well what Elly has to face after her older sister, Kathy, is killed in a freak car accident that also leaves Elly badly injured. The thing is, it's not even like Kathy hangs on for a while, slowly slipping into death and giving Elly a chance to realize that her sister is on her way out the door of this life. The accident happens and bam! , she's gone, and herself remaining unconscious after the accident for an entire week, Elly gets even less of a chance than everyone else around her to prepare for the loss. She wakes up from comatose limbo to find out that Kathy is gone forever, and the unfairness of the situation hits me hard. I feel as if she should have had a chance to fight for her sister's life, like it's not fair that Kathy could have been taken away while Elly was sleeping, almost like someone hustled her out the back door when Elly's head was turned and that's not how it's supposed to go, like it's a shady deal. But isn't that how the reality of death manifests itself, sometimes? The themes of loss and grieving are powerfully addressed in this glowing, emotionally loaded novel. With less sympathetic characters or writing that wasn't as skillfully evocative, the effect wouldn't have been nearly the same, yet Lurlene McDaniel uses the tool of straightforward plainness as her most effective instrument, not overcomplicating the story or making it too flowery or overdone at all. She really allows the pure emotions of an ordinary family caught up in a terrible situation to speak loudly for itself, and it's in that simplicity that the book comes into its core power. There's even the whispered suggestion of continued life as Elly draws closer to her friends, and even begins a relationship with a boy who really seems to care about her. Why Did She Have to Die? is a quietly powerful story of family connections and the ramifications that result when those close ties are severed. I must say that few stories dealing with the theme of death have been done better. I will give four and a half stars to this book, and you may never know how close I came to giving it five stars.
