Spring is finally here and it's time to work on my tan. John D. MacDonald published twenty-one Travis McGee mysteries (between 1964 and 1984) narrated by his weary "salvage consultant" who often agrees to locate missing persons or items, 52-foot houseboat the Busted Flush docked in Fort Lauderdale serving as McGee's office. MacDonald was one of the earliest authors to use themed titles for their series and his brilliant use of color not only offered a visual motif to help readers distinguish each one, but generated some of my favorite titles: The Deep Blue Good-By , Dress Her In Indigo , The Lonely Silver Rain , etc. First up is A Tan and Sandy Silence . Published in 1971, this dazzling detective thriller introduces Travis McGee pumping the bilge of the John Maynard Keyes , a cabin cruiser belonging to his neighbor Meyer (first or last name unrevealed throughout the series), a retired economist who shares in McGee's sardonic world view but is less a sailor, his boat taking on eight inches of water and at risk of sinking to the bottom of the Bahia Mar Marina where the men live. The rainwater pumped from the bilge, Meyer alerts McGee that the Busted Flush has a visitor. Harry Broll is a real estate developer who McGee last saw at the marina when the man came down to beat on him. Broll's attack was centered on Mary Dillon, his newlywed wife, who during an argument revealed to Harry that she was not only intimate with McGee prior to their engagement, but how much fun she had with him on a two-week cruise into the Keys and around the peninsula to Tampa Bay. Despite the bruises he endured, McGee invites Broll onto the Busted Flush , assuming water under the bridge. McGee hasn't seen or heard from Mary in three years, but that fails to satisfy Broll, whose wife has gone missing for three months and he believes, shacked up with McGee. And the dumb little weapon came out from under his clothes somewhere, maybe from the waist area, wedged between the belt and the flab. A dumb little automatic pistol in blued steel, half-swallowed in his big, pale, meaty fist. His staring eyes were wet with tears, and his mouth was twisted downward at the corners. The muzzle was making a ragged little circle, and a remote part of my mind identified it as a .25 or .32 caliber, there not being all that much difference between a quarter of an inch diameter and a third of an inch. There was a sour laugh back in another compartment of my skull. This could very possibly be the end of it, a long-odds chance of a mortal wound at the hand of a jealous husband wielding something just a little bit better than a cap gun. The ragged circle took in my heart, brain, and a certain essential viscera. And I was slouched deep in a chair facing him, just a little too far away to try to kick his wrist. He was going to talk or shoot. I saw his finger getting whiter, so I knew it was shoot. Broll empties his pistol at McGee but both are grateful for it to run out of bullets without hitting flesh. Broll calms down and tells McGee that he needs Mary by the 30th of the month, some business thing. It strikes McGee as unusual that Broll would let three months slide before asking around for his wife. That evening, at a party thrown by their neighbor Jillian Brent-Archer on her motor-sailer trimaran Jilly III , Meyer advises McGee that the next man to shoot at him might not be as generous with his aim. McGee is comforted between the sheets by Jillian, who needs a compatible man in her world and offers to take care of McGee should he accept the position of her houseguest. McGee instead pokes into the lives of Mr. and Mrs. Harry Broll. While Meyer uses his friends in the banks to investigate what Broll is in to, McGee traces him to Casa De Playa, a Broll Enterprises condominium. McGee charms a broker named Jeannie Dolan, who tells him that her girlfriend was dipping in the company ink with the boss, who left her for a Canadian named Lisa Dissat. An anonymous phone call to Mary sent her to Lisa's apartment, where Mrs. Broll discovered the infidelity. Meyer learns that Broll is in business with a Canadian investor named Dennis Waterbury, whose land development offering is about to go public in a deal which would net $2.5 million for Broll. Canvasing Mary's block, McGee gains the trust of a friend who confides that unknown to anyone else, Mary is living off her bastard husband's dime on the Caribbean isle of Grenada, from which she regularly sends her friend postcards. For Harry's land deal to go through, Broll needs to secure a loan using Mary's trust fund as collateral, hence his desperation to locate his missing wife. McGee is troubled by the fact that Mary's car is still at Miami International, which contradicts the frugality of his ex-flame. McGee traces Mary to the Spice Island Inn and boards a BWIA flight to Grenada, where he confronts a woman using his ex's identity. McGee determines this to be Lisa Dissat, a honey pot involved in a scheme hatched by her cousin Paul, a prime cut sociopath. He was single, she said, and did not look like anybody's idea of an accountant. Bachelor apartment, sports car. She said he was a superb skier, proficient at downhill racing and slalom. She said that three years ago, when she was working in Montreal, she had run up bills she was unable to pay. She was afraid of losing her job. She had gone up to Quebec to see Paul, whom she had not seen in several years. He had taken her to dinner and back to his apartment and made love to her. He had paid her bills and arranged for her to work for Waterbury. After they had been intimate many times, he had told her of his plan to share in some of the fat profits from Waterbury's operations. He would arrange the necessary leverage through her. He said he would let her know when the right opportunity came along. The aspect of John D. MacDonald that has influenced Stephen King, Lee Child and other genre fiction writers aren't his plots, doled out with the detail of someone holding expert level knowledge in South Florida sleaze, but the stark beauty of MacDonald's prose. His stories often contrast legality with morality, Travis McGee wanting to do the right thing, as soon as he figures out what that is. MacDonald invites the reader to learn the answers along with McGee, never once stopping to hector or preach. The moral center of the novel is Meyer, who often compels McGee that when confronted with an emotionally difficult decision, the right one is the one that would take the most effort, paying now rather than putting yourself in debt. I knew but did not want to tell her. You see many such couples around the yacht clubs and bath clubs and tennis clubs of the Western world. The man, a little younger or a lot younger than the moneyed widow or divorcée he has either married or is traveling with. The man is usually brown and good at games, dresses youthfully, and talks amusingly. But he drinks a little too much. And completely trained and conditioned, he is ever alert for his cues. If his lady unsnaps her purse and frowns down into it, he at once presents his cigarettes, and they are always her brand. If she has her own cigarettes, he can cross twenty feet in a twelfth of a second to snap the unwavering flame to life, properly and conveniently positioned for her. It takes but the smallest sidelong look of query to send him in search of an ashtray to place close to her elbow. If at sundown she raises her elegant shoulders a half inch, he trots into the house or onto the boat or up to the suite to bring back her wrap. He knows just how to apply her suntan oil, knows which of her dresses have to be zipped up and snapped for her. He can draw her bath to the precise depth and temperature which please her. He can give her an acceptable massage, brew a decent pot of coffee, take her phone messages accurately, keep her personal checkbook in balance, and remind her when to take her medications. Her litany is: Thank you, dearest. How nice, darling. You are so thoughtful, sweetheart. It does not happen quickly, of course. It is an easy life. Other choices, once so numerous, disappear. Time is the random wind that blows down the long corridor, slamming all the doors. And finally, of course, it comes down to a very simple equation. Life is endurable when she is contented and difficult when she is displeased. It is a training process. Conditioned response. "I'm used to the way I live," I told her. A Tan and Sandy Silence is the 13th Travis McGee novel and has a riveting beginning, middle and end, with McGee evading Harry Broll's cap gun aboard the Busted Flush and confronting the depraved, committed killer who Meyer has warned him about, on a deserted beach and later on a construction site. MacDonald made me a partner in wanting to find Mary Broll and whoever was responsible for her vanishing. The ambiance of an April in Fort Lauderdale and Grenada are intoxicating in their natural beauty and deadliness, the dialogue is superlative and research is woven into the story with finesse. Without expecting it, I got notes on how to tell if a man wants to shoot or talk, and how to make life decisions that are a bit more practical.
