Ladies and gentlemen, I apologize for being so late when writing a review, but as I told you, I had to help my father, and I also have a very strong cold, which makes me hurt when I swallow. For these reasons I have not been able to write, as I would like. Taking advantage of a respite I have decided to write this review. I must admit that it was first to write a review of Peter Benchley's "Beast" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8... because of my passionate idyll with the homonymous sea creatures, of an anthropology character, but I preferred to write a more enjundious critique. The first thing I will say (due to my agreement with María Alvarez de Asturias) is that this novel has scenes of high sexual content. So I don't recommend it to anyone who doesn't like descriptions of sex scenes. If you haven't given up this criticism yet. I will confess, that because of my personal sympathy for two authors it has been very hard to have to put suspense on both of them. I refer to the novel"Legion" by writer William Peter Blatty (may he rest in peace) https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2... , and of which I might write a review. Because the book didn't please me, but indifferent didn't leave me. Another of the most painful decisions has been to make the decision to suspend a novel by Dean R. Koontz :-( https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... who by the way last year with his fantastic"Coldfire" https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... managed to become part of the select club of writers that I have once put five stars. That I would recommend to Mr. Koontz, for I would say the same advice that Paulo VI https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... gave the Catholic writer Graham Greene https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... when his novels appeared in the forbidden book index, that he did not heed that, and that he would continue to write. The same is recommended to Mr. Dean Koontz (i still have three books of his to read, that is, he has three bullets in the bedroom, to reconquer me). That ie pinged up to my idolated G.K. Chesterton (Chesty) was suspended either, and no one will doubt that this colossus is my favorite writer https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... That said anyone can have a bad day, or write a book, that I didn't like a particular reader, as in this case, and it's a shame, because the plot was very interesting. The possibility of inventing a drug, that hypnotizes people, and as if we were victims of one of the incurable curses of Harry Potter https://www.goodreads.com/series/4517... https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6... (in this case the Imperium curse) allows us to use a person, to do with it what we want. Eliminating his free will. Now that we know that the South Korean film has won the Oscars (people will be able to tell whether or undeservedly). I am not surprised, because artistically Asia it seems to take a thousand turns to a very fallen layer west, although in its defect I will say, I do not know if the example of Parasite is a good role model. I think, curiously, it has not been possible to choose, but what it does show is that Orient is fashionable. So you won't be surprised, I compared this dean R. Koontz novel to two other Asian novels I've read. One of them is one of my favorites such as "The Whisper of the Devil" by the magnificent Miyuki Miyabe https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8... https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... In fact, the Japanese author invents one of the most interesting ways to kill crime in police literature. Through hypnosis, but he doesn't make Koontz's mistake. A hypnotized person cannot kill himself, as he does in this novel with two characters, because the man has an instinct for conservation, he can only end up with a hypnotized person by making her believe that he does this action by running away from something, that he can Kill him. It also explores the subject of subliminal advertising more intelligently than Koontz. Although Koontz's resource is skilful, as he uses three characters as a tutorial the evangelist Leonard H. Dawson, General Klinger and the aspiring despot Ogden Salsford, to explain how they will develop their pioneering experience in that place of Maine Black Valley . There we are told about this drug (yet to be invented), although it may be possible. Certainly one thing we agree with Koontz, that if there is any chance of a bad deed being done it will end up done, like that the human being is man. Utopia, as in this case Dawnson, a sincere Christian apart from forage has a charitable intention, despite its undoubted hypocrisy, and its narrow-mindedness. That's another one of the novel's flaws. You're sick of seeing fanatical Christians who want to destroy the world. For when a mad Islamist, or a Buddhist like Soko Osahara, or why evil atheists? In fact, after seeing an article by the late Epstein, and seeing that aberrations are being practiced in the West. The last option is more plausible than it seems. Not that I'm a fan of Protestantism, that I dislike, but there are much worse things. In addition, I love reading non-Catholic Christian novels, although I mainly collect Catholic novels and writers. In fact Koontz does not usually employ Christian villains. This would be the first, though there may be more like Leonard H. Dawson. Anyway, Koontz already marks distance and shows us Dawson's contempt for the Catholic religion. There is a monologue of the character, when he talks about that man does not need intercessors, no prayers, and that you save yourself. With what falls into pelagio's heresy. The second novel, which reminded me was Edogawa Rampo's interesting novel "The Strange Case of the Panorama Island" where a sexual obsessive, such as Ogden Salsford uses a fortune, to build himself a site with glasses, that allows him to realize all his sexual fantasies. Just like the villain Ogden Salsford. In fact, as I read chillnights, I thought about how these two rascals look like. https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1... and this is something else, where I want to get to. If you go with good intentions you fail, more when things are done with bad intentions. One thinks of the first case in Anthony Burgess's colossal novel "The Clockwork Orange" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4... where the government has good intentions, although the priest already warns him of the harmfulness of using subliminal advertising, and treatments, to alter behavior. Free will was given to us, so that we might willingly choose to love and serve God, for ourselves, then one can choose right or wrong. As C.S. Lewis says, there are two types who tell God "Thy will be done" and others to which God (hopefully we will never find ourselves in this situation) to those who God says "Thy will be done". Precisely, even if it may seem better a world without free will, the characteristic of hell was this. A world with beings who are puppets, and act driven by others. Empty shells, or robots, automatons this was the characteristic of James Blish's novel "A Case of Consciousness" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1... though Blish is part of a misconception. Like Manicism. By considering Satan and God equal and giving the Devil the chance to create. Something unacceptable from an orthodox point of view. But if the Devil were able to create. He would create a world like Blish's novel, and the one trying to implant this trio of lights. There are some brilliant reflections on the part of Salsford/Koontz that coincide with De Prada https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/7... https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6... that repressive regimes such as fascism, communism, and Nazism are no longer practical. Ogden Salsford's world is a world of hypersexualization, fly-over rights in which the Dictator exercises a benign dictatorship. Of which it makes a great profit in this case fornication under hypnosis with several women (three in particular). There are four sex scenes throughout the novel (perhaps five) and three rapes, two of them with sadomasocism. This is completely unacceptable. I really disliked those scenes. Anyway, the author explains the misogyny, and why his disgusting character acts as he acts. I dislike the conduct of the bad guys in this novel, but also that of the good ones. Koontz falls into the sheer law of the talion, and makes his heroes Charlesrodians "Revenge Is Mine." It seems to justify, that all kinds of moral abuse is lawful, to fight the villains. It is true, that the protagonist suffers a great personal loss (the worst that can happen to a person), but here he does not kill himself by self-defense, but by revenge. It is true that Salsford is more dangerous alive than dead, and can manipulate the people's automatons as they please. But in the end he opts because his characters become executioners. But the most serious thing is that this novel written in the 70s of the last century and falls into the mistakes of this wretched and ill-wry era. The source from which protagonists Paul Amendale drink, and Sam Edison who distrust scientists although I do not like to recommend "Hideous Strength" by C.S. Lewis https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1... ) and the government. So Koontz opts for an individualist company, which is wary of the great leviathan of the state, even if in this case it is a private multinational, and does not bet on Chestertonian distributionism, or Belloc, nor wendell Berry https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... , nor John Senior https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... , who are critical of scientificism and obsessive machinization. Although more serious is what Constatin Virgil Gheorghiu proposes in "The 25th Hour" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6... of human machination. If you are uneasy about this possibility read my friend Jorge Sáez's novel Raised from Memories of Sunset https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4... https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... not even for the solution given by the novelist Rosa María Arceniaga in "Moskostrom" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4... not even for the solution given by the novelist Rosa María Arceniaga in "Moskostrom" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/4... No Koontz opts for a remedy worse than the disease and to bet on the recipes of plutocracy in this case the ominous Paul Ehrlich https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... one of the drivers of Neo-Malthusian antinatalism, and propelleor of abortion. This gentleman (for not calling him something uglier, and certainly deserved) is theories such as overpopulation. Well, gentlemen, this delightful and abhorrent subject is the inspiration for the novel's heroes. Of course there is talk of bucolism, and there is no talk of abortion, nor birth control, but of rejecting technology, and returning to the countryside, but users. Let's think, if the encouragement of a novel turned out to be Hitler, would you accept it? To me that vile spawn, which hides under the cloak of environmentalism, like many other authors, who under their cloak of philanthropy have done so much damage to the world, and are responsible for a series of policies, which will be disastrous, and which are being imposed on us to this day. That's why I was forced to take action and suspend Dean R. Koontz. Not even the beautiful children's scenes. I particularly liked Rya. Nor the beautiful Jenny (a little girl, for my taste). But there hasn't been any more adorable Jenny since Forrest Gump. With all this you can't fix the mess of this novel. Other than that Koontz doesn't offer me anything new either, to attract me. Unlike "Cold fire" his novel is very similar to other works of his. The end of one of the villains I don't say which one I thought was very appropriate. It is a pity that Koontz had not read this book would have been very good https://www.goodreads.com/author/show... I hope, that his next novel is more to my liking, and can give Koontz a note more in line with his merits.
