A mixed bag. One of the significant limitations is that people who spend most of their life heavily under the influence of drink or drugs are, for the most part, very *boring*. And an awful lot of these pieces are essentially stories of Kent spending time with rock stars who spend much of their time intoxicated and going on about either how brilliant they are, or how others have unfairly sabotaged their careers and lives. And an awful lot of the people featured in this book come across as really quite nasty people - most obviously the 'Exploding Idiot' Sid Vicious, but I couldn't help reading strange echoes of one Donald Trump in Jerry Lee Lewis' constant self-aggrandising statements, for example. The best sections are those about the more interesting characters - the ones of whom there is more to say than simply that they became very successful, took a lot of drugs and ended up in rehab (or in the case of Sly Stone, at least at the time the book was written, who simply carried on exactly as they were into middle age. Whether he's still free-basing cocaine at nearly 80 I don't know...) The interviews with Brian Wilson are amongst the best in the book because Kent is genuinely interested in the music he makes. The long article - effectively an extented discography with critical notes - on Neil Young encouraged me to go back and listen to bits of his back catalogue that I'd ignored up to now. There's a reason people don't for the most part celebrate his 80s output, but on the other hand, Sleeps With Angels, which I'd never listened to before now, sits well alongside the best of his 70s output. Of the articles about bands on tour doing lots of drugs, probably the most interesting is the one on Kent's experience with the Rolling Stones on tour in the 1970s. In contrast with, say his descriptions of the members of Guns n Roses at the height of their stardom in the late 80s, or drinking sessions with Shane McGowan, he does manage to get under the skin of how their sheer success had somehow blunted them as a creative force - that they had everything that they could want, but it had seemed to leave them rather bored. The book ends with a short article on self destructiveness and rock music. One thing he doesn't cover is what leads so many down the path of substance abuse - I wonder if it has to do with having to be on stage and perform night after night. Years ago, I remember a friend who had a 90s grunge-rock band that played a few local gigs and how he got completely off his face before he played in front of an audience for the first time because - all else aside - he was just terrified of being the centre of attention and could only do it after having consumed most of a bottle of vodka. The result was, um, sketchy but kind of compelling to watch in a car-crash kind of way*. "What's the alternative? A long life full of moderate musos and bands like Belle and Sebastian." The thing is, I might rather read about what Stuart Murdoch has to say than most of the larger than life characters featured here. *I've no idea what became of him. I think he went on tour as a session keyboard player with Hawkwind, or possibly Hawkwind's support act, for a while. We lost touch a few years after leaving school. At a school re-union some time back, nobody seemed to know. One said he was living in a monastery, while another thought that was nonsense and he was working as a psychiatric nurse.
