3.5 stars This collection comes shrouded in praise, unusually glowing even by blurb standards and much of it from big names, but it doesn’t seem to have received much attention from readers. My reaction was mixed. The writing is good, the characterization and imagery vivid. And yet, there’s a lot of tragedy, some of it perhaps over-the-top, and some of the stories are maddeningly inconclusive. Like others who have posted here, I found the last four stories better than the first four; not until finishing the fifth was I even sure I was going to finish the book. The eight stories in the collection are not linked, but there are many repeated themes: father/son relationships; doctors searching for meaning, often through travels to developing countries; characters who experienced the traumatic death of an older sibling or parent during childhood; collapsing marriages; multi-generational collections of insects. The author himself is a white man who has worked as a doctor around the world, and the collection certainly reflects that, though several of his characters are also Indian-American. My thoughts on the stories in order of appearance: “The Hill Station”: The collection begins with the only story featuring a female protagonist, an Indian-American microbiologist traveling to India to teach a workshop. I found this story and character immediately compelling, but was put off by its direction, which suggested that tired notion of a female professional giving up her career for marriage and motherhood. Unclear whether she actually stops working, but abandoning the workshop was certainly unprofessional. Also bizarre and unfortunate is her choice to have a child by a married affair partner she never told about the pregnancy, and to marry a random guy met on a bus who seemed interested in her mostly for her passport. That said, this is one of the less tragic stories in the collection and the bus guy’s courtship method is hilarious. “All the Rivers in the World”: This story features an overweight Maine carpenter coming to terms with his father’s decision to abandon his mother in favor of following his boat-owning dreams to Key West. Again, compelling and colorful characters, but not a very successful story in my mind. The notion that the son ought to use his savings to bail out his father, who doesn’t seem to have a real business plan, didn’t sit well with me, and the father’s much-younger girlfriend’s experiences as a nurse in war-torn Africa seemed out-of-place. “A Few Short Notes on Tropical Butterflies”: The title story features the strained marriage of two surgeons, an older man who hasn’t dealt with the traumatic death of his sister in childhood, and a younger immigrant woman who desperately wants children. The story traces the husband’s grandfather’s Victorian-era adventures in search of tropical butterflies, the beginning of a love for butterflies passed down from father to son that has apparently brought tragedy to each generation. There’s a lot here, but after making it through all of that trauma I expected a more decisive ending. “White Flour”: A young man travels to India to spend time with the father who abandoned the family years ago in favor of service to the poor. Compelling characters, but the story doesn’t do much with them, and the ambiguous ending seems to me to just leave us with nothing much. “Watson and the Shark”: A doctor volunteering in Rwanda or the DRC faces a crisis when militants attack. This is the one story that really deals head-on with the recurring issue of medical professionals volunteering in war-torn areas, with some exploration of the reasons leading people to choose this work. In some other stories I found this element out of place, the poor sufferers serving as no more than a crutch in the privileged protagonist's journey, but this story is well-done and one of the better ones in the collection. “The Carpenter Who Looked Like a Boxer”: This perhaps deceptively straightforward story of a single carpenter father picking up the pieces after the disappearance of his brilliant psychiatrist wife was the most compelling story in the collection to me, mostly because of the mystery at its heart. I couldn’t shake the conclusion that the wife was dead on their property, most likely at her husband’s hands. There are so many hints: he “looked like a murderer”; her requests for violent sex acts and descriptions of his hands around her neck; two scenes in which she’s in the water and talking about death or he’s afraid she’ll die; the fact that nobody knows where she’s gone; she took nothing with her; she wasn’t angry when she left; he tells the kids that “I’m sure she would talk to me if she could”; his apparent hallucinations and worries about suffering memory loss like his father; the odd absence of any description of her departure and what she said beforehand; his aversion to the neighbor paying an exterminator to examine the property, while something is eating at him from the inside; the cliff above the water on their property, where the story ends. The story never answers the question, but I found these characters and their marriage particularly interesting. “Blue”: A young man climbs a mountain with his best friend and his uncle, apparently in tribute to his dead father. This story is almost absurdly tragic, with every major character in it apparently dead by the end. The ending is successfully ambiguous though: it’s unclear whether the son has actually hallucinated most of the story after the others have been killed, or whether it’s only at the end that he begins to hallucinate . Either way, it’s certainly vivid and sad. “Acts of Memory, Wisdom of Man”: The final and longest story is a somewhat meandering tale of a teenage boy growing up in a family of Indian immigrants in Iowa in the 1960s, with a father who worships reason and discipline while the mother is drawn to a free-spirited family friend. The scandal and tragedy that will befall the family are fairly predictable, but the characters are well-drawn and the setting vivid. The dialogue is particularly good, capturing the non-native English of the parents as well as the way of speaking of a precocious, awkward adolescent. Overall, while this wasn’t my favorite short story collection, it certainly has a lot of merit. I enjoyed meeting the author’s characters, though I found some of his tragedy over the top and the repeated portrayal of characters’ careers in science and medicine (or even carpentry) as being no more than a safety blanket to be unfortunate. I would consider reading more from this author.
