An Unpleasant Book – Which is Definitely Worth Reading It is hard to believe that Robert Cormier wrote “After the First Death” as early as 1979, as you would think the plot was inspired by some of the gruesome events of the last few years, but Cormier’s pessimism was apparently well ahead of its time – if pessimism can ever be that. Cormier’s fable is terse and yet complex, as it offers us a variety of different perspectives, often changing ones within one paragraph, which makes the novel quite a demanding treat. The story is about the hijacking of a bus of pre-school children on their way to summer camp by a group of four terrorists from an unspecified country somewhere to the south. Miro, the youngest terrorist, is about to pass his initiation by killing the bus driver the moment the bus is parked on an old railway bridge. The original driver, however, has been stood in for by his teenage niece Kate Forrester, and Artkin, the terrorists’ ringleader, decides to spare her for a while in order to have somebody to calm down the children, who are also being drugged by the hijackers, which causes the death of one little boy. The terrorists demand the release of some of their accomplices, a large amount of money for the continuance of their cause and the disbandment of a secret government organization to do with countering terrorist attacks. The government, of course, is unwilling to concede, especially in this latter point, so that the military decides to take the bus by force. Cormier’s novel is more than just a book about the roots and motives of terrorism, although the figure of Miro can teach us something about how young people are recruited for terror organizations in poorer countries. It is, as far as I see it, basically a book about how adolescents are influenced by their parents. Kate, the bus driver, seems to be an insipid American teenage girl at first sight, but in the face of danger she discovers a potential for bravery and determination inside herself and yet all the time stands in need of somebody, preferably her parents, acknowledging this new quality. Ben Marchand, a general’s son, is also willing to please his father – and his country – and therefore accepts his father’s suggestion to go and negotiate with the terrorists. The most unsettling thing about the general is that he knows his son will be subjected to torture – the general actually preferring more clinical terms like “intensive interrogation” or “methodological intervention” – and that he therefore makes his son pick up false information, which he will deliver during “intensive interrogation”. There is still another father-son relationship, namely that between Miro and Artkin, who at least is some kind of surrogate father to Miro. Equally eager to please his father figure as Ben is, Miro is yearning to earn his full acceptance into the circle of terrorists by killing Kate, although he also feels fascinated by her. Both the general and his terrorist adversary, Cormier seems to say, manipulate the younger generation for their own aims, deftly using emotional bribery to achieve this aim, and justifying their cause by tagging the label of patriotism to their actions. “Either you are a great patriot or a great fool”, Artkin says to the general when Marchand sends off his own son as a bo-between, and we might ask ourselves where the difference between these two possibilities lies. Reading this book made it clear to me that I doubtless have many character faults, but that, luckily, I am completely innocent of patriotism. Cormier’s book is extremely well-written – with a disturbing use of metaphors bordering on the insane* – and it provides ample food for thought. However, it is full of sordid realities and does not have a happy ending, which makes it quite unpleasant to read. But then eating your greens is not always pleasant, either, but good for you! * To give you one example: “The lantern fell from his hand but continued to shine on him where it fell. Blood gushed from the faucet that had been his mouth a moment before. The blood spilled across his chest like scarlet vomit. “
