My pity for Rodriguez continues. Brown is a meditation on the color of liminality in the black/white dynamic of American self-conception. At times, Rodriguez seems willing to tarry there in the in-between, in the almost-but-not-quite, but then he moves self-consciously away into that zone beyond doubt, seemingly aware of the dangers of certainty, but preferring it cold comfort. As he does in Hunger of Memory , Rodriguez seems to want to embrace his occasional white-privilege allowed him by his social position as an academic and a writer as something he has unmitigated and uninterrupted access to. It seems to me to be the way he deals with his guilt that he has it at all as compared to those who by dint of color and/or other social disadvantage have less frequent access to it, or no access at all. For example, he makes the point to mock a young woman he calls a "white Latina" for referring to herself as a person of color, as if "color" were only complexion. His attitude on these issues actually seems inconsistent and frustrating, because he also talks of "colored" thoughts and "colored" language - he includes a long discussion with a black/brown friend on the socially constructed nature of race and estimations of color that are founded on positional power dynamics - but then continues to display shame any benefit he may have gained from affirmative action. It is never clear to me why he feels so undeserving. It is never clear to me why he never uses his rich evocative (also overwritten and florid) language to reflect on situations where the brownness of his skin and his name have been obstacles to the everyday exercise of the privilege he claims to have. Could it be that he has never had that experience? I doubt it. I would be more willing to believe that he simply myopic, always interpreting such experiences through his unassuaged guilt. And yet, he seems too self aware and intelligent for that. I don't know. Rodriguez's meditations do come upon some interesting questions. For example, how the progressive assertion of racial representation actually lead to increased forms of segregation, bemoaning the fact that his books are found among "Latino" writers regardless of form or content and not among the writers of the western canon he so admires. He snickers at the fact that a newspaper chooses a gay Columbian writer of magical realist fiction to review his work, when nothing but broad conceptions of "latino" and "gay" gives them anything in common. At the same time, he seems to be suggesting that acting as if race does not exist (as it certainly does not as a scientific category) would undo the experience of race in America. Ultimately, I grew tired of Rodriguez's writing style and his psychological limitations, but that doesn't mean I walked away from the book without any ideas to chew on, but I am more likely to spit them back out than swallow them.
