Marcus, who used to review rock records, now seems to be mostly writing books. He specializes in connecting whatever performer he is interested in to various historical trends and cultural figures. It can be witty and deft at times, but for the most part the tone and the endeavor is serious. I enjoyed his book on Johnny Rotten (real name John Lydon) and the Sex Pistols in which he connected them to John of Lyden, a Dutch religious fanatic who led a movement of crazies several centuries ago. Here he connects Bob Dylan and the Band's Basement Tapes recordings to sundry unusual threads of American folk culture. The connections are tenuous in places. For example, he refers to Constance Rourke's still widely read study "American Humor" and the concept she introduces of the mask, a protective, deadpan device worn by performers, salespeople, and con artists throughout American history - but this does not seem to really fit Dylan and his crew. There are other references to novels and the like which I had a similar reaction to. But things do click when he digs into the past of American folk music, and links the Basement Tapes to Harry Smith's famous Anthology of American Folk Music. There are many weird old songs and oddball performers there that Smith rescued from obscurity, and who plainly had an influence on Dylan. Marcus is good at digging up this strain of eccentric artistry (which he calls the Old Weird America) and presenting it to the reader. He discusses Frank Hutchison, who lived through the West Virginia Mine War of 1920-21 (something I did not hear about in my high school history classes, but should have) and gives us a long section on the life of Dock Boggs, a rough-edged Tennessean who may have been a big influence on Dylan. In other places, he rambles about Smithville and Kill Devil Hills, fictional places that represent the cultural space he is interested in. Marcus also gives us some idea of how and under what circumstances the Basement Tapes were made, and he spends time (too much of it) sharing his bombastic impressions of the songs. However, he tells us virtually nothing of the history of the recording's release, whether or not it was successful, and how the record company did (or didn't) deal with it. It might have been interesting to hear some more about how Dylan and the Band felt about the project. For big fans of the record (and I am one, I love its raw, eccentric, moody power), this book will probably be a useful adjunct, and for those who are interested in some of the other things Marcus explores here, it would probably be an interesting read. Dylan himself seemed to enjoy it, and like Johnny Rotten before him on "Lipstick Traces", provided a complimentary quote to grace the cover.
