By the time I was done with this, I wanted to set it on fire. While I do give Duffy credit for trying to approach her illness in a positive way, I found her a disgusting human being overall. She describes how hilarious it was to watch her ex-boyfriend being obnoxious and disruptive in public, with no obvious considering for the other people in and around the situation. She mocks other diseases which, while not life-threatening as her own, are still actual valid diseases that people suffer from. (I have multiple friends with Raynauds and I've seen them on days when they're pretty miserable). She scoffs at, borderline mocking, support groups. If you don't like them or want to go, fine, but they've done a lot of people a lot of good. Worst, to me, was reading about Duffy's realization regarding MRIs. She describes having to go every other month and how she hated them but then one day realized she understood what it was like to be in a veal crate. After coming to this awareness, one would think she would put some energy (or at least some of the money she obviously has) toward stopping such a cruel practice, right? Nope. She says she "rewards" herself for surviving her veal-crate like horror by going out after an having a veal sandwich. What. The. Fuck. Additionally, Duffy spends a ridiculous amount of time in the book name-dropping. Right. I get it. You dated Dwight Yokam and George Clooney. Good for you. You don't have to refer to them by full name every single time you mention them. And, really, who cares? The only thing they have to do with her recovery aside from being supportive friends is by being wealthy. She could have stayed somewhat humble/modest and referred to them as "a wealthy friend" or just "George", FFS. Speaking of money, it must be nice to have plenty of it, and have plenty of rich friends, when you're sick. How she expects the average person to relate to her story is beyond me. Plenty of people don't have health insurance, let alone extra money to bring hand-made, expensive cannoli to bring to their doctor whenever they go. Yeah, good, look on the bright side and stay positive. That can be a little tough when you've got mounting health bills you can't possibly pay. Good for her that she was able to continue modeling and acting. Not everyone is able to continue working when they're sick. Finally, she gives some advice that made me, as a nurse, grit my teeth. Bring people potted plants and bottled water and food they like! Uh, no. Not without checking with hospital policy and the patient's current doctor's orders. A patient may be on a fluid restriction or a specific diet or, at the very least, have their intake monitored and recorded. "Sneaking" someone in something they're not supposed to have may be more detrimental then you realize. The only chapter I truly enjoyed was written by her husband. While I certainly don't think anyone deserves suffering, the only reason I'm acutely saddened by Duffy's illness is that it prompted her to write this book.
