Today's review is on Night's Child by Cate Tiernan Night's Child is the special edition installment in Tiernan's Sweep series and receives two thumbs up. Four years have passed since the last book and Morgan and Hunter are still together and in love, though they don't get to see each other very often. Morgan is busy rebuilding the Belwicket coven that her mother was in, and Hunter is busy with setting up the New Charter; a newer and more evolved version of the Witches Council. This leaves Morgan to making the most difficult decision with regards to their relationship. She plans to break up with him, but is delighted when he turns around and proposes to her. The next day however Hunter dies is a horrible ferry accident and Morgan is devastated. Fifteen years later, we meet Morgans daughter Moira. Her life seems to mirror that of Morgans when she falls in love with a handsome young man who's mother is suspected of using dark magick. Strange things are beginning to happen around Morgan, and she realizes that Hunter may still be alive. She talks to Sky and she comes to help. Morgans half sister Iona has killed their father and taken his soul. With her increased power she has trapped Hunter on a deserted island for the last 16 years and it's up to Morgan, Sky, and Moira to rescue him. Once found, Hunter is surprised to find that Moira is in fact his daughter. And though Moira is confused, she sees and actually feels the love pouring from Hunter to her mother. Moira was fated by the Goddess to be born, she destroyed the dark wave heading towards Belwicket and her home with the help of her boyfriend Ian, her mom, Sky, and hunter along with members of the Belwicket coven. Things settle down a few days after the destruction of the dark wave, and low and behold Hunter once again proposes to Morgan and she says yes again. Everyone is happy and the all live Happily Ever After. Though some of the books received low stars, the series as a whole was enjoyable. I think many YA readers would enjoy the series and I highly recommend it. Love is expressed through mutual respect and trust, not through sex. (A welcome change from other YA books.) I have to give this 4.5 of 5 stars!! Excellent job Cate!!
