I recall reading somewhere once of Stephen King - a typically and not always kindly outspoken opinionist - commenting that Harris could tell a darn good story, but he was a lousy writer. When I began this book, I guess I could see where he was coming from. The writing feels oddly clunky and does not have that smooth, stream-like quality good prose possesses as the writer weaves it through the reader's brain. Hell, even plot-wise, it all starts off pretty slowly, and the book's thriller/suspense engine seems to be running at low gear. The villain (an admittedly interesting and quite sympathetic one) is the only character that really had me hooked. I guess Hannibal is good and all, but I prefer the Hopkins version in the films. Sometimes a great story, or even just a great character, is cemented more by the film adaptation rather than the original novel. While it is very often the case, one certainly cannot use the refrain "the book is better than the movie" in all cases. I actually think that is something said more often by people who actually do not read that much, so that they are blown away in the rarer instances they do. Anyway, after a little while, if you manage to hold on and wage through the somewhat tedious opening and the backstory I for some reason did not find as engaging as I feel I should have, Red Dragon does eventually come together. Although it isn't the best thriller I have read, it does certainly pull you into it, enough so that the lackadaisical prose and occasional overflow of pointless description does become less noticeable, and you find yourself eager to see how everything turns out. Perhaps I should mention, in respect to this book, that I had already seen (and loved) the movie numerous times. I have failed, thus far, to convince my wife (who somehow thinks Edward Norton is overrated - no wonder she liked The Italian Job , which Norton himself, for many a good reason, despised) to watch Red Dragon , which certainly has its moments, but all in all is decidedly less fucked up than both Silence of the Lambs and the deranged but sickly engaging Hannibal . The book is a perfectly decent one. But it's not great by any stretch of the imagination. Even Harris's best novel - Silence of the Lambs - does not quite qualify for that, in my small opinion. But yes, by all means read it. Belated postscript from 2021: I'm not sure how this is my most liked review on Goodreads. I am just a modest user with less than 60 friends, but I've written many far better than this, and the book itself is hardly one I even care much about. But there you go. I ain't gonna complain about it. I thought I would just add, however, that having also read the next two books, though not yet Hannibal Rising (which I've heard is pretty terrible), The Silence of the Lambs is decidedly better than this one. As for Hannibal , I'm not really sure. Like the movie, it's easily the most unsettling, but it has its strong moments. I can't really deal with the film anymore though, since for some reason what used to be seen as objectively disgusting and quite off-putting about some of Hannibal's baser actions (feeding a man his own brain, and also feeding a child said brain against his knowledge) are now held up as comical rather than gross and somewhat detrimental to the character's likeability. I never quite liked how the scary but still oddly noble and ever-so-intelligent Mr Lector morphed into a full-fledged horror-movie maniac in the second film. I always liked it better when Hannibal was reluctantly respected and admired from a safe distance, not gleefully applauded for being, in reality, not that much better than the more conventional villains he goes up against from inside his cell.
