"They wanted her. They knew her through and through; they knew her fragility and her plurality. And they still wanted her. They had stolen her in order to rescue her…" I have already officially declared myself a devoted John le Carré fan. It truly seems he cannot write something bad or even mediocre as far as I’m concerned. I knew with The Little Drummer Girl I would be missing my favorite spy, George Smiley. I’ve gotten pretty accustomed to seeing him in the pages of my novels every few months, and I feared I’d feel the lack of his presence here. And I did miss him a bit. But no matter, this book blew me away! The behind-the-scenes mastermind of this adventure, Martin Kurtz, is a different sort of man altogether. He seemed to be made of sterner stuff. "… he was too paradoxical, too complicated, made up of too many souls and colours… His power base was rickety and forever shifting, according to whom he had last offended in his quest for the expedient allegiance." What I found really refreshing in this book was the appearance of a leading lady. Up until now, it seems the men have been the stars of le Carré’s stage. This time we have the pleasure of meeting a star of the London stage, Charlie. "Her name was actually Charmian but she was known to everyone as 'Charlie,' and often as 'Charlie the Red' in deference to the colour of her hair and to her somewhat crazy radical stances, which were her way of caring for the world and coming to grips with its injustices." Charlie is given the chance to act in the role of a lifetime - that of a double-agent in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. There is a terrorist bomber out there that needs to be stopped in his tracks, and it needs to be done from the inside. Charlie may have flirted with radicalism before, but she is way out of her element in this one. Enter Joseph, her recruiter. The working relationship between these two is complex to say the least. I for one got completely caught up in the dilemmas presented by the roles both assumed in this very nuanced ‘theater of the real.’ "He’s come to collect my soul, she thought as she swung jauntily past him in order to demonstrate her immunity. Yet when did I ever promise him he could have it?" This is far more than your typical espionage thriller. This is brilliant writing combined with moral complexities where the lines between good and bad are always blurred. This is first-rate characterizations combined with extreme tension and intrigue. It's a very unique and tragic love triangle of sorts. This is not le Carré standing up on his soapbox and forcing his political views on us. Rather, we are given the opportunity to look at the human element on both sides of an issue. It’s relevant even today, almost forty years since its publication. Without a doubt, it is a literary novel of the highest caliber. I’m not sure I’ll watch the movie adaptation starring Diane Keaton, but I am super eager to check out the BBC miniseries production released in 2018. Update 1/31/2020: The BBC miniseries with Florence Pugh, Alexander Skarsgård, and Michael Shannon is brilliant! "… the logic was the fiction, and the fiction was a web that enmeshed everyone who tried to sweep it away."
