This is a story about a little boy named Elbert who hears a bad word in a crowd full of people. The story makes the bad word into its own little character, but it is in a negative way to show that it is bad. It describes it as small storm cloud that was ugly and covered with dark, bristly hairs. Elbert snatches the word from the air and stuffs it into his back pocket. Elbert ends up using the bad word when a mallet is dropped on his foot and it makes his mother pretty mad. By the end of the book, Elbert learns his lesson and when the same event happens again he learns his lesson and uses different words to express his pain. The characters within this story include Elbert, his mother, and the little creature that represents the bad word. This story also includes a bunch of other random people that are attending the same elegant garden party as Elbert. The main character of this story is obviously Elbert, and he seems to just be a normal little kid attending a fancy garden party. The way the bad word is explained is pretty interesting and really helps to have a visual for the reader of what bad words look like that and why they are bad. Most of the pages have the text at the bottom of the page and centered and then the images are covering the rest of the page. The illustrations are very cool and represent what is happening in the story really well. I like that this book is colorful and fun just like a lot of Audrey Wood’s books. I also like that it has a good message in it and can teach a lesson to the students reading it about bad words and how they should not be used. It is a very easy read as well and the way that the characters are portrayed really helps to be able to understand the story. I think this could be a book that is included in the classroom just as a good read for students, but I also think that it can be used to help teach a lesson if necessary. There might be a time that a student in class says a bad word that might have heard around school or at home and that would be a good situation to bring out this book and read it to help remind the students that bad words are not okay. It could also be read in the beginning of the year to help make the rules of the classroom and what is expected by the teacher when it comes to words and then reinforced if need be throughout the year.
