I am one of those who, after reading this novel once in my twenties, put it away with a sense of disappointment. Don't get me wrong, I still thought this was a solid regency novel, quality-wise as good as anything Heyer was capable of producing. But the romance! All the way through I sympathised with Jenny and was pained for Jenny, and in the end when she still wishes so much that Adam could love her as he loved Julia, I had felt unsatisfied and annoyed. Revisiting this novel in my thirties, I have to say... it's like I'm reading a different book! Honestly, I would posit that this is the only real romance Heyer ever wrote. Let me explain. Also, warning... Instead of reading this novel from Jenny's perspective, as I did before, I read it, this time, from Adam's. I guess this is something new readers of Heyer might not know, but Heyer started writing for her brother, and was guided and edited by her father, and so her romances are actually very sympathetic towards men and much more oriented towards masculine sensibilities than you might be used to from other romances. In fact, I thoroughly recommend her novels to everybody, man or woman, romance-reader or not, because there is so much more adventure, history and comedy in them, than there ever is of the smooshy stuff. But that's by the by. So, reading this from Adam's perspective changes everything, because he is the actual protagonist of this novel, not Jenny. He is the more complex character, the one who grows and changes, the one whose arc we are really observing. Adam is a soldier, an attractive young man who is in love with a beautiful girl. When his father dies and saddles him with a ruined estate and mountains of debt, the dream of marrying the beautiful girl has to die, along with any plans and hopes Adam might have had. His world is turned upside down and out of a sense of responsibility he agrees, reluctantly and with some misgivings, to marry the plain and prosaic Jenny. She is the daughter of a vulgar but kind tradesman. She is not vulgar herself, though, but practical, sensible and (though Adam doesn't know it) in love with Adam. She agrees to the match because (as she later confesses to his sister in one of this novel's most heartbreaking scenes) this is the only way she could have helped him. She knows he is in love with somebody else. She knows she is too plain to ever attract him the way his first love, Julia, did. But she is determined that he shall be comfortable with her, at least, and so sets to work to accomplish this. Heyer does not mince matters. She goes to work to find the places in which such a marriage would rub and clash. She tells you, the reader who expects sighs and budding lusts and ugly-duckling-to-beautiful-swans transformations, that Adam looks upon his bride, the girl he had just married, and is momentarily repulsed by her. She tells you how awkward their honeymoon was. She lets Jenny's father trample into their marriage with his well-meaning but annoying and domineering offers to lavish the couple with every extravagant luxury. She also lets Adam yearn for another woman. But as the novel goes on, she also allows Jenny to shine - not in the way Julia did, not by ever becoming slender and beautiful, but by being herself: solid, plain but sensible, attentive to her husband's actual needs, attentive to her new home, intelligent, resourceful, caring. She allows Adam to see it, and as he grows up, to slowly appreciate and learn to love her. The story is really about his growing up: from the boy who yearns to be a soldier in action and desires with all his heart and body the beautiful, unattainable dream of a girl, to the man who farms, brings his house out of ruin, and loves his plain but capable wife. As a young romance reader I really wanted him to fall head over heels in love with Jenny. But as a grown up married woman, I know now that if that were what Heyer had written, I would have found it sweet for a few seconds and then I’d have put the book down and forgotten it as a nonsensical fantasy. Even when I did not like this romance, I have to admit, I never forgot it. Scenes from this one stuck with me much more than any from any other Heyer novel. Adam gaining a thorough, genuine appreciation of Jenny, a deep and warm liking, a feeling of being comfortable and being at home is romantic in a way that stays with you and makes you wonder, more deeply than any other romance, what love really is. And whether the romances we read really are about love. It seems by definition that they should be. But how often are they about couples who, seeing each other once, get all horny and behave silly? How often is it about couples who don't know each other really at all? That’s not love, is it? Love is about knowing someone and understanding them to their core, caring about someone, worrying about them, feeling complete and relaxed when in their company. In that sense, Jenny and Adam’s is the most really romantic romance of all of Heyer’s work. For all that Heyer makes you go through to get to that ending, it really is satisfying when Adam finally sees Julia for the sentimental airhead she is. It is soul-satisfying to have her bothering him with nonsense when he hasn't even had his breakfast yet. Jenny might have her own unrealistic fantasies about love, just the way Adam does, but when he looks upon her and kisses her and tells her that he loves her, I know that that is precisely what he means. He is not infatuated with her, blinded by her or giddy with longing for her. He loves her the way a husband loves his wife when all that nonsense passes. In fact, he loves her the way you, the reader, know he would never have grown to love Julia. With her he'd only ever have had that first rush of blind bewitchment, and when that dissolved, it would have left him with nothing but pleasant memories of a youthful passion. She would have grown as tiresome a burden to him as his mother is. So, here I am, ready to eat crow! I apologise to all my GR friends with whom I argued about this novel being unromantic! I was wrong and you were right. There.
