I have to say, this book took me by surprise. I was expecting a typical late 90’s romance I could skim through, but instead was drawn in by the characters and the magic of the town called Bethlehem and the holiday season. Even with a betrayal present, I empathized with the H and h and hoped for a believable ending. Some Enchanted Season is a book about rediscovery, accountability, and realizing what is important. It’s about second chances. Ross and Maggie were well on their way to a divorce. They both evolved into different people having different goals and desires. The past few years of their marriage had been filled with bitterness, accusations and defensiveness, and misguided intentions. They lived separate lives, eventually slept in separate bedrooms, and most recently, began living apart. With the filing for a divorce simply a formality, they decided to have one last gathering on Christmas Eve at her new home until a discovery and an argument had Maggie hopping into her car on that snowy night and careening into a ravine, nearly dying. The story picks up eleven months later as she’s released after multiple surgeries and intensive rehabilitation, minus her memories of the months leading up to that fateful night. She remembers that she wanted to leave him and agrees they should continue with the divorce. He agreed to take care of her at her home, mostly out of guilt, for the next couple of months and to ensure she can function on her own. This time allowed both parties to reassess the relationship. I really enjoyed how the failings weren’t just laid out on the table and all of the sudden the characters magically understood, kiss-kiss, and it was over. No. Those arguments were thrown at each other over the years which obviously never sunk in, each thinking the other was selfish. It was the quiet times in the characters’ heads that gave way to discoveries. Like Ross noticing that Maggie was wearing his sweater and thinking to himself “she used wear my sweaters just to feel closer to me… when had she given up wanting that intimacy?” Or as he's telling his employees to figure things out on their own “why hadn’t I set these limits years ago? Why hadn’t I set evenings with my wife as private times to be interrupted by nothing less than the end of the world? If I had made it clear to everyone that nothing took priority over her, if I had shown her that kind of commitment and respect, none of the last year would have happened. So many ifs, so many regrets.” Those moments really got to me as i am a sucker for all that is wistful. I really thought I’d hate Ross but I can empathize. I can see how he spiraled out of control and how he landed in the situation he did. They both thought they lost the love they once had and although he felt guilty, he had been resigned for years that he lost Maggie already. I found it warming and heartbreaking at the same time to see his guilt for his actions and self-loathing increase in direct proportion not only to his renewed love for her, but his fear of her regaining her memory. I felt his desperation and despair at the thought of losing her again. This was just short of a 5 star book and here’s why: the ending. I felt that it was unrealistic and needed to be drawn out a little bit more. Even the most insightful person needs some time to come to terms with the events and go through the stages properly to arrive at a believable conclusion. Sure, the discovery happened a year ago, but, that memory was new to her. As far as she’s feeling, it JUST happened. She never had the chance to process it the first time around and the speed of forgiveness took a little away for me. I also could have done without the mystical and divine intervention, but then they would have had to come up with a different title for the book, hmm? Overall, this was a lovely surprise and I will definitely be reading more about the other characters in the town of Bethlehem.
