I pretty much read this book and Woodrell's The Death of Sweet Mister back to back. Give Us a Kiss was so much less of a downer and really quite amusing. I guess Woodrell was trying to "one-up" his Missouri hillbillies vs their counterparts in KY and TN. The story takes place in Howl Co. in southern Missouri (Woodrell's home turf). In this short novel the reader will be exposed to Lucky Strikes, Johnny Walker Red (ugh), Stag Beer, the Git 'N Quick, cow chip golf, Country Beaver and the Rythmn Drifters(?), catfish noodling, Razorback Red from the money garden, the Rocky Drop and more including a trailer attached to an A-frame. If you already know this stuff "then you might be a redneck." Our cast of characters include General Joe and Mom, the brothers Doyle and Smoke, Grandpa Panda, Sheriff Lilley, members of the Dolly clan (they reappear in Winter's Bone) and my personal favorites, the mother and daughter team of Big Annie and Niagra (Mom couldn't spell Niagara for the birth certificate). There's even a flea ravaged mutt named Damned Spot, right out of MacBeth. Woodrell's theme is alleged to be "generational criminality." Each new generation of the Redmond clan is born to be bad, it's in their genes and it cannot be helped. Old man Grandpa Panda, a convicted felon, has got himself a closet full of guns and ammo under the stairs of the ol homestead. Ready for feuding. Yes, there is some bad stuff that goes on and people even get killed. Oh well, who cares about a Dolly but another Dolly? In my view the story is about the beauty and the sensuousness of the country girl, Niagra, and her equally impressive mama, Big Annie. I do believe that Niagra was modeled after Daisey Mae of Little Abner comic/cartoon fame. Much more than a sailor's dream. Big Annie? Well, Big Annie was not big in the sense of being XL, she was buxom. Big Annie also possessed a sweet disposition which made her very likable. I found the book to be fun and funny. It is well written and enjoyable. Gotta love those country sirens. They stole the show. "All we demanded was our right to twinkle." I almost gave the book 5 stars but thought it would be too hard to explain.
