After Lucy is supposed to be "affecting and wise" according to Vanity Fair. I would dearly like to know how they reached that conclusion, because there are no insights into anything, and I found it impossible to be affected by the misadventures of this jerk. I hate Porter. He's supposed to be a likable everyman, but how are we supposed to empathize with this man-child? His jokes aren't funny and often play off facile stereotypes. Hur hur, granolaland, hur hur, fat people, yuk yuk, abstract art. He runs around meekly trying to work up the fortitude to even meekly defy the will of his in-laws, like a passive-aggressive teenager. He agonizes over the dumbest things, wondering at one point if he should throw a pebble into the pool before deciding against it. If the idea is that he is supposed to be less uptight, one wonders what he was doing going on a spur of the moment trip in the first place. Also off putting was the implicit racism in someone who freaks out at the thought of entering, in broad daylight, a :gasp: black neighborhood! At one point he worries the only black characters in this book (two guys playing chess, not given speaking roles) might pull a switchblade on him for no reason. And what about the insights peddled by this book? So he lives off of the in-laws, has a snitty teenage rebellion, and throws a hissy fit before learning to "take responsibility" for his kids and his life. This basically means handing them off to the inlaws. He learns how to empathize with the wealthy parents while the washed up hippies decide that they've totally got to grow up. And on top of all that, he learns to fear black people all over again. Heartwarming. What are we supposed to learn? That it sucks when people die? Duh. There's a vague sense that maybe he should be less uptight and controlling, except that he was never that controlling to begin with. That life happens when you least expect it? That's incredibly cliché, so I'm pretty sure that's it. That two weeks later you too can find some hippie chick to, like, totally ogle and have mind-blowing sex with? Yeah, sure, why not. Not a good book.
