I thoroughly enjoyed the book The Necessary Hunger written by Nina Revoir. The main topics in this book were basketball, jealousy, careers, and growing up in a dangerous town. I really enjoyed this book for multiple reasons. For one, basketball was a big focus in this book, and as a basketball player I really liked the detail that the author put into the basketball scenes. As I was reading I could tell that the author really knew what she was talking about and did her research about the game. Another reason I enjoyed this book is that it was really easy to get your head in the setting and get attached to the characters. I found myself getting mad at the father when he made a decision I thought was bad, or being sad when something didn’t go the main character’s way. The characters being so deep and complicated made the story believable and a lot easier to get invested in. The point of view of this book comes from the main character, Nancy Takahiro. She lives in a house with her father, as well as another star basketball player, Raina, and Raina’s mother. The book took place in the mid 1980s, in Inglewood, California. It all started when Nancy’s dad started going out with Raina’s mom. This would normally be totally fine, but since Nancy was Asian and Raina was black, their parents were looked down on as a couple. Some of the problems in the book consist of Nancy trying to decide where she wants to go to college, Nancy having a “crush” on Raina but Raina already having a girlfriend, and Raina’s dad’s problems that he’s fighting through at work. Overall though, the biggest problem is Nancy dealing with growing up in a dangerous neighborhood, especially as an Asian. Due to this, the theme of the book is someone can never let their background and childhood destroy their future and potential, even when they don’t believe in themselves. In this book, I really liked the way that the author made the characters so realistic. There were certainly points in the story when I felt like I could be reading a true story because of how the characters didn’t have perfect lives, or horrible lives, they had very realistic lives. For example, there were times when Nancy would be doing horribly, Raina wasn’t talking to her, her friend was in jail, another friend got kicked out of her house, and she wasn’t getting along with her dad. It was at a time like this when she would win a big game or her friend got the news that she got into Berkley. These moments made it believable, highlighting not just the negatives, but also the positives. For me, the biggest weakness of this book involved some scenes that were really slow tempo and felt like they stretched out for too long. For the most part all the scenes that weren’t basketball games seemed to move slowly. For example, in one scene, Nancy and Raina were running and doing a late-night workout, during this it felt like the author spent an unnecessary amount of time explaining the air, and Nancy’s breathing. However, I can’t complain about this too much because it gave me a good idea of what the characters feel; it just slowed down the pace of the book. In the end, this wasn’t my favorite writing style, but it was something different, and I really enjoyed it. The author made it feel like I was in the story and gave me a story I could visualize really well. For this reason, I liked this book, and I’d recommend it to sports fans and athletes, as well as to anyone looking for a really realistic feeling story.
