4 ⭐ The Tao is definitely the most beautifully elusive and intangible philosophy that I've had the pleasure of trying to wrap my head around. Everything about it drips with mystery and mysticism, right down to it’s purported author, the enigma that is Lao Tzu . I really made an effort to understand what was meant by each and every poem. I read Ursula K. Le Guin’s rendition alongside this, more scholarly translation, by D.C.Lau and I listened to multiple audio versions, driving to and from work, but still, I feel I only received just the barest glimpse into the depth of Lao Tzu’s words. I’m not particularly surprised by this, people spend their entire lives studying the Tao, attempting to keep to ‘The Way’. You don’t just read this on a whim and suddenly start living the Tao. In fact, in my opinion, if one were to heed Lao Tzu’s words, one would likely come to the conclusion that we’ve strayed so far off the path as a people, that to get back on it would take an unrealistically monumental change in worldview, philosophy and ideology. The book relishes in its own mystery . As Le Guin states so aptly in her rendition, there is a “temptation… to grasp at something tangible in the endlessly deceptive simplicity of the words” but, on occasion, the slipperiness of the idea… Is the idea. If I had a dollar for every 30-something pommy hipster I’ve seen on YouTube, repeating Lau Tzu’s 1st chapter with a self-satisfied smirk… ”The way that can be spoken of Is not the constant way; The name that can be named Is not the constant name.” … only to then immediately attempt to explain it anyway! They obviously never reached chapter 71: ”Not to know yet to think that one knows will lead to difficulty.” You can’t label or define the Tao as by doing so you limit its function which is, inherently, limitless. All one can know is that it was “born before heaven and earth” and supports the universe. It is responsible for the strong being strong but equally responsible for the weak being weak. We can’t define it but we can definitely discuss the concepts that make up the Taoist teachings. "The reason I have great trouble is that I have a body. When I no longer have a body, what trouble have I?" Ideal attributes of the Taoist include modesty, frugality, contentment (desirelessness), compassion, tenderness, softness, vulnerability, selflessness (benefitting others without expecting gratitude), non-contention, ignorance (apparently) and the ability to find positives in negatives (i.e. without lows, there are no highs… Without death, there is no life… We suffer, but only because we have a body). Doing not doing is also an ongoing theme in the book. I’ve been banging on about this one for years to my fiancé and she just tells me I’m a lazy fu… sod! Lao Tzu says: ”One does less and less until one does nothing at all, and when one does nothing at all there is nothing that is undone” …. What? If everyone else is allowed to take ancient philosophies out of context, so am I damn it! In all seriousness though, Lao Tzu usually uses this phrase in relation to governance, as in, a leader should lead with minimal meddling in the affairs of the people. Or in relation to the individual, living without striving for more. So, yeah, still gotta do the dishes. “He who shows himself is not conspicuous; He who considers himself right is not illustrious; He who brags will have no merit; He who boasts will not endure." Be like water . Another common theme… ”there is nothing more submissive and weak than water. Yet for attacking that which is hard and strong nothing can surpass it . I have come across this idea in the form of analogy and/or metaphor now in 3 works. Sun Tzu’s ‘Art of War’, Lao Tzu’s ‘Tao Te Ching’ and Bruce Lee’s ‘Tao of Jeet Kune Do’, each time given slight variation in its implication and, I love it! The only issue I have, in this case, is that, at times Lao Tzu’s “weak” and “soft” descend into utter subservience to anything stronger or greater than yourself. Essentially giving in as a means of survival. D C Lau explains that this is likely a result of the time in which the book was written (The Warring States) in which self-preservation was as much as many would dare to achieve. The Tao Te Ching is not just a book about a way for the individual to live in sync with the Tao. Lao Tzu also likes to comment on the dangers of wealth and living beyond ones most basic needs, as well as expressing his opinions on governance and anti-violence sentiments. Lao Tzu was an anti-capitalist and anarchist before these things even existed . Those who possess too much wealth while others starve, who are “dressed in fineries” or “filled with food and drink” while others go hungry, he condemns as “taking the lead in robbery”. Whilst not completely anarchistic, Lao Tzu is almost completely anti-legislative and believes that leaders should lead with minimal meddling in the affairs of the people, stating, ”…the myriad creatures all revere the way and honour virtue. Yet the way is revered and virtue honoured not because this is decreed by any authority but because it is natural for them to be treated so” . Later, he likens governing a large state to “boiling a small fish” because a small fish can be spoiled with too much handling. ”The rites are the wearing thin of loyalty and good faith And the beginning of disorder; Foreknowledge is the flowery embellishment of the way And the beginning of folly.” These views regarding governance tie in with one of his more extreme ideas that education, innovation and progress are all things to be avoided. Ignorant people are easier to rule and one should also rule in ignorance. It’s essentially an expansion on the idea of not doing. There’s an anti-change and anti-intellectual leaning in his words. In Chapter 29, Lao says: ”The empire is a sacred vessel and nothing should be done to it. Whoever does anything to it will ruin it; whoever lays hold of it will lose it”. Le Guin says: ”As a model for the Taoist, a baby is in many ways ideal: totally un-altruistic, not interested in politics, business or the proprieties, weak [and] soft” . Although I disagree, on many levels, with Lao’s concept, it’s hard to ignore the fact that for all the progress the human race has made on an industrial, technological, political and psychological level, we’ve still managed to completely fuck our planet, almost beyond repair, and despite the fact that many have a better standard of living than 2500 years ago, it is hard to remember a time when so many people were so desperately unhappy. This specific edition contains a magnificent and substantial introduction in which Lau (not to be confused with Lao) gives his own thoughtful and scholarly opinions on what some of the key concepts that can be taken from the text are. He also discusses what is known about the history of the text and the period in which it was, traditionally, thought to have been compiled in and addresses inconsistencies in the text, giving convincing arguments for the case that the book was likely not written by one wise old sage named Lao Tzu at all, but in fact was a compilation of many different Taoist thinkers, their disciples and, later, various commentators. Lau later comments further on this in two very interesting appendices titled ‘The Problem of Authorship’ and ‘The Nature of the Work’. Personally, I’d prefer not to acknowledge that this text may have been written after Confucius’ time or that Lao Tzu may never have existed. I’m too enamoured with the idea of an old sage, so wise and all-knowing as to render Confucius himself bewildered enough to allegedly exclaim to his own disciples: ”I know a bird can fly, a fish can swim, and an animal can run… But the dragon’s ascent into heaven on the wind and the clouds is something which is beyond my knowledge. Today I have seen Lao Tzu who is perhaps like a dragon.”
