The first of Asimov's many science essay collections is a strong, well-structured entry, and boasts virtues not often seen in anthologies, namely foreshadowing, momentum, and a big payoff at the end. That said, my overall attitude toward Asimov's nonfiction is not terribly critical because since I was a child I have been in awe of the exuberance with which he acquired and disseminated historical and scientific knowledge. See my review of The Solar System and Back for an explanation of the filter through which I view his nonfiction, and particularly his science essays. Being a first entry, the autobiographical or anecdotal asides with which Asimov began most of his later essays (particularly for the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction ) are almost entirely absent here--Asimov's tone is more businesslike than it would later become. While Asimov fans may find that this detracts, I don't--I enjoy Asimov's personality but I'm here for the science. And he delivers. Importantly, astronomy is lightly represented in this collection; nuclear physics and organic chemistry dominate. Organic chem has long been a tough subject for me to get excited about even though I can intellectually apprehend its importance, and I am appreciative that Asimov turned his gifts for clear explanation to it in this anthology. The essays here were written in the mid-to-late 1950s, but the Ace Paperback edition I'm reviewing dates to 1976; Asimov added endnotes of no more than a paragraph each to a few of the essays, but no other alterations are evident. After a brief introduction (just over two pages) which serves to explain the title, this anthology comprises: "The Atoms That Vanish" (original, 1957) "The Explosions within Us" (original, 1957) "Hemoglobin and the Universe" ( Astounding Science Fiction , February 1955) "Victory on Paper" ( Astounding Science Fiction , September 1955) "The Abnormality of Being Normal" ( Astounding Science Fiction , May 1956) "Planets Have an Air About Them" ( Astounding Science Fiction , March 1957) "The Unblind Workings of Chance" ( Astounding Science Fiction , April 1957) "The Trapping of the Sun" ( Astounding Science Fiction , May 1957) "The Sea-Urchin and We" ( Astounding Science Fiction , July 1957) "The Sound of Panting" ( Astounding Science Fiction , June 1955) "The Marvellous Properties of Thiotimoline" 1. "The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline" ( Astounding Science Fiction , March 1948) 2. "The Micropsychiatric Applications of Thiotimoline" ( Astounding Science Fiction , December 1953) "Pâté de Foie Gras" ( Astounding Science Fiction , September 1956) The penultimate chapter republishes Asimov's parody of academic writing on the occasion of the completion of his Ph.D. dissertation work, and marks one of his first forays outside of science fiction. The companion piece constitutes his follow-up on the former's deliberately ludicrous premise. The final article builds upon several of the nuclear-physical and metabolic concepts introduced earlier, and rather than taking the form of an essay, it's more of a whimsical scientific mystery story. Within the context of this collection, it's a five-star piece.
