I read this many years (decades) ago and remember being spellbound. Rinse and repeat. Not disappointed. ——————— “It was for this reason that the Sacred College decided to silence Jean Marie Barette and suppress the account of his vision. They knew that the backlash of a millennial proclamation could be enormous. Yet it was for exactly the same reason that Jean Marie proposed in his encyclical a preparation of the spirit against an inevitable period of social insanity. He wanted physicians and places of asylum already established before the epidemic took hold. And, in principle, at least, I believe he was right. Even in ancient times asylum was a mystic word. It connoted a sacred place, a temple, a shrine, a forest grove where a criminal or a runaway slave would find sanctuary from his pursuers and sleep safe under the numen of the resident god. It was not merely the ingathering which was important. It was the outgoing as well; the outgoing of the power, the hope, the life-thrust, which sustained the panting fugitive for the last mile as the hounds bayed closer and closer at his heels.” ————————- “What do you really want?" "Enough light to see a Divine sense in this mad world. Enough faith to follow the light. That's the core of it all, isn't it? Faith to move mountains, to say to the cripple: 'Arise and walk!' " "We also need some love to make the darkness tolerable." ———————- "Evil is the ultimate absurdity," said Jean Marie Barett "It is the last sad buffoonery: man sitting in the ruins of hi world, daubing himself with his own excrement." —————- Each man will be judged by the light he is given. ———————— “So, in the evil times which are now upon us, you are chosen to keep the small flame of love alight, to nurture the seeds of goodness in this small place, until the day when the Spirit sends you out to light other candles in a dark land and plant new seeds in a blackened earth. "I am with you now; but tomorrow I shall be gone. You will be alone and afraid. But I leave my peace with you and my love. And you will love one another as I have loved you. "Please!" He urged them to cheerfulness. "You must not be sad! The gift of the Holy Spirit is gladness of heart." ————————- This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
