Awful writing. I mean, awful . Branden writes like a third-rate romantic novelist. And there is literally no one to like in this story, at least as he portrays them. However, as a key to understanding Rand I regret to say that this is probably indispensable. And bear in mind that Branden still largely agrees with his personal Mrs. Robinson's "philosophy". Look, the fact that she had an affair with someone half her age doesn't make Ayn Rand a bad person. She took care of that in many other ways. But her "reasoning" to rationalize what she was doing highlights the fact that she was second-rate as a thinker. On a good day. Branden portrays a woman who demanded unquestioning obedience at a level that would make a medieval pope think twice. Those with the temerity to disagree with Rand were subjected to inquisitions (and at least in his own case, Rand slapped him around a bit, which is regrettable but understandable --- the reader may find himself with itchy palms before the end of this opus). However, there is no serious dispute of the grillings members of the Collective were subjected to by Rand's directive. The most damning fact revealed about Rand is not her treatment of her husband or the series of "friends" and family members she shed without a qualm (and without giving them any credit for assisting her, either through financial or mental aid). It is the fact that Rand didn't read. I have always wondered why she got the essential message of Christianity so wrong. She didn't know anything about it. This extends to history as well. Her instincts were for conspiracy theories. Branden is particularly insightful when he talks about the glum depression Rand entered (along with her Tonto) when Atlas Shrugged failed to stop the engine of the world. Why weren't there first-rate minds willing to engage on behalf of her philosophy? The obvious answer never seems to have occured to either of them. No first-rate minds took her seriously. It is also telling that her most intimate followers --- and she didn't have friends, you were either a follower or nothing --- were people at the very beginnings of their careers. Branden started crushing on her when he was fourteen, which seems about right. Branden's chief failure? Yes, Rand was intolerable. She was a spoiled brat who managed to get people to buy her novels. I have read them (as well as her defence of selfishness), and I get it. Rand favored plot, and both Fountainhead and Atlas drive right along in between the crushingly boring "philosophy". You can get the same thing from any Danielle Steele or Judith Krantz without having to wade through long passages about how lonely it is to be a misunderstood free market capitalist. No, Branden's failure lies in the inability to realize what a total dope he has been all of his life. If anything, he emerges from this thing as even worse a character than Rand. There is also a bit at the end wherein Devers Branden, his third wife, purports to relate a visit she pulled on the elderly Ayn Rand. Aside from the inherent improbablility of what Mrs. B recounts and Branden relays to you, Gentle Reader, there is at least this comfort for the man. He has once again succeeded in marrying someone who sounds just like him.
