Mother of Pearl by Melinda Haynes is an amazing novel. Written in 1999, it has been on my shelf for years. Moving has pushed me to review what is on those shelves and retirement is giving me more time to read. I took this book on my trip to Portugal, so much was read on airplanes. It is set in Mississippi in 1956 and ends in 1961. In small Mississippi towns, the Civil Rights movement is not in the forefront. One character, Canaan Mosley follows the movement in the newspaper, he is personally victimized as he it hit with a bottle. An avid reader, he works as a janitor in the library, so he is there at night and not permitted on the grounds during the day. Yet, the core is the way he and his neighbor, Even Grade, support each other and also open new doors for each other both within the Black community create bridges to the White community. The characters are strong, but also, we learn their histories as we move through the book and see how personally they have each been harmed by racial injustices. Black women are part of this circle, Joody Two Sun, and Grace. Grace, as been a caregiver to a White family, and follows them through various traumas. Joody Two Sun appears in the woods, a strong spiritual woman who is drawn to Even Grade, long working man whose orphan status has shaped him and some incidents in Memphis still haunt time. He meets Grace and see her as a potential partner for his friend, Canaan Mosley. The coupling is complicated for both, but they do endure. We see members of the White community who have secrets that shape their lives, but many adults continue to keep the knowledge hidden from those most in need, even if the adult actions are taken to keep those secrets. There are three young White people who pull members of the Black community into their world: Valuable, Joleb and Jackson. Valuable, a young girl who has lost her grandmother, Luvenia, who raised her in some supportive but questionable ways. With Luvenia’s death, Valuable’s mother, Enid is back in the picture, but they do not talk and Enid continues her seductive ways with various men. Eventually she does leave. Valuable’s other family, Neva and Bea, take over her care, when they can, moving her into their home and making plans for her future. Valuable sees how the knowledge of Joody Two Sun is more supportive of her real path. In that household Even Grade also comes to care for Valuable. They each recognize something in the other. Joleb, is in the family that Grace cared for decades. In the face of losing his brother and mother, he depends on the support of others, since his family is keeping his own origins a secret. His mother suffered a stroke at his birth, so she did little mothering, Grace did that for him. As his finds his roots, he makes a new path. Jackson, who has grown up with Valuable, comes to see her sexually, but his parents move him to Alabama. He is distant, while Valuable is with child. The plans for the child are complex, as family members has different ones. In removing Jackson from his community, his parents have cut his ties to people who initially cared about him. Not focusing on the movement is a strength of this book, as we see how Black people continue to live in a segregated and racial divided rural area, but to connect in various ways. We also see the compromises and also the adjustments that White people make as they learn their real connections across color lines. Yet, we see how racial inequality harmed all and made it difficult for people to have real connections. It is the small Black enclave and the White folks who are connected to them who survive.
