Update: Finally able to talk about the book. This book touched my heart, made me laugh so many times, made me mad and made me cry. There are a lot of books I would never have read if it wasn't for my Goodreads friends, but the two most memorable and that have made it to my favorites list are: The Conte Of Monte Cristo and Lonesome Dove I loved so many characters in this book and I feel like I have been on that journey with them. I kept wishing they would have stayed in Texas or at least stopped in Nebraska after so much they went through. And my emotions are still raw as I cry. Because people die and when you love characters you don't want that but that is life for real, life in books and life in movies and tv. I will write a more detailed review after I have had some time away from what I just read. I'm going to have to watch some shows, read more books and come back to talk about these people I grew to love. To be continued. . . Mel ❤️ Like I have said, this book really got to me. I fell in love with so many of the characters. I loved Augustus and he made me laugh through this whole book. I have to say he was my favorite character. I loved Call too but Gus was the one. I loved Deets and he also has a special place in my heart. I loved how he was with them for 30 something years. He was a great man and a great tracker. Roscoe is another character who cracked me up. He was so innocent and funny. I loved the relationship between him and the little girl, Janey. I didn't really care for Jake at all. If they never listened to him none of the bad things would have happened. I felt bad for him for a minute when he ended up with the Suggs boys and what happened to him in that situation. I felt bad for Lorena and all that happened to her. I loved the relationship between her and Gus. I loved Newt (who could not love Newt). I really wish he could have gotten better closure at the end of the book. I loved Pea Eye, the Irishmen, the pigs, the horses, Bolivar, Po, Clara, July, Joe, Wilbarger and I'm sure I have left some out. I just know that if you have been putting off reading this book, don't, go ahead and get to it. I think 9 times out of 10, you won't regret it! Mel ♥
