Creepy fun reading! LAUGHING WHILE CREEPING OUT! This is a great novel, only that curiously when I bought this book, I bought also, another novel by Dean Koontz titled "Life Expectancy" (you can see my review of that book here: Life Expectancy . I comment this, since I found both novels quite similar. Not exactly the general story and developing but the mood of the storyline. I totally adored Life Expectancy and I jumped right after that book to read this one and I was like "Mmh, I'm feeling like deja vú". But don't get me wrong, the stories are totally different but I think that since before of these two books, I hadn't read a Dean Koontz book with such many humor elements, usually you find characters quite likable and some amusing moments where you smile, but so far, my Koont experience was strictly of creepy horror, not creepy fun. And I don't tell this as something bad, since I think that's kinda expected to do standard horror, but crafting stories with clear horror intention, but with such rich funny sense, it's quite cool. Even recently, you find a lot of this in movies and TV series, but at least me, back in 2007, it wasn't something so usual. But I totally embrace it. So, initially, I thought that Life Expectancy was like unique on that angle, but right after I read that one, I found here, in Ticktock , another horror book with rich humor elements. THOSE WONDERFUL WOMEN Another thing that I found quite similar is the female companion character of the main protagonist. On both books, the main protagonist finds a spectacular female character with great personality. So, while I loved both characters in each novel, it didn't help to my "deja vú" feeling. I know that Dean Koontz re-use a lot of elements, like smart dogs, protagonists who like to read and/or are writers, over-detailed towns, etc... and I love his work for all that. As I say, "Tick Tock" is a wonderful horror story with a great humorous ambiance, quite entertaining and a really page-turner. In fact I read it quite quickly. So, I still recommend it a lot. Just try to read this book, Ticktock and Life Expectancy with some time in between of each of them. Quite advisable, if you read something else, of a different genre, in between. I'm sure that you'll enjoy both books!!! Have creepy fun!!!
