I can’t imagine having a family dependent on me and spending my monies beyond my assets. All the while, frivolously enjoying myself with the nobility as did the late fifth Viscount, Lord Lynton. In the end, he left a financial mess and what should have been a tale of ruin. Adam, the sixth Viscount and new Lord Lynton, met with his deceased sire’s man of business. In order to hold on to his estate, he was given an answer and it was as clear as day. He needed to marry an heiress. ~~~~~ Before I go on with my review, I need to get one minor quibble out of the way ! This is the second story I have read by Georgette Heyer and I may have overlooked it before now ! Can you guess? ! It is her use of exclamation points when a person is having a conversation ! I don’t think of myself as having OCD but it got to the point that as I read each page I couldn’t help but go back to count the (!) ! It ranged from 6- 16 on any given page before I finally surrendered my tendency to tally the totals ! ~~~~~ That said, I enjoyed this realistic story with a marriage of convenience theme. I speak with experience as I have read almost 90 MOC romances over the years. I have rated some with 5 stars and others I have marked DNF. A Civil Contract is in my top ten because the main characters were portrayed in such a human fashion . Adam planned on selling his home, Fontley, and give up his dream of marrying the beautiful Julia Oversley. It was hard to beat the conversation between Julia’s father and the weary Adam. Within a short while, Julia’s father set up a meeting between Adam and a Mr. Chawleigh. Chawleigh had high hopes for his own daughter and wanted her to marry a gentleman. Once again, I loved the author’s crisp description of the two men and their conversation forthwith. Ms. Heyer’s intricate research was spot on and I understand why she has so many fans. Long story short, Adam was given an opportunity to save Fontley, provide for his sisters and mother AND bring himself out of debt if he agreed to marry the wealthy Cit’s daughter: Jenny. Short with a flat-toned voice and plump. Shy, well-behaved, and sensible. Unlike Julia, Jenny’s beauty was not skin deep but found in her character: her common sense and goodness. She knew Adam loved Julia. She didn’t demand deep affection. At the outset, she hoped for dignity and respect. As a couple GR friends pointed out, I found the heavy history on Napoleon and his battles time-consuming and unnecessary. I have read enough about it in other Regencies. Adam’s younger sister, Lydia, and her antics added humor to the story. I enjoyed the verbal sparring between Lady Nassington and Chawleigh. And more than once I needed to remind myself that Adam and Jenny were a product of their time. I can honestly say that A Civil Contract was an intelligent novel of marriage that never disguised its frailty.
