Gad's hall was on the market for a very, very, reasonable price and the seller Mr Thorley was the most helpful man that Bob and Jill Spender could have hoped to meet. The old house was well maintained and was ideal for the Spender family to move directly in to. After they had moved into the house Jill started to have uneasy feelings and Ella, Bob's mother, having visited once, had such a bad feeling about the place that she made any excuse she could think of not to return. The Tudor house had been owned by the Thorley family since it was built and had passed down through the generations but the current Mr Thorley who had no children and had made the decision to sell, to the right buyer. In part two of the novel which starts on page 71, we are taken back in time to summer 1841 when George Thorley widowed with two daughters remarries to a lady called Osborne who like him has two daughters who or a similar age to his own. The girls get on well together and the blended family is a happy one and to add to that Mrs Thorley gives her husband a much-wanted son and heir George known as Georgie. All four of the girls became simply known as the Thorley girls, they all doted upon little Georgie and he was somewhat precocious and spoilt. The only sibling that gave any cause for concern was Lavinia, she was artistic and withdrawn, was naturally pale a little too slim to be considered shapely, she never seemed to be aware of what was going on or at least she showed little interest and was always late and preoccupied with her own thoughts. After Lavinia meets Mr Fremlin at a party and then her mother is invited to his family home to meet his mother, Lavinia becomes a frequent visitor to the Fremlin home and although we are told very little of what goes on there we later draw the conclusion that it was something unnatural. The results of what happened at the Fremlin house is the turning point at Gad's Hall, it changes from a happy home to a place of secrets and sadness, a sadness that will linger and reverberate down through the centuries. Gad's is doomed to be marred by the presence of evil stamped into its very walls.
