Wieneck's book is a pleasing combination of close reading of historical archives and court records along with the author's first-person intrusions into the narrative, as when he goes to Mount Vernon to reenact for himself the type of labor the slaves would have done according to Washington's strict time management requirements, and to Colonial Williamsburg where actors portraying slaves and free blacks hold conversations among the tourists, to sometimes poignant effect. He finds that Washington was not explicitly a racist (1) (unlike Jefferson), and that from the Revolution on, he underwent a slow transformation from a man who accepted slavery's necessity and inevitabilty to one who found it repugnant. One of the book's surprises is the statement President Washington made to his secretary of state, recorded by Jefferson - "that if the Union split apart into North and South 'he had made up his mind to remove and be of the Northern.'" The popular image is of a man who subjected himself to rigorous self-control and discipline (and who, like Jefferson, cared immensely what society thought of him and what his legacy would be), and that image mostly survives the book although there is the question of whether Washington fathered a mulatto son with a slave named Venus who was owned by his brother and sister-in-law. To this image we can add a man who had enormous personal and military courage, but not as much political courage. Slavery had become disgusting enough to him that he pointedly and vehemently insisted in his will that his slaves be emancipated upon his wife's death (the vehemence was because he knew she and her descendants would try to fight it), but not quite disgusting enough that he was willing to risk making political enemies among southern politicians by freeing them during his life. Martha Washington does not come off well here. She was an extremely advantageous marriage for George, who needed her wealth to ease his debts already as a young man. But she never developed the moral enlightenment he did on slavery, and was a bad influence on him in the matter of the runaway slave Ona Judge. She spoiled her son Jacky Custis, who was always entitled, lazy, and dissolute, fathering a son with Martha's black-white-Indian slave Ann Dandridge, who was also Martha's half-sister and thus Jacky's aunt. Jacky protested to his stepfather when soldiers and veterans were given the right to vote. Washington was stingy with his field slaves. They got one set of clothing per year, plus a wool jacket for winter. There was no allowance made for repairing worn out clothing, and when it needed mending, the slaves had to steal wheat sacks. Every newborn got a fresh blanket, but the adults' blankets had to last years, and Washington also required them to carry leaves in their blankets to spread on the floors of the stables and livestock pens. He was obsessed with productivity and calculated how many tobacco seedlings should be planted per day per slave. His slaves always underperformed. When he rode around his plantations and spotted wagons carrying much smaller loads than he thought practical, he would stop and instruct the slaves on efficient wagon-filling and transport. When the productivity of his seamstresses declined, he had an overseer threaten to make them field slaves. Some of Washington's denture teeth were pulled from his slaves' mouths. They were compensated; Wiencek notes that it had also been European practice for the rich to buy teeth from the poor. Wiencek unearths a new bit of information - acting as a lottery manager in Williamsburg in 1769, Washington raffled off children in order to settle the debts of a planter named Bernard Moore who was in hock to the Custis estate. As guardian for his stepchildren, Washington was responsible for the financial management of their estates and inheritances. For the purchase of a £10 ticket, gamblers might win 1,800 acres of land with a forge and grist mill, apple and peach orchards, or Sukey, about 12 years old, and Betty, about 7. Moore's bad fortune had started when it was discovered that the recently deceased speaker of the House of Burgesses had embezzled more than £100,000 of public funds. Moore had borrowed heavily from the embezzled money, too much to repay, and his estate had to be liquidated. Wiencek writes, "In modern terms, it was as if the collapse of a Wall Street brokerage, due to the malfeasance of its officers, had led to the sale of the children of the cleaning staff to pay the debts of the corporate vice presidents." The children of indentured servants also suffered horribly. In the early 1760s Washington had been elected to the vestries of two church parishes and was appointed a justice of Fairfax County - both government positions. It was a crime for an indentured servant to have a bastard child. The punishment could be a fine, the extension of the term of service, or both. If the servant could not pay the fine (and the fines were so high it was rare that she could), she might be whipped. In addition, her owner would take ownership of the bastard children, so the court records contain statements like "the churchwardens of Fairfax parish bind Sarah Blinston about three years old and Thomas Blinston about fifteen months old (base born children) apprentices to Sampson Darrell Gent according to Law." This was a case on which Washington sat in judgment. Washington was chosen on the first ballot to command the troops in the Revolutionary War. He insisted on no salary but allowed his expenses to be covered. Since this is not a military biography, Wiencek mostly sidesteps battles and focuses on the issue of black troops. They were already in existence when Washington arrived in Massachusetts, having joined up spontaneously. This was disturbing to some Southerners in the Continental Congress, who demanded their expulsion. Washington agreed, on both slaves and free men, and issued the order banning them. At the same time, the British were inviting slaves to join their ranks and gain their freedom (and some Mount Vernon slaves did). Washington revised his order to admit free blacks, but not slaves. Wiencek believes that the "personal appeals had moved him, that the humanity of these free black people made itself apparent to him," and also that he was influenced in his decision by the black poet Phillis Wheatley's poem lauding him. He invited Wheatley to his home in Cambridge and they met for half an hour, according to a biographer, something he would not have done in Virginia (according to Wiencek) because it went so much against custom. Black and white sailors ferried Washington and his army across the Delaware River in 1776. At Valley Forge, where blacks and whites fought alongside, he decided the army should take on more black recruits, and a mostly black regiment from Rhode Island, containing free men and slaves who were given their freedom for enlisting, was raised. An officer serving on the French staff noted later that this regiment "is the most neatly dressed, the best under arms, and the most precise in its maneuvers." In fact, this unit was hand-picked by Washington and Lafayette to carry out the critical assault on Cornwallis's men at Yorktown. An interesting side note here involves Washington's aide-de-camp, John Laurens, from one of the wealthiest colonial families. He and his father had made their money from the slave trade and owned many slaves. Yet, educated in England and Geneva, he had come under the sway of the Lockean ideal of innate human liberty. He had transcribed Washington's letter endorsing the plan to recruit black infantrymen and with his father derived a scheme to emancipate several hundred blacks. He asked his father to turn over some slaves to him instead of leaving him a fortune, in order to turn them into a fighting force; they would gain their freedom when the war was over. Washington approved of Laurens' plan. But Laurens' father Henry nixed it, fearing it would subject his son to ridicule throughout the South. A year later Laurens revived the plan for South Carolina and Georgia and brought Alexander Hamilton aboard; it was especially urgent now because the British had captured Savannah. But Washington no longer approved, fearing that hundreds or thousands of newly freed slaves would cause immense discontent among those in bondage, including his own. He was also concerned about how the scheme would affect the sale price of slaves he was trying to unload - although his conscience was pricking him more by this time, and he would not separate families by sale. The wartime desperation for troops was such that even several Southern legislators proposed to the Congress that slaves be offered enlistment and freedom once the war had ended. But it was voted down (the planters were horrified by it) in the South Carolina Assembly. Charleston fell to the British. Once the war had concluded, Washington's dear friend Lafayette wrote to him, suggesting that he begin the process of ending slavery. He would buy an estate in the West Indies, where freed slaves could be employed as tenant farmers. "Such an example as yours might render it a general practice," hinted Lafayette. Knowing Washington's obsession with his prestige and with appearances, he added as a challenge, "If it be a wild scheme, I had rather be mad in this way, than to be thought wise in the other task." Lafayette did buy the estate, in French Guiana, and Washington effusively praised "the benevolence of [his] heart," but did nothing further. Lafayette had personally contributed around $1 million to the war effort, but later said, "I would never have drawn my sword in the cause of America, if I could have conceived that thereby I was founding a land of slavery." At the Constitutional Convention, Washington served as president, presiding over but not taking part in the debates. He looked on as the Founding Fathers enshrined slavery and kicked the can down the road. But Wiencek finds evidence that he was thinking hard about freeing his slaves as early as 1789, but kept it secret from all except his private secretary, not wanting to set his own family against him on the issue. As the case of William Costin - Jacky Custis' and Ann Dandridge's mulatto slave son - shows, the Washington-Custis family were not strangers to interracial sex. Jacky's daughter Eliza married an Englishman, Thomas Law, in 1796; while an official of the East India Company, he had taken an Indian mistress and had three sons by her. Two of the sons came to America - he believed they would be more welcome there than in England - and Eliza told Law that "she would be a mother to them." They met Washington, and attended Harvard and Yale. A slave named West Ford was the daughter of Venus - a slave belonging to Washington's half-brother John and his wife Hannah, who lived 95 miles from Mount Vernon - and some unidentified white man. Stories had been passed down to two separate branches of Ford's descendants that West as a child had traveled often to church with George Washington, and had ridden around in a wagon with him (although the association that runs Mount Vernon asserts there is no "documentary evidence" that the two ever met). Two of Ford's descendants told the New York Times that a history was passed down directly from West Ford to his grandson, to their mother, that Venus "was his personal sleep partner and that when it was obvious she was pregnant he no longer slept with her....When she was asked who fathered her child, she replied George Washington." West Ford was freed by Hannah Washington's will, and her son Bushrod Washington later bequeathed him 160 acres of land adjacent to Mount Vernon. This extreme generosity from a family that freed no other slaves stands out, and strongly suggests a family connection. The most plausible explanation is that Bushrod or one of his two brothers fathered West Ford - they had ample opportunity, whereas most historians have found it difficult to impossible to pinpoint a time when George Washington and Venus would have been at the same location. Another difficulty is that Ford's precise birthdate, or even month and year of birth, is unknown. "Personal sleep partner" suggests an ongoing relationship, which is fairly clear could not have happened with George Washington. Then again, the research of Annette Gordon-Reed with regard to Jefferson and Sally Hemings suggests that slave family oral histories or testimonies are often mistakenly discounted; Madison Hemings had asserted in a newspaper interview that his mother had told him he and his brothers and sisters were Jefferson's children. Wiencek finds one instance when Hannah and "her maid" (Venus) traveled to Mount Vernon, and conveniently Martha Washington was sick abed at the time. But he acknowledges that Washington's sense of propriety, control, and decorum make it highly unlikely he would have a sexual dalliance with a slave. My money is on the youngest of Hannah's sons, Augustine, who died in an accident in April 1784 at age 17. The oral histories indicate Venus' relationship with West Ford's father "stopped abruptly" - perhaps when Augustine died - and his full name was George Augustine Washington, which matches another part of the oral history, Venus' assertion that "George Washington" was the father. It would also explain why Hannah Washington showed such generosity to West Ford in her will: he was the only thing left of her teenage son.(2) Two final anecdotes show Washington in an unflattering light. As President, he and Martha lived in Philadelphia with some of their Mount Vernon slaves. This was a problem, because Pennsylvania had passed a law by which any slave who was in residence for six months became free. Washington had his secretary move slaves back and forth from Philadelphia to Virginia so that they would fall short of the six months’ residency. He even wrote his secretary a letter instructing him to lie about the scheme, if necessary. He was particularly concerned about his wife’s slaves (the “dower negroes”) because if they disappeared, the family would not only lose their labor but he would have to compensate the Custis heirs for their property losses. In 1796, Martha’s slave Ona Judge ran away from Philadelphia. This was the young woman who was closest to the First Lady, doing her hair every morning and accompanying her to social events. She arrived in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Unfortunately, slavery was still legal there, and the Fugitive Slave Act which Washington had signed in 1793 allowed escaped slaves, if found by their owner or an owner’s agent, to be brought before a court and ordered returned to the owner. Someone who knew the Washington family and had seen Judge wait on them recognized her in the street, and Judge confessed to running away. When Washington heard about it, he spoke confidentially to his Secretary of the Treasury, asking him to write to his employee, the customs collector at Portsmouth, to seize Judge and ship her back. “Everything about this was illegal,” notes Wiencek. “The president had set the machinery of the federal government in motion to recover private property.” Also, according to the law, Martha as the owner of Ona had to set the legal action in motion, and a slave could not be seized and transported, but had to appear before a magistrate so that ownership could be established. The customs collector found her, but did not seize her as ordered. Instead, he relayed her request to the Washingtons: she would come back to them, as long as she would be freed upon their deaths. His letter suggested that they follow the correct legal procedure to have her returned. Washington wrote an angry reply: he would not negotiate with a slave, and particularly not when it would be rewarding her betrayal – “however well disposed I might be to a gradual abolition, or even to an entire emancipation of that description of People”. Washington had alleged that Judge had been taken off by a “seducer,” which was not true and probably a tale concocted by Martha to provide some moral cover. It seems likely that Washington’s vehemence with regard to recovering Judge was to placate his wife. He asked the collector to seize Judge quietly, without raising a ruckus. If that was not possible, he would “forego her Services altogether.” In the meantime, Judge had gotten married to a free man and had a daughter. Martha’s desire to have her back had not abated, and she sent her nephew Burwell Bassett to find her. Bassett found Judge and her baby; Judge’s husband was away at sea. Bassett was staying with Senator John Langdon, a longtime friend of the Washingtons. He told Langdon that he was planning to forcibly seize Judge and her daughter. But Langdon, aware that Judge’s child, though born in New Hampshire, would still be a slave because of her mother’s status, was “appalled,” and slipped away during dinner to send a message to Judge that she was in danger and should flee. She did, for good. Just a few weeks earlier, Washington had written the will in which he emancipated all his slaves at Martha’s death, specified that the old and infirm would be clothed and fed until their (the slaves’) deaths, and that any child slaves without parents or with unwilling parents would be taught to read and write and trained in a useful occupation up to the age of twenty-five. (1) I'm not convinced. At the least, the author is using an extremely narrow definition of racist. In a gracious thank you letter to Phillis Wheatley after she sent him her panegyric poem, Washington addressed her as "Miss Phillis" - with the author noting, "Nothing could have induced him to address a black woman by her last name - a convention reserved for whites". However he did sign the letter "with great Respect, Your obedt humble servant...", reminding me of the time Jefferson admonished his grandson for not bowing to a black man in the street who had bowed to them. (2) https://www.nytimes.com/1999/07/07/us... Errata: On the map, “Washington’s Virginia,” Leesburg, Great Falls, Alexandria, Mount Vernon, Belvoir, and Gunston Hall are on the wrong side of the Potomac River. -------- ADDENDA: "When Jefferson worked on revising Virginia's slave codes in the late 1770s, he proposed a law that would have required exile from the state for a while woman who had a black man's child; if she had insisted on remaining in her homeland, she would have been outlawed, meaning she could have been beaten or killed with legal immunity for the perpetrators." "During Lafayette's famous tour of America in 1824, the city of Savannah banned all blacks from attending the parades in the visitor's honor, but Lafayette made a point of paying a public call on a slave who had served in the Revolution. In New Orleans he met with a group of black veterans and greeted each of them personally." What was Washington's height? p. 65: "straight as an Indian, measuring six feet two inches in his stockings and weighing 175 pounds. His frame is padded with well-developed muscles..." p. 195: Washington is six feet tall p. 345: a Polish aristocrat visiting Washington over several days describes him as "nearly six feet tall."
