“I'm tired and I want to rest; I want to get out of this and go lie down somewhere, off where it's dark and no one speaks. Forever.” ― Philip K. Dick, Dr. Bloodmoney If you’ve watched Ex Machina , you know this is a super-slick film of two young men interacting with a beautiful version of AI, a great work of science fiction with such a streamlined, clear-cut, linear, easy-to-follow storyline, at the opposite end of the spectrum from, well, Philip K. Dick. Case in point: PKD’s Dr. Bloodmoney , the CRAZIEST novel I’ve ever read. Here are ten reasons why: 1. Atom Bomb The setting is the San Francisco Bay Area. No sooner are we introduced to our main characters in the first and second chapters then a series of Hiroshima-size atomic bombs hit. What remains of the human and non-human populations must deal with the devastation , the PKD-style devastation, that is. 2. Man in Space The US space program shots Walt Dangerfield and his wife up in a rocket to colonize Mars. Bad timing. Immediately after blast-off the bombs hit. But Walt, who has lost his wife and is stuck orbiting Earth, maintains contact; matter of fact, everyone tunes into his hayseed broadcasts to receive updates on global happenings, a weird combination of the nightly news and a version of that old television show Hee Haw . 3. A tiny adult person lives inside Edie Keller If being a seven-year-old post-nuclear war little girl isn’t tough enough, Edie has tiny brother Bill lodged right inside her, next to her kidney. Bill is a fully matured adult (perhaps the result of nuclear fallout) who can carry on adult conversations with sister Edie. 4. Dr. Bloodmoney Bruno Bluthgeld aka Jack Tree aka Dr. Bloodmoney is an atomic physicist and paranoid, shape shifter who might very well be responsible for the world-wide nuclear war. 5. Dogs that talk Dr. Bloodmoney owns a frisky, playful dog who occasionally talks in dog-like growls, a phenomenon accepted by all the survivors as normal and routine after the radioactive fallout. 6. The mutants are coming San Francisco can be a hazardous place to live with such potentially dangerous creatures as mutant winged weasels flying around and splattering themselves on skyscraper windows or anything or anybody else who might be in their way. 7. Less than appealing diet Stuart McConchie is an African-American TV salesman who was forced to eat a live rat to survive in the cellar after the bombs hit. Seven years later, Stuart is making his living selling robot-like rat traps. In many ways, if the novel has any foundation in sanity, Stuart is our man. 8. The importance of being a horse With all the modern, sophisticated technology, one aspect of post-bomb life is less than modern: the main mode of transportation is riding a horse. At one point, Stuart McConchie feels great sadness since he had to leave his horse hitched to a pillar under a San Francisco dock. Big mistake: the San Francisco homeless killed and ate his horse. 9. The danger of taking a job as a teacher During his job interview, Hal Barnes asks the town’s clearing committee what happened to the last teacher. One of the committee members, an older lady by the name of June Robe, tells Hal matter-of-factly that the clearing committee had to kill him. 10. Thalidomide Boy I've saved the best for last: Hoppy Harrington is a young man who is a phocomelus, that is, without any hands or legs. Hoppy possesses a wide inventory of psychic powers and mechanical abilities that more than compensate for his physical disabilities. Hoppy appears front-and-center in much of the novel’s action. PKD is actually able to have all this craziness intertwine to construct a riveting, cohesive story. How in the world does he do it? Obviously the author had one of the most powerful and most creative imaginations in history. Also, from what I understand, PKD was known to use tabs of speed to fuel his psychic rocket ship. Again, the craziest novel I’ve ever read. “Imagine being sentient but not alive. Seeing and even knowing, but not alive. Just looking out. Recognizing but not being alive. A person can die and still go on. Sometimes what looks out at you from a person's eyes maybe died back in childhood.” ― Philip K. Dick (1928 - 1982) - Judging from the above quote, PKD might still be around!
