“There’s a Nightmare in my Closet” is a children’s book from Mercer Mayer, author of the popular “Little Critter” books and it is about how a small boy overcomes his fear of a nightmare in his closet. “There’s a Nightmare in my Closet” may be a cute story about conquering your fears, but the story is a bit dull for some children. Mercer Mayer’s illustrations are creative and colorful as he illustrates the nightmare as being extremely huge but seems to look a bit goofy as it has two big front teeth and has green polka dots against his pinkish skin. Also, Mercer Mayer gives the story a somewhat dreary atmosphere as the colors look a bit washed out and plain. Mercer Mayer does bring out a positive message for children about conquering your fears, which the boy does a great job at conquering his fear of the nightmare. I will not tell you what happens at the end, but the ending (well, let’s just say the ending is very similar to the ending of “Simon’s Book”) is extremely cute and will easily reassure children to not be too scared of monsters. Parents should know that the nightmare might scare smaller children since it is extremely big and ugly and parents should try to reassure their children that there are no nightmares in their closets. Also, the story seems a bit too weak as the characters seem a bit one-dimensional, meaning that you cannot relate to them easily since they do not have any personality that distinguishes them. Even though the nightmare is harmless, he rarely has any personality that can distinguish him, as the same with the boy, even though the audience knows that the boy is brave, but he seems to be lacking any emotion that makes him likeable. “There’s a Nightmare in my Closet” may be a cute story about how a boy conquers his fear over a nightmare, but since the story is a bit too weak and the characters do not seem to have much personality, some children might be easily bored with this book. I would strongly recommend Maurice Sendak’s classic “Where the Wild Things Are” over this book because the characters are much more memorable and the illustrations are much more beautiful than in this book. I would recommend this book to children ages five and up since smaller children might be frightened by the huge nightmare in the book.
