Written more than 40 years ago, and it still holds up. This book covers observations by famed baseball writer Thomas Boswell from approximately the late 1970s through the 1983 season and World Series. The chapters each cover a topic, but they're not really organized in a specific way. Some are about positions (third base, pitcher, catcher), but others are about managers or the game's myths or the strife that was entering the game deeply in the early 80s. They're full of real-time quotes and also old-time anecdotes, and the entire book is a pleasure to read. I had to stop myself from consuming it in one sitting, but instead to let it wash over me slowly like watching a baseball game from the outfield bleachers. A few highlights for me. The chapter on the Orioles teams of the time was great. Boswell runs through the team's clubhouse, giving paragraph-length sketches of each of the players and how he fits into perhaps the most cohesive team of the era. I remember those O's teams well -- Palmer, Bumbry, Lowenstein, Murray, Sakata, and manager Earl Weaver -- and it's great to hear their backstories and their banter. And to understand that they really did approach the game differently than their opponents. The fact that the Oriole Way worked so well makes it astonishing that it wasn't copied wholesale. Nowadays when a sports team has success, its strategies are disseminated and copied immediately, but I guess not in those less cutthroat times. Boswell goes back to the O's time and again in this book because he did most of his daily baseball reporting for The Washington Post, and the O's were the local team at the time. So there's a chapter on the Ripken family that is pretty good. There's a lot about how fiery and angry Cal Sr. was, and clearly that's why he didn't get a manager until he was nearly 50 and then barely lasted a season. One of the great things in this book is that it's a moment in time, and some offhand comments take on an immortality because of what happened later. One of these is Cal Ripken Jr., who had completed two seasons by then (great seasons), remarked that he'd like to play every inning of every game for 20 years. He nearly did that -- and who could have imagined he'd break Lou Gehrig's consecutive game streak at the time, except that clearly he had the mentality that enabled him to do it? Another inadvertent look into the future is in a diatribe Boswell wrote after the 1981 American League playoffs, when the surprise A's lost to the Yankees in 3 straight games. The A's had bullied their way to the West Division title, and Boswell writes with scorn about their style of play promoted by Billy Martin, the tyrannic manager. And then he complains that the A's are "stylin'" at the plate to waste time and knock pitchers out of rhythm. He claims one at-bat took 8 minutes, and he notes that the A's averaged an ungodly 2 hours, 55 minutes per game. This was 25 or so minutes more than any other team. Ironic, given that game lengths crept up in the 2000s to the point that the major leagues instituted a series of rules before the 2023 season to try to get things under control and down under 3 hours again. I like how much Boswell likes every aspect of the game and that he seeks out players who feel the same way. He writes of the joy players have in just playing catch, and he likens it to the wonder each of us feels as a kid when we stick our glove out for a throw from our dad, and the ball is stuck in there. Boswell finds joy in the obsessions players have over their bats, batting style, grip on a pitch, and so on --- all the insider things that make this an art, not just a sport. Even when a player turns out to be reprehensible as a person, such as Pete Rose or Gaylord Perry, Boswell reminds us of an inner grace that they have. About Rose, who's become a caricature over the decades of his exile from baseball, Boswell writes of his selflessness to switch to third base in the middle of his career to help the Reds get great hitters in the outfield. With Rose at third, the Big Red Machin of 1975-76 was one of the greatest teams ever. Few players would have taken that chance on such a high-profile move, but Rose did everything right on the field. Perry, a first-class jerk, nonetheless was grateful for every minute he had in the game. His dignified views on how to play the game that hearkened back a century were part of keeping baseball's lineage alive at a time when Astroturf and drugs were changing the game for the worse. Ah Astroturf. Boswell was writing during the heyday of plastic fields and giant bowl stadiums that also were used for football. It was a time when the styles of play differed way more than they do now, as teams experimented with what worked best in which environment. Teams like the Cardinals and Royals developed speedy, defense-first teams that bedeviled sluggers like the Brewers, O's and Dodgers when they came to town. But the small-ball approach couldn't usually withstand power in the game's final showdowns, a fact that Bill James noticed in some of his earliest findings. And, yes, wonderfully Bill James is referenced a couple of times in this book. Boswell, who fancied himself a statistics guy, clearly recognized that James and others were advancing to another level of analysis, and he credits them with starting to uncover things we take for granted now, like that players are at their peak around age 27 (not early 30s as was assumed at the time), that Fenway Park is great for left-handed hitters (plop a weak fly off the wall in left), and that Houston's and St. Louis's pitching staff greatness was a much a product of the park and defense as the quality of the hurlers. If you remember baseball in the '80s, you can relive Mark Fidrych's failed comeback, Fernando Valenzuela's electrifying rookie season, and how Tom Seaver and Jim Palmer wrung out the last greatness of their careers. You can recall spicy Earl Weaver and the early greatness of Whitey Herzog. You can remember turf hits bouncing over fielders' heads. You can hear how Mike Schmidt went from being really good but flawed to an all-time great, and how Robin Yount just missed reaching the highest of hallowed levels. And you can remember the astounding salaries of $500,000/year granted to the game's best players. It wasn't an innocent time, but it was slower and, perhaps, more gentlemanly than it is today. Certainly the world the players lived in was smaller and more all-baseball than the social media swirl of today. And Boswell captures all of this from both a fan's perspective and a player/coach view, too.
