A hefty tome this and one I wasn't sure I would bother to read in its entirety but after dipping in and out a bit, I did finally settle down to reading through the rest of it. Despite the title, it isn't just about the origin of the English imagination. It does start with the Anglo Saxon period and goes on from there, but the author also has a tendency to swoop around through history in each chapter - which is based on a topic - so that he might be discussing Chaucer than zoom off to put in an aside about how Dickens or Shelly handled the topic. The book does stretch as far as the nineteenth century more or less with some tiny mentions of the twentieth - T S Eliot and I can't recall who else. So it's more about the development. Mostly it concentrates on the literary aspects with some short chapters on architecture, portrait painting and gardens. Certain claims are made: alliteration is a key feature hanging over from the Anglo Saxon, the English are preoccupied with the past, tend to melancholia, have a keenness for blood and gore and ghost stories in drama and literature, are heavily influenced by geography, and that English culture absorbs influences from other cultures. Not all these are convincingly referenced when the examples are centuries apart. Women get two short chapters, from recollection. Some important women writers, of the medieval period and later - Aphra Benn made it in, and I think Jane Austen and the Brontes, but I don't think there was any reference to George Elliot. There are some odd blanks: in a chapter on clowns, the physiognomy he describes as being the classic one instantly brought Punch to mind, but then when he eventually mentioned Punch and Judy in passing, he didn't connect it to the clown description a few pages beforehand. There was such a breadth of topic and such a whistle-stop tour through it all that I'd already forgotten most of the earlier part by the time I reached the final third. Certain authors are mentioned a lot - Chaucer and Dickens for instance. I have read both and am slowly reading through Dickens' novels, so didn't find that irritating. There's quite a bit of Middle English which you are just expected to understand: I could work out most of it, but was baffled by the odd word. There's a chapter on Chatterton from the eighteenth century, a poet of the Romantic era whom I knew nothing about. The author discusses him rather than saying much about Keats, Shelley and Byron which was rather an omission. After finishing the book, I discovered that he had written separate books on Dickens and Chatterton, so that must account for the emphasis on both, especially Dickens. Some aspects aren't really covered - the English tendency to anthropomorphise animals, for example, or the beliefs in the Fair Folk which eventually led to Victorian fairy stories. Overall, I would rate this as an OK 2 stars as it didn't really work for me.
