"If I handed you a baseball bat and gave you permission to bash my face in, would you do it?" Usually, the members of the group say no. "Why not?" I ask. "Because it's wrong to hit someone. It's not right," someone says. "Because it would hurt you, and I don't want to hurt you," another person says. "Which person would you trust with the bat?" I ask the group. The group quickly concludes that the person who doesn't want to hurt me is much less likely to hit me. This person has the ability to empathize with how I would feel if I got clobbered. Since we often do what we know is wrong, rules rarely keep us in line. Love does a much better job of keeping us moral. We think of how we might hurt the one we love, more often than we think of some code we must keep. Henry Cloud's Changes That Heal is that rare self-help book that actually offers sound, rational advice in dealing with issues of the self. As the subtitle makes clear, Cloud examines "four shifts that make everything better...and that anyone can do": Bonding to others, defining clear boundaries, sorting out good and bad, and becoming an adult. As an experienced therapist, Cloud offers clarity and relevance to these topics as well as strategies to put them in effect. There are some good, helpful sessions within this book to help us help ourselves to be better selves. However, I want to note Cloud is also a Christian, and many of his explanations and solutions are Biblically based. I can understand if this turns some people off. It's one thing to help someone with an attitude adjustment; it's quite another to help someone adjust an attitude so they can be more right with God. Cloud quotes from the Bible more than he quotes therapists or scientific research. The bright side, though, is that his use of scripture is cogent and relevant to his topics. In a sense, you get a better idea of the potential use of some Biblical writing in defining and offering viable solutions to misguided or even delusional thinking. As a Christian, I found Cloud's methodology fascinating and insightful. If you do not want to mix religion in your therapy, then Cloud may annoy rather than assist you. A despairing person should have kindness from his friend, said Job, "lest he forsake the fear of the almighty" (Job 6:14 NASB). Job recognized, as only a person in pain can do, that simple answers not only fail to relieve pain, they can literally drive a person further away from God. The hurting person who takes this sort of advice to heart often has two problems instead of one: the pain she originally had, plus the guilt over not being able to apply the answers she was given.
