Something was off in Steal the Dragon. I didn't understand why Rialla stuck it out as a slave through the entire novel. She repeats that she is not a spy and it's true. She doesn't stop any planned murders. She doesn't gather very much information on her own. She never quite intergrates herself into her surroundings well enough to do anything impactful. Without Tris, Rialla wouldn't have accomplished anything except getting herself enslaved and tortured. Why didn't she return to Ren and reinforcements? If Rialla is such a good Steal the Dragon chess player, why couldn't she see she needed to fall back and get help? If Tris is so capable and caring, why didn't he knock her out and get out of there? A man rash enough to mess with magic zombies with no back up wouldn't have Rialla talk him into allowing her pointless torture to continue. Tris talks down to nobles and ups their healer bills on a whim, but sits back while Rialla recklessly hurts herself? In the end Rialla's noble motivation falls short. She never has any realizations that working with others is better than working alone. In fact, she defeats Winterseine with her own empathy powers cementing that she is both stronger than him magically and psychologically. When she goes back to Jarroh, the pedophile and child murderer, she doesn't try to stop him in any real way from collecting slaves. She could have admitted to turning Winterseine's brain into soup or given Jarroh a taste of that and threats of more if she finds out he has continued to harm slaves. Jarroh agrees that Laeth didn't kill his brother and the book ends. Rialla has complete independence to move from country to country, illusion powers to smooth the way, and deadly power over others' minds. Why, once she has everything she could ask for and the approval of powerful people at her fingertips, does she settle for clearing Laeth's name? Why did Rialla stay and continue to get tortured? The romance ruled the primary direction of the plot rather than the main motivation (and thereby decisions) of Rialla. Tris and her needed to bond somehow without magic and they needed to be around each other for a reasonable amount of time for them to declare their love by the epilogue. Moving the soon-to-be lovers around the story board from country to country is too messy. They are balanced delicately by Tris's kindness and lies. Adding that tension could produce conflict that screws up their chemistry or bores the audience with too much world building. Rialla is poisoned, water boarded, and raped for their love. Tris forces a soul bond on them both without her knowledge or consent until the fourth to last page. She happily accepts with only a paragraph of thought. Steal the Dragon is interesting research into Briggs' early work, but flops as a novel on its own. Because of the implication. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
