Lessons learned from this book: people are shit. *lol* Nothing new or groundbreaking but maybe readers back then (1877) thought differently. In any case, Anna Sewell found a marvellous way to show humans just how dreadful they can be - through the eyes of an animal. This is the life story of a horse that has had many names. The first of those names was Black Beauty. He was born from a long line of fine horses, growing up in a wonderful place but eventually being sold. Many different things happen to him along the way, showing nice owners who care deeply and affectionately for their animals, violent drunks, ignorant fools, lazy people, hard workers and people who pretend to be "good Christians" but who really are just spiteful. Thus, the reader gets to see Black Beauty's carefree days as a colt, how he grew up to be a sweet-tempered horse, how he worked hard and had to endure quite a number of injustices (though not as many as other horses we learn about), even pulling cabs in London, and the friends he made (both human and animal) throughout his life. My favourite character, to this day I'm pleased to report, is Ginger. My heart always breaks for her. Some things are hard to read about as well they should be. Animal welfare might not be perfect nowadays but we've certainly come a long way from the days when horse tails were cut off with no anasthesia, flesh and hair and all because it was supposed to look better! While we see Victorian England, both in the countryside and big city, through the eyes of a horse, we get to see living and working conditions of both rich people and lowly workers as well as the financial situations of the different classes. Funny fact: Amongst other things, the book describes conditions among London horse-drawn taxicab drivers, including the financial hardship caused to them by high licence fees and low, legally fixed fares. Soon after the book was published, the difference between 6-day taxicab licences (not allowed to trade on Sundays) and 7-day taxicab licences (allowed to trade on Sundays) was abolished and the taxicab licence fee was much reduced. No idea if the book was responsible but it might have drawn people's attention to this injustice and thus helped to change the situation for the better. I'd like to think so at least. Mainly, the book teaches about animal welfare and that their lives count just as much as human lives (a radical idea back then and, depending on whom you're talking about, even today). But the book generally talkes about how to lead a good life, how to treat anyone and anything with kindness, sympathy, and respect. A wonderful classic that I'm very glad I revisited.
