Dick, did you really just waste a perfect plot by endlessly driveling about pseudo philosophical deeper meaning of art while being unable to establish other plotlines, any major action, suspense, believable characters with comprehensible motivations to let the mess culminate, again, in just ending the novel in the middle of nowhere without anything, resolution, explanation, maybe an excuse for publishing something like that? This thing is truly completely overrated, the weaknesses of Dicks´writing that can be compensated by great ideas in „Do androids dream of electric sheep“, „Ubik“, and other novels escalate close to illegibility because he simply doesn´t seem to have made an effort to make it a good novel, just money with it. Drugs can be damn expensive if they are not made homegrown Heisenberg´s DIY style… This is like calling something a romantic novel and writing nothing about love or a war novel without fighting or a fantasy novel without magic or, in this case, an uchronia Sci-Fi novel without alternative timelines, tech, a plot, sense, action, freaking nazis, believable characters, what a mess. As it´s often the case with such books, I already felt that it won´t end well, because it stayed slow during the last third and culminated in absolutely nothing senseful. The man in the high castle is the prime example of why Dick can´t be named with the other behemoths of Sci-Fi, because they didn´t produce such messes, built meta-universes and timeless tropes instead and they loved their work and filed it to perfection and would have never dared to publish something like that. This thing is not just very average and loveless, it´s simply an insolence towards readers that trust an author to not publish something that has both no sense and no ending and... but I am repeating myself. I have read a great many Sci-Fi novels and that was one of the very few that left me very unsatisfied, read one of the other 2 I mentioned, but avoid this one, it will just disappoint you. Dick was quite a dick to publish that concontion. I added these last paragraphs to my review of „A scanner darkly“ too, because it fits for both novels. Just as „A scanner darkly“, the novel shows that Dick was a highly overrated and overhyped writer, I will spontaneously call him Kazuo Ishiguro of Sci-Fi, whose novels I disliked so much that I first didn´t even wanted to add them to the library. Wait a moment, one of my inner voices just told me that I did yet delete them for the sake of my peace of mind and mental sanity. I´ve read tons of sci-fi and just don´t get what people see in Dick and Heinlein, it´s not even social sci-fi because everything is so stereotypical, or illogical, full of authors' voice, both unplotted and without realistic character motivations. Just as if they wrote down whatever came to their mind without caring about the conventions and rules of the art of writing real, great, worldbuilding space opera sci fi, or meta social sci fi or full dystopian sci fi, or anything that has more than 2 grains of sci-fi trope elements, and not just egocentric, eccentric, very average novels with tiny amounts of fantastic elements and much drivel and delusion. The 2 strange weirdo uncles problem: They are, especially in comparison to the true big three of sci-fi, Asimov (incredible worldbuilding, wit, innuendos, and connotations en masse, perfect pacing) Clarke ( über epic language, a positive interpretation of Lovecrafts´ big, dangerous old ones, subtle social criticism), and Lem (everything great about Asimov and Clarke conmpressed and so complex that it blows my poor, little mind whenever I reread it)the 2 strange uncles of the genre nobody wants to invite, but has to, because it would be too unfriendly and the aunt is quite ok at least. So the one is wasted, drunk or on drugs, mentally ill or extremely unstable, promoting pseudo fringe philosophical drivel about conscience and reality, conspiracy theories, alternate realities, and timelines, uchronias while he is losing the red line and inner logic of his strange ideas until he finishes with an extremely unsatisfying and far fetched conclusion nobody except of him understands. The other one is arbitrarily and unpredictably switching between extreme political and economic ideologies and ideas he is hardlinering and proselytizing about, while his views about women, gays, and sexuality are insulting half of the family, until he finishes his endless monologues without referring to any details, facts, or integrating complex interwoven character arcs. Family gatherings suck. Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph... https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
