Boys feel just as insecure getting girls as girls do getting boys. I just love that. Although if this had been a woman author I would have written off her sensitive boy as unrealistic, but since the author is male, I give him more leeway with emotions. I'd like to think rather than being chauvinistic, I'm taking a man's word for it since us women can only guess. Literature about finding love is normally the sappy girl's perspective and here you get insight into a boy so anxious to give love and find approval that he's hungry, but can't show it. The industry needs more male authors. The main character, Cameron, is somewhat of a loser with no social life and yet he is a deeply feeling, attentive, and pensive boy, emotionally mature beyond his more outwardly charming brothers. I found myself relating him to my closed-off brother whom my family often writes off as immature and irresponsible, when he has his moments of glory where you do get a glimpse of him, particularly how devoted and sweet he his to his girlfriend. It is those quiet shy boys, "the nice guys who finish last," who are the ones worth waiting for. As always, Zusak is poetry to read. Each chapter ends with Cameron's insights. The last is my favorite: "There are so many moments to remember and sometimes I think that maybe we're not really people at all. Maybe moments are what we are.... Sometimes I just survive. But sometimes I stand on the rooftop of my existence, arms stretched out, begging for more." It's an extremely quick read--I read it over a few hours--but it's not an empty mindless read. Admist all the paranormal fantasy out there with unrealistic male love interests, it's nice to read young adult about a real guy (including his adolescent thoughts on sex). I adored Cameron and his vulnerability. ETA: I met Zusak at a book signing. He was everything I thought he would be. I asked him how much Cameron was based off his own adolescent years and he said very much so. I could see that in him. Is it possible that I adore Zusak more than I did before meeting him?
