Easily 4.5 stars! ~Virginal Heroine ~Ruthless Hero hellbent on vengeance ~Traditional Bodice Ripper ripe with un-PC elements ( primarily non-con ) “It is a pity that we had to meet as we did, but I am not one to spurn a gift from the gods because of its wrappings. I am prepared to enjoy you for as long as the pleasure lasts, and to see that you do not lose by it.”-- Rolfe, morally grey hero of this tale Our hero, Rolfe, a Ruthenian prince and now the heir to the throne since the death of his older brother, is set to find his brother's former mistress whom he suspects to have information on a murder plot against his brother. Once he makes it to the US continent, he mistakes his target's cousin for his brother's former mistress. Angeline, a caring, helplessly devoted, and innocent young lady, is desperate to keep her cousin, Claire, safe from the ruthless Ruthenian prince whose reputation precedes him. Leading her cousin to the convent that once housed and educated her, she is snatched up by Rolfe on her return journey to her home with here aunt (Claire's mother), and no amount of reasoning and/or pleading can convince him that she is, in fact, not Claire. It is not until he is literally in the process of raping her (a punishment, in his mind, befitting the woman whom he thinks conspired to murder his brother) that he discovers she is telling the truth, because there is no way his brother's former mistress could remain innocent. Alas, it is too late and he pleads with her to let him soothe her pain and make her feel better for the injustice he has done her. Thus begins their story. I really liked this one. There was so much action, never a dull moment, and the story continued to progress and evolve. The only reason I deducted half a point is because there are roughly THREE instances where the heroine is about to be raped by another person other than the hero and he ALWAYS shows up just in the nick of time to save her. I'm not saying I wanted that to happen. Hell no! I'm just saying that the author might have wanted to stop the progression of the assault at some other point rather than the very moment before the assailant succeeds every time. It was just too many times and too close to succession to consider believable. Also, there's this one character, Andre, who is so incredibly sweet and even though I wanted to see the heroine end up with the hero, I didn't want to see Andre's heart broken and we got a front row seat to the show for that! I don't even know if that was good or bad. It's kind of refreshing to have a potential love triangle where both men were deserving, but the other man was just so well written that you felt his loss in not getting the girl too. One thing I did appreciate was that we didn't really get groveling from the hero for the wrong he has done the heroine, but we were absolutely certain of the remorse he was feeling over it and it suited the story very well. “Do not be deceived,” Rolfe said, his voice quiet, his eyes narrow and darkly blue. “She has suffered irreparable injury, the worst that may befall a young woman—and endured it in a spirit of grace and without hope of succor for endless hours while you, Madame, made no attempt to provide rescue, did not even make the effort to see her, though you must have guessed soon enough where she was. Certainly you did not come to plead that she be returned to your loving arms inviolate. You abandoned her to my tender mercy and sat at home rigged out in silk and perfumed lace receiving callers and pretending she was safe in her bed while she was imperiled in mine.” -- Rolfe to Angeline's aunt If you love historical romance and/or bodice rippers that stick to the traditional non-con elements of the genre, then this is the story for you!
