Review #1: The Lists I would do a list of my favorite Woody Allen films but I've already done so elsewhere on goodreads. I know it happened in 2003 (or maybe it was 2004. I remember the pain if not the exact date) that these asshole Wes Anderson fans made fun of me for having such a long list of favorite Woody Allen films. Times that Wes Anderson made me look like an idiot: 1. His stupid fans ganged up on me for having a long list of favorite films. Okay, if my favorite filmmaker was Wes Anderson my favorite film list would look like this. 1. Rushmore 2. In 2002 I told my twin "I don't watch Danny Glover films." I don't recall exactly why I told her this (it isn't even true. I've seen Places in the Heart [a good movie and if anyone wants my list of favorite John Malkovich stories I've got one hell of a good story about that film] and other movies.) So we go to see The Royal Tenebaums in theatres and who plays the boyfriend of Anjelica Huston? If you said "The 'Burne" meaning Lawrence Fishburne you are wrong. It was Danny Glover. Lauren was oh so smug. Damn you, Wes Anderson! 3. When I was 6 I was obsessed with always wearing a faux rabbit fur coat. I never took it off, even in the hot Alabama sun. So one day a kid announces to our teacher that he's hot. I chime in, "Me too!" "Of course YOU'RE hot, Mariel, you never take off that stupid coat!" Since 'Tenebaums came out people think I'm just like Margot Tenebaum when I share that story of my childish stupidity. Not fair! I did it first! Guess you were copying me when you were done copying Salinger and Konigsburg. I may not have been able to give those Anderson fans the what for back in 2003. But you know what they say about revenge being a dish best served cold? I'm going to do lists related somehow to every story in Woody Allen's book Getting Even. That's right, I'm getting even. The Metterling Lists Best stories set in laundromats. (Shout-out to 'Fonso 'cause we've talked about this before. We are both cursed by the gods of laundry.) 1. The Flight of the Conchords. Jemaine meets Sally again and segues into "Business Time". 2. The Flight of the Conchords. The actor/laundromat employee played by Will Forte (usually he sucks). His laundromat movie in the credits stars John Turturro. Yeah! 3. Dr. Horrible's Sing-along-blog. It was sweet the little romance in the laundry room. 4. Isabel Coixet's My Life Without Me. Sentiment without being sentimental AND stars Sarah Polley (one of my top faves). 5. Vivian Van Velde's Companions of the NIght. A girl meets psycho vamp killers and psycho vamps in the laundry retrieving little brother's teddy bear. A Look at Organized Crime Most bad-ass mafioso. 1. The baddest ass mofo mafioso ever . 2. Johnny Dangerously . 3. Now that's HARD time . The Schmeed Memoirs Best hair-dos. 1. 'Fonso's afro (shout-out!). 2. Dan Bejar . 3. Robert Smith of The Cure. Those follicles were tentacles that sucked in the fans. 4. Medusa 5. John Turturro's homage to Eraserhead AND Morrissey in Barton Fink. My Philosophy The top philosophy factory in the world: 1. Flint, Michigan. D'oh that was going to be the best outfits to wear while being philosophical! Black goes with black. Yes, But Can the Steam Engine Do This? Historical figures who are so pathetic no one ever named sandwiches after them. 1. Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. 2. Earl Grey 3. James Earl Jones 4. Stieg Larsson 5. Wolfe Dragomir, Earl of Ravensmere Death Knocks Games I'd totally beat death in: 1. Nintendodogs 2. Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon 3. Posting in all of Alfonso's threads (shout-out!). Spring Bulletin College courses Buster Bluth should've taken: 1. Cutting the umbilicial cord 2. Girls date their fathers and boys marry their mothers 3. The Beatles (I so would!) Hassidic Tales, with a Guide to Their Interpretation by the Noted Scholar Best people to walk into a bar with a rabbi: 1. A priest 2. A preacher 3. A guy The Gossage- Vardebedian Papers Best chess players 1. Manny 2. Notgettingenough 3. John Turturro in The Luzhin Defence 4. Alice 5. Ronald Weasley Notes from the Overfed Free association in my brain: 1. Some girls are bigger than others. 2. My pet alligator loves this waaay too much 3. Ezra Pound A Twenties Memory Authors I would love to name-drop like I knew 'em: 1. Shakespeare 2. Jk Rowling 3. George Orwell Count Dracula Ideal dinner guests to a dinner party featuring Count Dracula 1. Elijah the Prophet 2. Those pesky relatives who won't leave. 3. Teachers and priests who invite themselves over. A Little Louder, Please Joe Sensitive's brethren. 1. Joe Porn 2. Jake Internet 3. Peeping Tom Conversations with Helmholtz Best therapist Christmas gifts. 1. Analrapist pants 2. Child molestation dolls 3. Bob from What About Bob? Viva Vargas! Best musicals with exclamation marks in the title: 1. Oliver! 2. HELP! 3. Oklahoma! The Discovery and Use of the Fake Ink Blot Placeds I've seen Jesus: 1. My breakfast cereal 2. Rorschach tests 3. Church Mr. Big Famous Mr. Bigs in history: 1. Sex in the City 2. Biggie Smalls 3. God No, that can't be it! I don't think those Wessies are sorry enough yet. My mom didn't name me Mariel after Mariel Hemingway because she liked her in Woody Allen's film Manhattan. She liked her teen modelling career. Other names I might've had: 1. Brooke (Shields) 2. Farrah (Fawcett) 3. Barry (Manilow) Review #2 I loved Woody Allen's Getting Even. I don't care what anybody else says about this book being out of date (it was published in 1972. Some of the stories predate that). I find Woody Allen always surprising and comforting at the same time like Morrissey or The Beatles. Like Morrissey because it seems to be easy to assume that the persona eclipses all other layers. The Beatles because the timelessness is the old and new at the same time. It doesn't eclipse nothin'. There's a reason why other actors who have attempted to "be" Woody have failed (don't think about Kenneth Branagh, Mariel! Nooo). There's a sharpness to the wit and good humor of his material. I don't really know how to describe it. I couldn't "be" Woody. I don't want to be. I really loved laughing out loud and being surprised by a really good line. How is death, history, god, education, taste, food, etc. ever out of date?
