Trigger Warning for Readers: Adoption, Infertility, and Murder. If you are looking for a book that is a mystery filled with twists and turns, then this most certainly is a book that you should pick up and read. Let's start with some of the many characters in the book: Karen and Greg Newhall: high school sweethearts who have faced many trials and tribulations throughout their marriage including infertility. The couple seem to lead a normal life after adopting their daughter, Jenny, that is until Linda: Jenny's birthmother shows up on the Newhall's doorstep on Mother's Day. As hurt as Karen Newhall is about Linda showing up on the doorstep, she seems welcoming to allow Jenny to begin to form a relationship with her birth mother, that is until Linda turns up dead, and surprisingly, there has been yet another murder in the town of Bayland, Massachusetts. This book had so many twists and turns, I thought I had figured out the potential murderer about midway through the book, however, I was totally in shock and taken by surprise to learn that the handful of people I thought the killer may be was in fact not. 5/5 Stars: I blew through this book pretty quickly. The storyline kept me intrigued from the very first couple of pages. If you are in search of a book that leaves you guessing until the very end, then this may be the perfect novel for you. I picked up this book on a whim from a used bookstore as the cover intrigued me, and upon reading the description I had made up my mind that I needed to read this book as quickly as possible. I think the author, Patricia MacDonald, did a wonderful job with this book. I was a fan of her writing style, and commend her for writing a book that can keep a reader guessing until the very last page. This book will go down as one of my top reads this year! If you do pickup this book, I highly recommend making and taking notes throughout the book about the characters and how they relate to one another throughout the storyline. There are many characters in the book and at times it was difficult as a reader to know how each character related to one another. I found taking quick notes on the characters made for a more pleasurable reading experience. If you should pick up and read this book, please, let me know your thoughts.
