2024 Review A ridiculous but entertaining story! 2021 Review The last time I read this book I cooed over the theme of unhappy marriages. This time I just kept noticing how often mistresses play a role! It ought to come across vulgar but somehow Heyer carries it off. 2019 Review - 5 stars It amuses me that I own so many these Heyer books I initially gave low ratings. It does not matter what I thought of them. If SHE wrote it, I will buy it. (Excluding possibly Penhallow .) Thankfully this book did not remain low in my estimation for long. In fact, I rather enjoyed it. True, the hero has about 80% more dialogue with his mother than his prospective bride, but I would say the mother is more of a main character. She drives the plot. Her difficulties send the twins hurrying to her aide. Her ideas drive their actions. By right she is a side character, and yet...she really isn't. Even how things wrap up put her front and center. So, the romance does take a back seat. But this is Heyer, Queen of Showing Not Telling. The reader can easily track how Kit falls for his brother's prospective bride, how she falls for him, how she learns of the switch...none of it explicitly said. I really enjoyed the added subtlety. Finally, I bumped the book up to 5 stars, not 4 like I initially planned, because False Colours comes with another level of depth than most Heyer novels. Now, I love Heyer's romances. They're witty and charming and leave you grinning from ear to ear. But they don't generally aim for depth . In False Colours she sort of tries depth and I understand why a younger me would not have liked it. But it comes from making the mother the main heroine. The book focuses on the impact of an unhappy marriage. Even though Lady Denville (the mother of the twins) has been widowed over a year, the impact of her bad marriage still remains part of her life. It influences the scrapes she finds herself in. How she views those around her. How others view her. There is a scene between the twins where the older discloses something of their mother's history to the younger. I won't spoil it. But the scene is not exactly nice. It really comes of out of nowhere and does not play a critical part of the story. But it poignantly expresses what she experienced as a young, unloved bride. And that is why I think this book deserves five starts. Though a "conventional" marriage plot with intrigue and masquerades plays out, the book really centers on Lady Denville. And it is wonderful for that. 2013 Review - 2 Stars Though a romping good tale, it isn't Georgette Heyer's best. While this book would be good for anyone else, she's Georgette Heyer! You have to expect something more! Anyway Plot Kit Fancot and his twin brother Evelyn are almost as identical as identical twins can be. The only people who can tell them apart have known them since they were very young - and even then it isn't a sure bet. So when Evelyn's sudden disappearance coincides with Kit's surprise arrival home from his diplomatic delegation abroad, their Mother convinces him that he absolutely must pretend to be Evelyn just for one evening to save his twin brother's engagement! Unfortunately, one night because an unforeseeablaly long charade when Evelyn doesn't reappear and Kit finds himself drawn more and more into his brother's shoes. He's also fins himself falling for his brother's fiance. Thoughts Though many reviewers complain that Kit spends way more time bantering with his mother than with his love interest, I didn't find it that bad. In fact, I enjoyed the easy carings-on of his mother, the servants, even his love interest (though I agree, more of her was desirable) It showed an echo of what makes The Grand Sophy so amazing, or even Frederica and Cotillion so brilliant. It isn't that there is a remarkable climax, but a more gentle up and down with a natural predicament and a gentleman to solve it. Somehow, though, it just didn't flow as well. I think what through me off most about Fales Colours was the frequent (and I mean frequent ) references to mistresses, lady birds, light skirts, and bits of muslin. It's an almost continual bombardment for a Heyer book. Of course, nothing explicit, nothing inappropriate, but it got grating after a while, like an echo that wouldn't go away already. My roommate pointed out that this probably was a usual thing for the time and as a very historically accurate person, Heyer would have stuck to that. While that does make some sense, I did find their Mother's frequent comments on it most...unlikely? Cressy's run-in with the former mistress was HILARIOUS though. Just sayin'. So anyway, not her best. Not her worst.
