This is a bummer of a novel--a mostly distasteful reading experience. But the honest evocation of human cruelty and misguided actions, alongside the brutal beauty of nature is so powerful and skillfully crafted that everyone should read it anyway. Before becoming Zimbabwe, Southern Rhodesia was a British colony, from 1923 to 1970. Doris Lessing, born in Iran, was six years old when she moved to the country in 1925 with her parents, whose hope (unrealized) it was to make a fortune from farming. “They were shocked, for the first week or so, by the way natives were treated. They were revolted a hundred times a day by the casual way they were spoken of, as if they were so many cattle; or by a blow, or a look. They had been prepared to treat them as human beings. But they could not stand out against the society they were joining.” In this debut novel, Lessing wrote about what she knew: the destructiveness of poverty; the tragedy of colonization; specific, horrific racism; patriarchy; the treatment of people who didn’t fall in line with the norm; and the impact of a couple struggling through living together while holding dramatically different dreams and realities. She tells the story of Mary Turner, how she rose from a loveless and impoverished childhood to become a confident, self-sufficient woman at a time when this kind of woman just wouldn’t do. Mary was disdained and made fun of, which pushed her into an ill-matched marriage to the kindly but hapless Dick Turner, after which farm life, blistering heat, and crippling poverty lead to her downfall. We’re told the tragic outcome on page one-- in the form of a newspaper clipping--so we know what will happen, but curiosity about how it happens propels us through the bleakness of the narrative. I found the depiction of a woman’s anger particularly fascinating. We frequently hear discussions of men’s anger and the roots of it. But, though there are plenty of stories about women’s mental breakdowns, discussions about their anger, and what might be at the roots of that anger (anger which often precedes the breakdown), I don’t see very often. Lessing gives a very convincing description of the way poverty, a lack of family love, childhood trauma, and bullying can create a simmering pain and lead to a bitter, evil, nastiness. “The women who marry men like Dick learn sooner or later that there are two things they can do: they can drive themselves mad, tear themselves to pieces in storms of futile anger and rebellion; or they can hold themselves tight and go bitter.” Another interesting and always timely theme dealt with the treatment of the land, and the way Dick Turner, who loved and cared for his farm, was only punished for this by poverty and ridicule, while his neighbors, who prioritized short-term gain, became rich leaders of the district. “He was sorry for Dick Turner, whom he knew to be unhappy; but even this tragedy seemed to him romantic; he saw it, impersonally, as a symptom of the growing capitalization of farming all over the world, of the way small farmers would inevitably be swallowed by the big ones. (Since he intended to be a big one himself, this tendency did not distress him.)” The headline above the news clipping that begins the book is “Murder Mystery,” but don’t expect a solution from Lessing. Instead she leaves us with ambiguity and symbolism, perhaps the most honest way to end the tale. “The crises of individuals, like the crises of nations, are not realized until they are over.”
