My best friend’s older sister, whom we stalked and annoyed and idolized and stole things from, including much of the Sweet Dreams series, fully got this haircut, influenced in part by Pat Benatar, Joan Jett, and this book. I’m pretty sure she marched in and thrust this cover right in the face of the stylist at Shear Rumors or wherever. And she ended up pretty much nailing this sassy, no-nonsense cover look dead-on. The places she could have gone, had we been geographically and otherwise more fortunate. For it turns out this cover model is none other than a young Courteney Cox, in a slightly more formal and scholastic version of the look she sported when Bruce Springsteen pulled her up on stage for the Dancing in the Dark video - right around the same time this book was published. For those of you who don’t already know this, their seemingly impromptu encounter in that video was actually staged: Cox was already a professional actress and soap opera star (and paperback romance cover model) who was cast and flown in from New York City for the concert footage video shoot. The kicker is that the footage was filmed at a concert in St. Paul, Minnesota, which was not actually terribly far afield of where we grew up. But alas, the decks were stacked, and my friend’s big sister was not to be discovered for fame in this manner, brisk feathered haircut notwithstanding. The best probably we could have managed for her in our neck of the woods would have maybe been, hm… maybe…Ted Nugent? The other essential fact of this cover is in its demonstration of how, in the first half of the 80s, the answer to the multiple-choice question of: A) Horizontally-striped multicolor pastel nubby sweater b) Vertically-striped, horn-buttoned, khaki-and-pastel blazer C) Crisply elbow-rolled sleeve cuffs or D) Popped pink polo collar …would have been an emphatic: E) All of the above! (Part of a series in which I reflect on how my friend’s big sister’s Sweet Dreams books influenced my 80s Midwestern fashion desert clothing endeavors.)
