Full Review Originally Posted @ Addicted To Romance Outlaw Hearts is a saga romance that will enthrall you from the first page, a love story that is majestic in its telling of it. In the past I have had the opportunity to read her before, but it has been many years. Almost ten years since I have read anything of her. So I was thrilled at the chance to read this one, especially with it being republished, and high ratings….and boy does this story deserve them, each and every one. This is not a short story, so be warned but so worth every moment of reading you take into it. It took me about two days to read this, it’s about 600 pages, but it didn’t feel that long to be honest. This story spans from when they first meet in their 20’s and ends when they are in their 40’s. We see them fall in love, get married, make love for the first time, have children, get separated and their relationship tested, we even see grandkids, but we see a love story that grows and becomes stronger with challenge they have to overcome together. We see how their relationship develops, and how no matter what they got put up against, they still won and their bond became even more firm than ever. This is a page turner, and keeps you on the edge of your seat in anticipation of what these two will have to endure to stay together and keep each other safe. What I loved most was how this captivated me so much that I lost quite a few hours of sleep so I could read that one chapter. It is quite an emotional journey we are taken on as readers, and it will really tug at those heart-strings in ways that you won’t see coming, and FYI :Bring a box of tissues to your reading corner because you will need them) it leaves the story will some things settled and a few questions but what a wonderful ending, and what is better is you have a second book that just became published so you can find out what they have to deal with next. This is a western based romance, set in a historical context, and the author is fabulous in describing vivid detail and making the story come alive with each page there is raw emotion and a true interpretation of the time and culture that the reader is opened up to. I will say this for Rosanne Bittner, she is one of the best romance authors that have ever written. This is a unforgettable story and a book that I will be re reading again, a story that is by far one of the best romances ever to be read and I soaked it all in, every character…every detail…every setting, this is a must read for any romance lover, because I guarantee you will cry, you will laugh, you will jump up and down in excitement, your mind is going to enter into a world you have never known or dreamed, and you will adore every delicious moment!!
