Great Content, Numerous Personalities being Quoted, Very Apt Anecdotes, Easy to Understand Principles and Universal Application is how I would describe what the book ‘The Leadership Challenge’ is all about. What is this book about? PART 1 What Leaders do and What Constituents Expect 1. The Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership: 1) Model the way 2) Inspire a shared vision 3) Challenge the process 4) Enable others to act 5) Encourage the heart 2. Credibility Is The Foundation of Leadership: For people to follow someone willingly, the majority of constituents believe the leader must be honest, forward-looking, inspiring, and competent. PART 2 Model the Way 3. Clarify Values: Find your voice and affirm shared values. 4. Set the Example: Personify the shared values and teach others to model these values. Part 3 Inspire a Shard Vision 5. Envision the Future: Imagine the possibilities and find a common purpose. 6. Enlist Others: Appeal to common ideals and animate the vision. Part 4 Challenge the Process 7. Search For Opportunities: Seize the initiative and exercise outsight. 8. Experiment and Take Risks: Generate small wins and learn from experience. Part 5 Enable Others to Act 9. Foster Collaboration: Create a climate of trust and facilitate relationships. 10. Strengthen Others: Enhance self-determination and develop competence and confidence. Part 6 Encourage the Heart 11. Recognize Contributions: Expect the best and Personalize recognition. 12. Celebrate the Values and Victories: Create a spirit of community and Be personally involved. Part 7 Leadership for Everyone 13. Leadership Is Everyone's Business - You are the most important leader in your organization. - Leadership is learned. - Leaders make a difference. - First lead yourself. - Moral leadership calls us to high purposes. - Humility is the antidote to hubris. - Leadership is in the moment. - The best-kept secret of successful leaders is love: staying in love with leading, with the people who do the work, with what their organizations produce, and with those who honor the organization by using its products and services. Overall, A simple yet effective book that describes what Leadership is all about and will always remain a as a timeless piece of literature in the non-fiction genre. Overall Rating – 7.5 out of 10 Loy Machedo loymachedo.com | loymachedo.tv
