Having just read a god awful Pride and Prejudice ‘sequel’, I wanted to read a bona fide Regency romance, and picked one by no one less than Georgette Heyer, the originator of the genre, and perhaps the only romance novelist who comes with glowing recommendations from A.S. Byatt. Not being a romance reader, I didn’t know what to expect, but I thought that this book is one decidedly odd romance. Imagine pitching it as a rom com/costume drama script to a Hollywood studio executive: Studio Executive (EXEC): “So what do we have here? A Civil Contract ? Is it a John Grisham thing? Scriptwriter (SW): “It’s a story about marriage of convenience in Regency England. A sort of a period rom com, actually.” EXEC: “Oh, Jane Austen! Costume drama! Pride and Prejudice was pretty good, and that little Anne Hathaway movie did OK. Chicks like them. ” SW: “It’s not from any Jane Austen book, but it's from a novel set in the same period. Specifically, it’s about the people who are involved in this marriage of convenience: the mercenary groom, the social climbing father-in-law, and the plain bride.” EXEC: “You mean they marry just for the money?” SW: “The hero --- Adam Lynton --- has to marry the heroine, Jenny, because otherwise he would go bankrupt. You see, the guy’s dad, the late Viscount Lynton, left the ancestral estate so deeply in debt that the only way to save it is for Adam to marry rich. Enters Mr. Chawleigh, a filthy rich, self-made man from humble backgrounds, who desperately wants to marry his daughter to the ‘nobs’.” EXEC: “So this Adam guy --- he just ran with it?” SW: “Uh, no. He’s kinda of reluctant, actually, being a gentleman and all. But as the head of the family, he needs to take care of his old mom, and provide dowries for his sisters. There’s just no other way out. He thinks that he’s sacrificing himself for the good of his family.” EXEC: “Okay. So, how plain is the girl? I’m thinking Natalie Portman --- or that Hathaway girl. Just put her in some kind of a dowdy getup.” SW: “Actually, she’s kinda short and plump --- “a little squab figure” is the word that’s used to describe her in the novel.” EXEC: “Eh --- gotta get someone petite for her, then. But she’s basically okay looking, right?” SW: “Umm, no. The novel says that she’s certainly not a beauty with her short neck and “mouse-coloured hair”. And she dresses funny.” EXEC: (grumbles) “How’s that gonna sell the movie?” SW: “But she’s a sensible girl, and pretty shrewd too. She knows that her husband doesn’t love her, but gets up early every morning just to make tea for him anyway. She personally embroiders his handkerchiefs with super tiny stitches. She makes sure that there’s hot supper on the table, no matter how late he returns home. Men like to be comfortable, and by golly, she’s gonna make him very comfortable.” EXEC: “Is that all she does? No dashing across the moor on a spirited stallion? No clever, witty talk? No ahead-of-her-time intellectual interests? SW: “Nope. She’s a born housewife whose sole purpose in life is to make her husband comfortable.” EXEC: “Fantastic! We’re gonna have the movie picketed by every wannabe feminist in town.” SW: “But she’s feisty --- in her own way. She keeps the ancestral house spick-and-span. She reins in her snobby mother-in-law like an expert horsewoman. She transcends her vulgar background to become a proper lady. And she eventually wins herself a handsome nobleman who in normal circumstances is way out of her league.” EXEC: (skeptical) “But where’s the drama? That can’t be all there is?” SW: “Before he was compelled to marry Jenny, Adam dated Julia ---the beautiful daughter of Lord Oversley, another rich nob --- and Jenny’s best friend from school. Julia’s dad put an end to their budding romance, because he wouldn’t have a bankrupt Viscount as son in law. But the two still have the hots for each other, even though Adam is now kind of married.” EXEC: “So that’s what the audience has to sit through the movie? Whether plain Jenny will be successful in making her husband so comfortable, that he’ll overcome his first love and fall in love with her?” SW: “Yep. That would be the gist of it.” It’s as if, having written dozens of romances, Heyer decided to throw herself a challenge and deliberately picked the most unpromising premise for a romance. The heroine is hopelessly plain, and virtually has nothing to make her distinguished other than her ability to be an uber Martha Stewart. The hero, despite being conventionally handsome, married her for mercenary reasons. Despite all this, Heyer managed to tell an enjoyable, even occasionally amusing story about the coming together of basically decent people who try to do their best under tawdry circumstances. There is no passionate sighs or heaving bosoms here, just the gradual triumph of prosaic sensibility (and homemaking ability) over “impractical” youthful passion. That’s a pretty subversive notion for a romance. The one interesting thing about Jenny for me is her true motivation in accepting the marriage of convenience. She knew that Adam was her best friend’s beau and yet has little compunction in ‘stealing’ him when circumstances permitted. This seems to be grossly at odds with the rest of her characterization as a modest, sensitive, eminently sensible little homemaker. She rationalizes her actions as making the best of a bad situation (“The choice is not between you, Julia, and me, but between me and ruin!”), but it doesn’t ring true to me (Come on Jenny, admit it, you’ve got the hots for the guy since like, forever --- and you snatched him up when there’s opportunity. I don’t blame you, girl). I wish that Heyer had explored this further, but perhaps it’s too much to ask from this genteel romance.
