“Racism is based on fear, that when the white racist confronts the black man, what he sees is not the individual man but a “nightmare” of his own creation” ― James Baldwin. James Baldwin would have been one of the Prophets if there had been an American secular Bible. He began his public life as a teenage preacher at a church in Harlem, a position that only widened the conflict with his stepfather, a minister who denied him the love that James sought all his life. Baldwin left the church formally in his adult years, but he never really stopped speaking to Americans about the issues that drive us away from simply loving and accepting our neighbor. He preached that race was a construct, that sexual love between two people was not something to judge, and that we needed to face the real history of the United States, our ugly national past that couldn't be overcome by changing our laws, as hard as that continues to be, but changing our hearts. Baldwin's biographer here, David Leeming, was a long-time friend who first met the author of THE FIREiNEXT TIME, ANOTHER COUNTRY, and GO TELL IT ON THE MOUNTAIN in Istanbul in the early 1960s. Twenty-odd years later he was with him at the end of his life in his place of self-imposed exile in France. Leeming tracks his friend in his years as a vocal celebrity and controversial Jeremiah-like renown author. He embraced Malcolm X, Meager Evers, Martin Luther King, and the Black Panthers with equal energy and vigor. That many of the leaders were gunned down shows how brave a man Baldwin was, not only writing about liberation but also going into Birmingham, Alabama, to observe and report on the Civil Rights struggle. He debated against bigotry on television and in the forums of Oxford and Berkeley, and over and over reminded liberal white America it had such a long way to go to see his people fully and completely. One thing this great biography isn't: a hagiography. Baldwin's messy personal life is also on display here as well as the plethora of hangers-on that he had to be rescued from by his brother David Baldwin and from true friends like David Leeming. This biography made me feel closer to Baldwin with all his eloquence, vulnerabilities, and amazing strength.
