These are not novels in the literal sense. If you want, you can see them almost as sketches of novels, or what might be left after you eliminated all extraneous details from a novel, except the plot, minimal (that is unilateral, almost cartoonish) character development, and surprisingly, the passion. The stories are very strange combinations of elements that you usually don’t see together. Their simplicity approaches that of fairy tales (at a certain point, Unamuno strips everything off the bones of the story to such a degree that he changes the very literary genre in the middle of it all and ends up with veritable pieces of dramatic dialogue); yet the characters and dialogue have a passion that you don’t see in such tales. Even the time of these pieces is imprecise. Just when you think that one is taking place some centuries ago, you are struck by the image of an automobile. This lends them some eternal character and opens your eyes to such literary possibilities, if you have ever wondered… You can feel, however, the power of life in these stories. Life wants to exist and doesn’t care about the means. There is something Schopenhauerian about Unamuno’s tales: The will to live is seething behind them and drives the passion to destructive limits. These are dark stories, nothing you want to read on the beach. Or maybe that’s exactly where you should do it because you do need some serious sunrays to wash away the darkness. While I may care about Unamuno’s ideas, I don’t care about Unamuno’s treatment of them in Three Exemplary Novels . I find myself unsure whether these stories are extremely conventional or extremely unconventional. If they are a bow to literary tradition or literary experiment. As a side note, with all their simplicity, the repetitive dialogue is somewhat exhausting. It is, of course, a tool for expressing passion, but it gets a bit too close to soap opera exchanges. So my enjoyment of Unamuno’s tales was not that great. I live on details, I consumes detours, I crave nuances. If this is the kind of literature that gives you the freedom to color it with your own nuances, I’m way too lazy for that. Unamuno’s tales are definitely not passive reading, since you have to put the meat on the bones yourself. In fact, despite their apparent simplicity, a second reading and some serious reflection are almost a must. I can’t stop thinking how these tales would look if filled with the details I crave. Pretty awesome.
