This was a surprisingly worthy follow-up to Shiloh that explored one of the best aspects of the first book in far more detail. Shiloh is a great book. Not only due to the classic boy-and-his-dog narrative - the desperation to get a dog away from a bad situation, grappling with whether or not it is indeed right (and if someone has any right at all) to take an animal away when you know how much it will suffer if you don't. Legal right, moral right - it dealt with all of that in a way easy for a child to grasp. The book is more than just a children's book though - it's equally compelling for an adult reader. This book further explores the villain of the first book, Judd Travers. It's well-known that he treats his dogs poorly, to the point of abuse. It's known he hunts out of season, and has a mean streak a mile wide. He's hated in the community, mocked outright by kids and adults alike. And man, he doesn't make it easy to like him. In the previous book we got a small glimpse of his humanity. He had begun warming up to Travis in it - and indeed looked sad to see his company go once the work was done. This sequel follows directly where the first book leaves off. Judd has begun drinking again, and that drinking is bringing out the worst in him. He's driving erratically, starting fights, and jut itching for trouble. Worst of all, he is hunting on the Preston's family lands, drunk like as not, and fixing his gun a bit too closely on Travis and Shiloh for anyone's liking. Things are coming to a head, and it's looking like there might be no resolution or redemption. Can a person that mean and cruel ever be redeemed? Can a dog that's been chained, starved, and beaten end up being a good pet? What about a person? This book deals heavily in the cycle of abuse, while still being a kid's book. It asks the hard questions, and shows a way forward, and just how difficult that way forward can be. People, like animals, need to learn kindness. Kindness can be hard to show and seem unappreciated, but it is always the right way forward. This book was every bit as great as the first and I thoroughly look forward to finishing reading the quartet.
