Having read Trixie Belden and the Secret of the Mansion (this is the TRUE title, never mind the reprints) I immediately moved on to book 2 because the two are really part of a single longer story. I've mentioned that I think this was the first Trixie Belden book I ever read. I was a weird kid and frequently Did Not Care about publication order or chronological order. I have no idea what I was thinking. Anyway. I loved this book because I desperately wanted to take a trip in a trailer like the Wheelers'. Still do, really. I am so done with camping in a tent. So the fact that Honey and Trixie got to go off searching for Jim, accompanied by the ever-patient Miss Trask, just hit all the right notes for me. However, the mystery isn't as solid as the one in the first book, probably because there are THREE mysteries: Jim's disappearance, the trailer thieves, and the mysterious family in the camper Robin . Yes, they're all interlinked, but there's a lot going on and it weakens the story. However, there are some really great supporting characters, particularly the farmer's wife (I can't remember her name, just that her husband is Nat) who ends up trying to adopt everyone . The bad guys, unfortunately, are cookie-cutter villains, though it's funny to see them outsmarted by three teens. I also like that we learn about Jim's thwarting of their plans at second hand. That really worked for me. As before, the heart of the story is the friendships between the kids, and Trixie and Honey's characters are even better developed. I still like Honey better, and I love her kindheartedness toward the various lost souls, as well as her strength in standing up to her would-be kidnappers. But the book isn't without its ridiculousnesses, chief among which is the disposition of Jim's fate. Everyone wants to adopt him--not foster him, not provide him with shelter, but flat-out adopt him, and I have trouble believing it could possibly be so easy. That the Wheelers, in particular, are so ready to take him on strikes me as weird, even if Campbell tries to lampshade it by saying Jim's dad was a friend of Honey's father. I end up giving it a pass because I think the point is to get Jim in a position to continue to be friends with the girls without introducing more adult characters to complicate what is, after all, a young adult book. . And the bad guys aren't as menacing as they really would be, but then, this is a YA mystery written in 1950, so there's that. There's also Jim's fortune, which is only ridiculous because the Wheelers are already our wealthy characters AND the Darnells end up with a nice chunk of change for their role in stopping the thieves. It's like wealth is the only possible reward, though I suppose Jim getting a new family is a reward in itself. The book ends with everyone comfortably taken care of and ready to move on to the next adventure, in which we meet Trixie's brothers who've been away at camp. I have my reservations about book 3, but that can wait for another review.
