HYPOTHESIS: Logan was the architect of the chain letter campaign. MOTIVE: The text establishes that the BSC is becoming increasingly unpopular around campus. Mary Anne herself admits that they no longer hang out with friends outside the group. I argue this includes Logan Bruno, since we NEVER read about anything he and Mary Anne do together alone, even in her own book. In her own words, Mary Anne says she "guess[es] you could call Logan [her] boyfriend," which is more noncommittal than previous books led us to believe. Logan's fragile masculinity is continually challenged by his relationship with Mary Anne and her friendship with the BSC. The book establishes that Mary Anne will pretty much always choose giggling with the BSC, even if it risks alienating Logan. He becomes the target of some mild bullying for choosing to hang out with the BSC over his other friends. He was also self-conscious to buy his own furry suit supplies and made Mary Anne go with him. He's jealous of anyone who gets to spend time with Mary Anne alone—even the school janitor. Logan concocts a plan to test once and for all whether Mary Anne will choose him over the BSC. With help from some adoring mean girls, he begins sending threatening letters and lays a trap to see if Mary Anne will come to him for help. MEANS: Logan's whereabouts are mostly unaccounted for in this book. He could be linked to any number of those school accidents. Logan also has relationships with each babysitting charge, and it wouldn't be hard to rile the kids up and play on their fears to further gaslight Mary Anne. EVIDENCE: Logan had already tried to drive a wedge between Mary Anne and Kristy by goading Kristy into being gross about her lunch. The book calls back to Claudia and the Phantom Phone Calls , in which another local boy terrorizes the BSC in order to impress a sitter. Logan rang the doorbell at Mary Anne's house to pick her up for the Halloween Hop. It would have been very easy for him to stick the note to her door without her noticing. Neither Grace nor Cokie wanted to explain why Logan was at the cemetery, even though they'd already been caught and there was no point in lying. They never admit to calling him, FYI. Logan is always referred to as Mary Anne's boyfriend post- Logan Likes Mary Anne , and they're together enough to do a couples' costume together—yet Logan completely hesitates to call her his girlfriend publicly. Why? Probably because he proved himself right—Mary Anne DID choose the BSC to help her solve her mystery over Logan. In the end, it worked, because Mary Anne continues to wear the creepy necklace as a symbol that this whole incident—which she never even mentioned to Logan—somehow brought them closer together as a couple. The prosecution rests.
