Mario Vargas Llosa's first book, based on his own experiences in a military academy, is a great read and certainly demonstrates the qualities of writing that he used later and that eventually earned him a deserved Nobel Prize for Literature in 2010. The narration is non-linear and post-modern in that the voice shifts from 3rd person to 1st person and the story is told from several perspectives at once. What looks like a relatively simple story of revenge becomes something much bigger - the conditioning of young men into thoughtless soldiers, the appalling way that men treated women in Peru (I suppose that hasn't changed), the hypocrisy of upper command which always protects reputation above everything else, the desperation of being bullied and the inevitable creation of bullied...The primary character Alberto has incredible depth (and is a rather obvious standin for Vargas Llosa himself). The captain Gamboa is not the person who we think he is and is drawn out perfectly. The one confusing bit to me was the focus on the Boa character and why he had an allegiance to the Jaguar. This is a rather minor point however because the entire narrative is captivating. There are truly moments when the reader feels he is walking in Lima and its suburbs and the descriptions of life at the academy are frankly terrifying. The Leoncio Military Academy exists in real life and was so scandalized by the book that they burned 100 copies of it shen it came out. Another interesting aspect of The Time of the Hero is racism. Peru was of course created from the wreckage of the Spanish conquering of the Incas by Pizarro and subsequent local wars that carved out the modern states of Columbia, Paraguay, Ecuador, and Chile. When Gamboa comes to see the Jaguar in lockup, he is surprised that the boy is not a "half-breed" like most of the kids in the Academy. There is another narrative earlier in the book, although it was hard for me to understand if it concerned Alberto or the Jaguar or someone else, where the family is a bit surprised to send this apparently white kid into the academy which they perceived as being full of half-breeds and savages. Now, I have unfortunately never visited Peru, but I have had several Peruvian friends over the years, so I know that by "half-breed", they are referring to descendants of the Spanish colonists with the descendants of the various tribes that survived after the fall of the Incas. There is a sense of derision whenever the poorer people from the mountains - the Indians - when references to them are made. I recall that, indeed, there was this sense of superiority in Peruvian "whites" over the people with Indian origins - such as the Cava who is ignominously humiliated and rejected from the school with hardly any sign of sadness or regret from his co-cadets. And added to this was the even worse stigma attached to people of black skin like the Slave and Verano in the academy. Vargas Llosa was describing a four-tiered system of prejudice with whites at the top, half-breeds next down, pure Indians, and then descendants of slaves with black skin at the bottom. There were also references to Chinese immigrants but they were more of a commercial nature and not really referred to in the social hierarchy. Again, having no knowledge of Lima and how the neighbourhoods are populated, numerous references are made to the apparently more affluent Miraflores quarter with its beaches compared to the less attractive suburbs and slums from which characters like the Boa originated. This is another interesting layer to the portrait that Vargas Llosa paints of the Lima of his youth. This book also reminded me of Cat and Mouse by fellow Nobel laureate Gunter Grass where Grass describes life in a Nazi Youth school. Equally brutal and deadly - another awesome book if you have not read it yet. I would highly recommend The Time of the Hero to fans of Vargas Llosa although it would be better to read Aunt Julia or The Feast of the Goats to get a better feel for his style before this book, because I enjoyed learning about him after reading his more mature work. This was my 5th book of his, but certainly not my last. He is quickly rising in my favorite authors list, at least tied with Marquez now. Fino's Mario Vargas Llosa Reviews: Fiction The Cubs and Other Stories (1959) TBR The Time of the Hero (1963) The Green House (1966) Conversation in the Cathedral (1969) Captain Pantoja and the Special Services (1973) Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter (1977) The War of the End of the World (1981) The Real Life of Alejandro Mayta (1985) Who Killed Palomino Molero? (1987) The Storyteller (1989) In Praise of the Stepmother (1990) Death in the Andes (1996) The Notebooks of Don Rigoberto (1998) The Feast of the Goat (2001) The Way to Paradise (2003) The Bad Girl (2007) The Dream of the Celt (2010) The Discrete Hero (2015) The Neighborhood (2018) Harsh Times (2021) TBR Non-Fiction The Perpetual Orgy (1975) A Fish Out of Water (1993) Letters to a Young Novelist (1998)
