I read this before but I am re-reading biographies because I am trying to write one. This one is written with a kind of sang-froid which suits its subjects: the writer's family. There are lovely paragraphs and beautiful sentences; it is such a pleasure to read. There is wit, there is fun, but there is also seriousness. We look at these lives as wholes, from beginning to end, trying to understand how these people interacted with the opportunities that were available to them in their lives, trying to understand what lessons we might draw. Michael Holroyd is a brilliant biographer. Here he begins way back with Victorians and traces all the stories into the 1980s. This is the generation that stepped up in WWII, and did its best. This particular family seems to do nothing but quarrel, and the parents marry and divorce three times; they don't know whether they're happy enough at any point in time; lack of money makes circumstances difficult. Holroyd is close to his father but they sometimes argued when he left school without a plan, or the inclination to follow his father's suggestion of becoming an engineer or scientist. He gives you the flavour of the arguments verbatim. Holroyd's father tried numerous times to make money in business and was a talented salesman. He had upper class charm, but in other ways wasn't very astute. He discouraged his son from his ambition to become a writer, but was in other ways supportive, giving him a small stipend to live on in his young adulthood. His divorced mother was very beautiful and lived a rather rackety life, with rich men to support her through her beautiful years. His aunt always lived with her parents in the family home in Maidenhead, until her advanced old age, but she too had had a love affair, which began in 1932 and petered out during the war. This was a very sad story though it began so happily. The grandmother had always been difficult and very nasty to her husband. She provides one lesson of the book: make the best of things and make the most of life, because it seems that all her life she did exactly the opposite. The author knew that she loved him, the only child of the household, but she had nothing to say to him, and he couldn't think of anything to say to her. The author went to boarding school from an early age, which seems to have suited him, because he made friends and wasn't unhappy, particularly, though he strove to become invisible. This is quite common for schoolboys. They may blossom later. We follow the family through their mainly downward trajectory and their adventures in love, until they one after each other become ill. This is a terrible thing, the deaths, the many trips to hospital, strokes, forgetfulness, cancer, falls, heart problems. The lack of kindness in the NHS pops up more than once, for example, when the writer is sitting at his terminally-ill mother's bedside, and a nurse refuses to give the author an aspirin. Having to find a chemist for his pain relief, he misses his mother's death. The doctor who sees the terminally-ill mother after a six-hour wait, puts his elbow on a stack of notes, and asks her: 'So what seems to be the problem?' I mean, is he being funny? Michael Holroyd had to do hours and hours of bureaucratic work for his parents and aunt and then watch them all die. It is terribly, terribly sad.
