Cristabel Swann is a gently born lady fallen on hard times after the death of her parents, father a vicar of course and no money to be had to support her. The story opens with Cristabel working as music teacher (piano and harp) in a girls school for the upper classes. Of course, all who work there are treated abysmally, and when Christabel receives legal notice of the death of her only remaining relation, Uncle Charles Swann* , Lord Harwood, she burns her bridges at the school and heads to London hoping to find some pittance or provision to allow her a living without teaching at the school. What she discovers instead is a bankrupt estate, a bellowing partially blind Naval Captain recovering from war wounds residing in the house which he had won at a card game shortly before Lord Harwood stuck his spoon in the wall. After some yelling and chaos, the Captain remembers another property in the Kensington section of London that was included int he settlement of Harwood's debt of honor to the Captain, and after vaguely remembering it was a boarding house, sent our naive but spunky Cristabel off to be the landlady of the boarding house with a loan of 100 pounds to get her started. Of course, a proper boarding house is not what Cristabel finds, although it takes her some time to tumble to the truth because she's too busy living in fantasy land and being distracted by a handsome ne'er-do-well of a military man seemingly recovering from a war injury - or is he? May misunderstandings and deceptions are at play, and even some mistaken identity issues - sort of - revolving around our Naval Captain. When she does tumble to the truth, the spunky Cristabel with a strong backbone takes charge, chaos ensues, and we start rapidly to a satisfying conclusion and a happily ever after for Cristabel. Metzger is one of my favorite regency romance writers because there is so much humor built into her stories -- through manyy of the characters, their actions and the pets. And there are plenty of amusing side characters -- Fanny the maid whose enormous extended family seems to have a knack for dying in unusual but hilarious circumstances, Boy who hates bathing and collects strays, and even those strays, like the dog Meadowlark who is anything but as sweet as that name suggests. Metzger is reminiscent of Heyer -- but not as sophisticated. But I find them incredibly funny. I give this a 3.5 - not the best of Metzger's work and took longer for the really humorous silly nonsense to captivate me, but still an excellent distraction. Total unabashedly entertaining fluff and nonsense. *Oh the irony! Charles Swann is a significant character in Proust...
