If Dante's Inferno and a Tom and Jerry cartoon had a baby, it would be this book. As it just so happens, the hell the author claims to have experienced matches the generic version of hell often portrayed in popular culture complete with fire and brimstone, wailing spirits encased in living skeletons, and cackling demons armed with pointy sticks. So what's being revealed? Don't most Christians already believe this stuff, including the stuff that doesn't even have any sort of biblical precedent? And why didn't Jesus pick a better writer for these "revelations"? The writing is amateurish at best, not to mention PAINFULLY repetitive. Did I mention that the writing is repetitive? Speaking of Jesus, the Jesus in this book is a real jerk. The biblical Jesus preached compassion and forgiveness, but this Jesus just goes around chastising people who are already dead and in hell. This seems kind of petty, especially for the Son of God. And what are some of the wicked and awful sins for which these people are justifiably damned for all eternity? Among them are homosexuality, practicing witchcraft (yes, witches are real), and lust. The word "lust" must be used a thousand times in this book. Call it a hunch but I'm wondering if the author has some church-installed guilt regarding her naughty bits. Here are some things I learned from this book: 1) Hell is located at the center of the earth and is shaped like a giant body. Just like in the bible. 2) Hell is filled with cell blocks seventeen miles high. The manner in which the author measured these cell blocks is not recorded. 3) God allows evil spirits to wander the earth where they trick people into committing acts of unpardonable wickedness, like for example being Hindu. 4) Satan talks like a comic-book caricature of, well, Satan. 5) Heaven is a giant bureaucracy complete with overflowing file cabinets. Apparently God hasn't switched to electronic record-keeping yet. 6) Jesus won't hesitate to add insult to injury. And he seemed like such a nice guy. 7) The greatest sin of all isn't child-rape or mass murder. The greatest sin of all is using your God-given free will to choose not to accept God's love, His infinite, terribly confusing love. 8) The End of Days is near. Or at least nearer than it was yesterday. The only thing I really learned from this book (aside from the fact that being a writer doesn't necessarily mean being able to write) is that fear is an integral part of Christian dogma, or at least the writer's version anyway. Apparently, God loves you with infinite compassion and infinite mercy but unless you acknowledge His greatness (sounds suspiciously like pride which is a sin, right?) He will not hesitate to condemn you to eternal torment for sins committed during a brief mortal lifetime. And then Jesus will pop up every once and awhile and say "I told you so".
