Change of rating on 10/03/21. I just finished reading Sheldon M. Stern's The Cuban Missile Crisis in American Memory: Myths versus Reality , and my opinion about Robert F. Kennedy's memoir degraded tragically, so I am removing the five stars I assigned to it the first time I read it. (My old review is below my new one.) I recommend Stern's work to everyone who has read Thirteen Days . -.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.- New review: Ask any Cold War buff for a good book about the Cuban Missile Crisis, and, without doubt, he will recommend you Robert F. Kennedy's Thirteen Days . Published in 1969, Bobby's memoir, based on his private diary and papers, quickly became the definitive authority on the subject – probably because Bobby had been an insider, he had been "there." As Sheldon M. Stern argues, though, President John F. Kennedy's secret tape recordings of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during that nightmarish week in October 1962 reveal that someone's insider status does not guarantee the authenticity of their claims. In reality, the ExComm recordings, which the author of this book has painstakingly examined, tell a whole different story than Robert Kennedy. While Bobby presents himself as his brother's indispensable adviser, who helped Jack overcome the urgent demands for military action and rejected the crazy idea of launching air strikes against Cuba by contending that "[i]f you bomb the missile sites and the airports, you are covering most of Cuba. You are going to kill an awful lot of people and take an awful lot of heat on it," he actually was one of the most aggressively hawkish participants in the meetings. And he quoted his words misleadingly to make them seem dovish. In fact, as the tapes reveal, he was arguing that bombing the sites was a weak and inadequate response and demanding a full-scale invasion – a course of action even the hawkish chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Maxwell Taylor, had warned the President not to take a few minutes before. Had Thirteen Days not been so popular, had it not been considered the most authentic source available for so many years, Bobby Kennedy's deception would not be such an issue. The trouble is that his memoir was perceived as truthful by historians and laymen – me among them – alike, thus giving birth to myths, which had permeated the public's consciousness and created a fictional Cuban Missile Crisis that has little to do with reality. And the reality, according to Stern, was that there was only one person at the intense ExComm meetings who consistently and persistently resisted the advocates of military escalation from the ExComm, the Joint Chiefs, and the Congress: President John F. Kennedy himself. Robert Kennedy, Theodore Sorensen, MacGeorge Bundy and everyone else who tried to portray himself as a staunch dove was of no help. That is why, armed with the evidence from the tape recordings, historian Sheldon M. Stern sets out to debunk the many myths surrounding the week when the whole world held its breath. He has divided his book into chapters according to the key players whose actual stance during the crisis had been obscured by false or incomplete accounts. He begins, naturally, with Robert F. Kennedy, who played a unique role in the Cuban Missile Crisis, for he was both the President's brother and his most trusted adviser. "I can vividly recall, for example, first listening to their recorded telephone conversations and initially finding it difficult to even understand what they were talking about. Typically, as soon as the connection was made, the brothers, without so much as a hello or “how are the kids,” would burst into a staccato exchange of barely coherent verbal fragments and exclamations before abruptly concluding with “OK,” “Good,” or “Right” or just hanging up. Their intuitive capacity to communicate often transcended the limits of conventional oral discourse. They always understood each other," describes Stern the wonderful trust and loyalty that existed between the Kennedy brothers. If John Kennedy temporarily left the room or did not attend an ExComm meeting, the participants instinctively recognized Robert Kennedy as his brother’s substitute – his frequent disagreements with the President notwithstanding. But unlike John's, Robert's attitude during the ExComm meetings was like that of a bantam cock preparing himself for a fight. The tapes reveal that he avidly opposed the naval quarantine his brother eventually chose to impose (to the Joint Chiefs' of Staff dismay) and argued in favor of intercepting a Soviet ship that had approached the blockade, preferably one that might carry missiles. “My God,” he declares tastily in one of the recordings. “The point is to . . . intercept a ship that had something rather than a lot of baby food for children.” This is hardly a dovish remark! Next comes Robert S. McNamara, John Kennedy's whiz kid of a Secretary of Defense. Aside from Robert Kennedy himself, McNamara was the participant whom Thirteen Days most consistently portrays as a dove. The President's brother writes that McNamara “became the blockade’s strongest advocate.” But the tapes paint a more complex picture. Two days later, on October 18, McNamara abandoned the caution he had recommended and boldly embraced the Joint Chiefs' demand for an air and land attack on Cuba: "In other words," he announced, “we consider nothing short of a full invasion as practicable military action.” President Kennedy was surprised by the Secretary of Defense's about-face and asked, "Why do you change? Why has this information changed the recommendation?" McNamara declared that there were too many targets, including many not yet located, to be realistically destroyed by air strikes, and there was a big chance of the loss of the Guantánamo base and/or attacks on the civilian population on the eastern coast of the United States from the new missile bases or the Soviet nuclear bombers. As can be concluded from Stern's quoting of the ExComm tape recordings, President Kennedy was the one to oppose McNamara staunchly. He reminded the Secretary of Defense that an invasion of Cuba could not be justified because most of America's allies regarded Cuba “as a fixation of the United States and not a serious military threat. . . . because they think that we’re slightly demented on this subject. . . . they will argue that taken at its worst the presence of these missiles really doesn't change" the nuclear balance of power. And only minutes afterwards, Kennedy came up with the idea that would eventually resolve the Missile Crisis: "If we said to Khrushchev . . . 'if you're willing to pull them out, we'll take ours out of Turkey.'" At first, McNamara voiced his support for the President's suggestion, but later opposed it vehemently. Nor was MacGeorge Bundy, President Kennedy’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, of any help to the President, who fought a lone battle against the gung ho Joint Chiefs. Interestingly, Bundy, who was another key player in the ExComm decision-making process, is hardly mentioned in Thirteen Days. Robert Kennedy was unimpressed by Bundy’s performance —accusing him privately of weakness and indecisiveness, of "strange flipflops. First he was for a strike, then a blockade, then for doing nothing because it would upset the situation in Berlin, and then, finally, he led the group which was in favor of a strike – and a strike without prior notification, along the lines of Pearl Harbor." First of all, the foremost advocate of a "Pearl Harbor" strike was Bobby himself. Second, calling the brilliant, self-assured, arrogant MacGeorge Bundy weak and indecisive is a description that strains credibility. In his own memoir, Bundy, in a Churchillian effort to make History kind to himself, describes himself as the coolly rational pragmatist of the group, but the tapes dispel this myth too. In fact, Bundy frequently clashed with the President and fiercely resisted the missile trade Khrushchev proposed on October 27: if the United States pledged not to invade Cuba and pulled its Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, the Soviet Union would pull out of Cuba. Bundy also joined the virtually unanimous demand for simultaneously announcing both a blockade and a declaration of war, insisting that a blockade alone was illegal and “an act of aggression against everybody else.” He lectured the President: “your whole posture” must reflect the fact that Khrushchev has done “unacceptable things from the point of view of the security of the hemisphere.” From the tapes it becomes clear that John Kennedy was more often annoyed with Bundy than with anybody else, for the National Security adviser frequently forgot he was not the President of the United States. And contrary to Robert Kennedy's claims in Thirteen Days, Mac Bundy was among Bobby's most outspoken allies in resisting Khrushchev's proposal. Last but not least, Dean Rusk's role was tragically misrepresented in the Attorney General's memoir. The Secretary of State, whom Robert Kennedy disliked, was outright libeled by Bobby. According to Thirteen Days, Rusk had initially been in favor of air strikes at the ExComm meetings, and afterwards was missing because “he had other duties during this period of time and frequently could not attend our meetings.” As Stern points out, in this case, the recordings help catch Robert Kennedy in an outright lie. Dean Rusk attended nineteen out of twenty ExComm meetings. His presence and contributions were recorded. He only failed to attend the meeting of the evening of October 18 because he was required to host a dinner at the State Department for Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, who had met with the President earlier in the day, and part of the morning meeting on October 23 because he was on one of the most difficult diplomatic assignments of the week: negotiating a unanimous vote in favor of the blockade. Furthermore, he was not silent, passive, indecisive, or reluctant to recommend tough decisions and did not have a mental breakdown during the crisis, as Bobby claimed. (If he had had a mental breakdown, it is doubtful that both Kennedy and Johnson would have chosen to retain him as Secretary of State.) He was actually an outspoken and influential participant in the discussions and was more often, except in the case of the Turkey-Cuba trade, a louder voice for caution and diplomacy than anyone other than President John F. Kennedy. He came closest to playing the dovish role that Robert Kennedy assigned to himself in Thirteen Days. That is probably the reason Bobby sought to discredit Rusk's importance so eagerly. Overall, Stern's analysis of the ExComm tapes persuasively confirms that nothing during the momentous week of the Cuban Missile Crisis was what it seems to be in Robert Kennedy's account. As it turns out, President John F. Kennedy used his intellectual and political skill to steer not only the Soviet Union but also his own brother and advisers away from a nuclear war. On his own. -.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.- Old review: Starting with the Bay of Pigs and continuing through a succession of covert (but not too secret) actions against Castro's government, President Kennedy convinced the Cuban dictator that the USA intended to destroy him, which they did. Fear of American attack urged both the Soviets and the Cubans to station missiles on the island. "It was clear to me," Nikita Khrushchev would write later, "that we might very well lose Cuba if we didn't tale decisive steps in her defense." On October 14, 1962, CIA officer Richard Bissel's U-2 spy plane first captured nearly a thousand images of the Soviet missiles installed in Cuba. When on October 16 he was alerted about these findings, President John F Kennedy, still in his pajamas, called his brother Robert – "We have some big trouble. I want you over here." The news were a slap in the face after all the efforts of the new administration to establish better relations with the Soviet Union. On the very doorstep of the United States, the Soviets were preparing sites for medium range ballistic missiles that could be used in a strike on America and take the lives of millions of Americans. As Kennedy indignantly told Khrushchev, it was the same as if the United States had built nuclear-missile sites in Polland. JFK told National Security advisor McGeorge Bundy to call an emergency meeting of his National Security team, assembling what would be known over the coming days as EXCOMM (Executive Committee of the National Security Council). Thus began the two weeks during which the world came as close to nuclear war as possible. The Cuban Missile Crisis, as the thirteen days came to be known, was JFK's finest moment. With the fate of millions of people (Americans, Cubans, Russians) in his hands, he laid a path that led, after many twists and turns, to the Soviets pulling themselves out of Cuba. His brother portrays his performance as calm, measured, and firm, no doubt a result of the valuable lessons he head learned from the doomed CIA invasion of the Bay of Pigs. When the Joint Chiefs, eager to avenge the Bay of Pigs and destroy Fidel Castro, advised an all-out, "surgical", aerial bombing of Cuba, followed by a ground attack, Kennedy knew better and weighed the advice skeptically – the Chief's solution would have triggered a nuclear war. President Kennedy, impressed by Barbara Tuchman's The Guns of August, a brilliant history of The Great War, told his brother that he would do everything possible not to facilitate such a development of events that would later be described in a book called "The Missiles of October" by the survivors of a nuclear war. He steered his bellicose advisors towards a far less antagonistic "quarantine" of Soviet ships and saved humanity from nuclear annihilation. He saw that the air strikes favored by so many would have brought death to thousands of innocent Cuban civilians and to thousands of U.S military personnel, and that they ran the risk of triggering the launch of nuclear weapons from Cuba against the U.S and of Soviet retaliation attacks on Berlin. As Secretary of US Department of Defense Robert S. McNamara reveals in his introduction to Robert Kennedy's memoir, the performance of the US Government during the critical period was more effective than at any other time during his seven years of crisis. The agencies of the Government – the CIA, the Defense Department, the State Department, the White House staff – worked together mostly because of the efforts of Robert Kennedy, who, acting with his brother's consent, did much to organize the effort, monitor the results, and assure the completion of the work on which the President's recommendations were based. On the fundamental policy question of whether to force the missiles out by air and ground attack or by far less risky application of marine quarantine, he stood by his brother's choice of the latter. Interestingly, Bobby also discusses the moral side of the question. He strongly opposed a massive attack by a large country on a small one because he believed such an attack to be inhuman, contrary to American ideals and traditions, and an act of brutality for which the world would never forgive the United States. As his brother's most trusted advisor, closest confidant, and a central player in the drama himself, Robert Kennedy gives the readers much inside into the top-level strategical thinking and decision-making throughout the whole crisis. JFK's objective was to force the missiles out of Cuba without war, to defend his country's vital interests without causing a nuclear holocaust. Eventually, he accomplished this objective by a strategy Bobby shaped and he directed – applying pressure against the Soviets without ever pushing them to the point where they would be forced to an irrational, suicidal response. As RFK writes, "Miscalculation and misunderstanding and escalation on one side bring a counterresponse. No action is taken against a powerful adversary in a vacuum. . . . For that is how wars begin – wars that no one wants, no one intends, and no one wins." JFK made each decision keeping this in mind and asking himself if Khrushchev would understand what they felt was their national interest and if the Soviet Union would have sufficient time to react soberly. All action – from stopping a particular ship to making a public statement – was judged against that standard. According to RFK, President Kennedy understood that the USSR did not want nuclear war, and that Khrushchev also realized that America wished to avoid armed conflict, and he dedicated himself to making it clear to the Soviet leader by word and deed that the United States had limited goals and had no interest in accomplishing them by humiliating the USSR. His decision to adopt the blockade gave the opportunity both for Americans to prepare and for the Soviets to recede. With his shrewd sense of diplomacy, Robert Kennedy was invaluable to his brother. In fact, it was his suggestion, when they received two contradictory messages from Khrushchev, the first favorable and the second unfavorable, that they replied to the first. He himself drafted this reply, stating the terms the Administration was willing to accept, and this terms eventually became the basis of the settlement. However, JFK himself had a perfect sense of timing and tactic. Against the advice of some, he refused to bargain the security of the Western world by yielding to the special, "face-saving" Soviet offers, and agreed only to withdraw US missiles from Turkey, which she didn't particularly need for her security anyways. Throughout the hectic thirteen days, he was always ready to act, but also to allow his opponent the opportunity to recede. The world, which had been holding its breath for thirteen days, breathed out a collective sigh of relief when on October 28 the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to turn his ships carrying more arms to the island back and to remove the missiles already stationed on the island. In exchange, the United States promised not to invade Cuba and to withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey, the latter deal remaining a secret for decades afterwards. While this fortunate unfolding of events by no means ended the raging Cold War, it represented the first tentative step towards the easing of hostilities. Clear, concise, and grippingly written, THIRTEEN DAYS is a brilliant, action-packed account of the JFK Administration's operations during those days when the fate of the whole world was being decided.
