this is my first time reading this book! wow, this was way better than I expected based on the synopsis. okay. stacey, mallory, and claudia find a bunch of cool old stuff in the attic of the 19th-century house stacey just moved into. one cool thing is a trunk, that mallory takes home and eventually opens to find victorian clothes and a victorian girl's diary. the diary details a mystery involving the girl's maternal grandfather accusing the girl's father of thievery. meanwhile, buddy barrett is having trouble reading in school and mallory becomes his tutor. she teaches him to love reading and they solve the mystery together. highlights: -buddy's eventual enjoyment of reading warms this little fakelibrarian's heart. seriously, the chapter where they read comics together and then make their own comics? or the chapter where they take turns reading encyclopedia brown stories to each other and solving the mysteries? so cute! -mallory notes that she feels like her 11-year-old year has been a decade. well, it's definitely been more than a year by this point, and it will actually be over a decade long. february 1988 is when Logan Likes Mary Anne! came out (and mallory's 6th grade year started), and november 2000 is when Graduation Day came out (and mallory finally finished 6th grade). -I love that stoneybrook legends have continuity. old hickory from Mary Anne's Bad-Luck Mystery is the jerk grandfather of sophie (the diary owner). -in one cute chapter, charlotte johanssen reads Katie and the Sad Noise to stacey without showing her pictures, then shows her pictures and stacey realizes it's a christmas book. charlotte did this to prove a point that things are not always as they seem. I love how smart and level-headed she is. -in general I just like the resolution to this. I like that old hickory couldn't stand to see his daughter's portrait but wanted to keep it so he got it covered up. I like that he was racked by the guilt of letting the rumors that jared (sophie's father) stole the portrait run wild, so he wrote out a confession and hid it. I love imagining the ghost of old hickory sneaking out of the cemetery, seeing mallory and buddy find his confession, seeing stacey and her mom displaying sophie's mom's portrait in their living room, and finally resting in peace. lowlights: -when describing the things stacey has to do for her diabetes, mallory narrates, "stacey is philosophical" since she would rather do those things than get sick. okay mallory, I look forward to when you get diabetes and you don't check your blood sugar and give yourself insulin injections because you're not philosophical enough. -seriously, buddy can barely read and his teacher calls archie comics trash? UGHHHHH. any reading is better than no reading, you jerk! -kristy dresses up as a "gypsy" for the seance. ugh. the most boring claudia outfit ever: - "Claud herself was wearing jeans, a plain white blouse, a pink sweater, white socks, and loafers." other outfits: -stacey: "Stacey, on the other hand, was in a much more typical outfit--a short-sleeved blue-and-white jumpsuit with cuffed pants. Parts of it were stripes, parts were solid. On her feet were high-topped sneakers laced only halfway up so that she could roll the tongue of the shoe down ( extremely cool), plus she was wearing a lot of jewelry. I think Claud had made some of it for her." -mary anne: "Mary Anne, who can be pretty funky in her own shy way, was wearing a very cool short printed jumper over a striped shirt...The jumper was white with a small red print, and the shirt was white with narrow, widely-spaced stripes." snacks in claudia's room: -pretzels (n.s.) -ring dings (n.s.)
