This is where everything begins. We’re introduced to younger wizard Gandalf, Frodo’s uncle Bilbo Baggins who is a talented thief, already crossed his path with Gollum and his preciooouss ring! A short, fascinating, riveting, magical story and introduction to the hobbit world which shouldn’t be turned into a trilogy on big screen! ( Peter Jackson followed the same way as he did with Lord of the rings series but at least there were three books! In my opinion it was not necessary to watch more movies with so many elaborated scenes even though I enjoyed to hear velvet voice of Cumberbatch as the voice of Dragon Smaug. It was awkward reunion of Sherlock &Watson) So I’d better reread this journey for celebrating 84th year of its publishing. The story starts with Bilbo Baggins’ finding himself host a tea party for a party of dwarves ( Gandalf is also a skillful trickster and it would be hard to say no to him. He’s my favorite all time favorite fantasy character after Harry Potter’s Dumbledore) Those dwarves song of reclaiming Lonely Mountain and its treasure from the dragon Smaug. As soon as the song ends Bilbo also finds himself accepting the offer becoming a part of their journey as a thief, and Gandalf maps out a secret door to Lonely Mountain which help them to reach their unique destination. We follow their heart throbbing adventure from Shire to Misty Mountains,Mirkwood Forest, introduced to wood-elves till they reach to the Lost Kingdom which is located under Lonely Mountain where the dangerous Dragon Smaug resides. In my opinion this classic is my all time favorite reads which is better than its three movie long adaptations. Here are my favorite quotes of this book: “There is nothing like looking, if you want to find something. You certainly usually find something, if you look, but it is not always quite the something you were after.” “May the wind under your wings bear you when the sun sails and the moon walks.” “Where there's life there's hope.” “It cannot be seen, cannot be felt, Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt, It lies behind stars and under hills, And empty holes it fills, It comes first and follows after, Ends life, kills laughter.” “This is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure, and found himself doing and saying things altogether unexpected.”
