So much has been written about George Washington that additional books about him are invariably overkill. Fortunately, my knowledge of Washington is scant, and I have not tackled the Ron Chernow biographical tome, or any other bio of our first President. There was enough info in Wiencek's book to add to my scant knowledge of this man of marmoreal gravitas. While reading it I was reminded of the time in grammar school when our teacher sat down with a serious face (come to think of it, she was always a bit dour) and enlightened us children about the life of George Washington. She served up the usual bromides--never told a lie, chopped down the cherry tree (which seems to be true), threw a coin across some vast river--cannot remember if it was the Delaware or the Potomoc. There was no mention of his owning slaves, or manumitting them in his will. Likewise, Martha Custis Washington did not exist, and Washington's military history was limited to the teacher telling us he was a great war hero, though she failed to mention which war(s). I suppose third and fourth graders have a difficult time with nuanced accounts, but even so I felt like part of the story was missing. An Imperfect God humanizes Washington and presents a well-balanced account of his strong points--Reluctant leader who ruled, for the most part, with wisdom--his weak points--owning many slaves whom he treated well but with a paternalistic fondness--so long as they did their assigned work. The book also touches on ambivalent sides of Washington, such as his obsessive ambition mingled with a desire to retire to his Monticello mansion and enjoy a bucolic retirement. Washington could also be imperious and had a bad temper when he felt his orders and wishes had not been carried out to his satisfaction. Washington was not an easy man to analyze and it shows in this book when Wiencek discusses his attitude about slaves and his behavior toward them. He seemed to loath slavery, but had mixed feelings that may have emanated from his time commanding them on fields of battle. He recognized their humanity but also had no qualms about his personal ownership of them. The man who never told a lie apparently told a few big ones when it came to dealing with runaway slaves, and even went so far to circumvent the usual legal procedures to employ slave hunters to track down errant escapees. It appears, though, that he was far more well-disposed toward his slaves than Martha, who comes across as a hidebound termagant who had no ambivalence about slavery. The biggest takeaway I got from the book, other than Washington's bifurcated views of slavery being an evil on a societal level, but perfectly fine on a personal level, was that Washington was much more educated than he's often depicted, and wrote and spoke with eloquence. He was also, like Jefferson, an oenophile, though the book offers no sordid tales of Washington drinking to excess. He seemed to have an instinctive sense of what behavior was appropriate for the high military rank and political prestige he gradually acquired--an instinct he must have utilized most of his life. Washington also comes across as sometimes being very calculating. Wiencek notes that it was commonplace among Washington's male ancestors to "marry up," just as George did when he wed the widowed Martha Custis who brought with her a fortune in property and slaves. Recommended for slackers like me who are interested in learning more about various subjects but lacking the discipline to site for 36 hours reading Ron Chernow's esteemed biography. (I do plan to read it, someday. :-)
