Cashelmara by Susan Howatch is a 2012 Open Road Media publication. (Originally published in 1974) What an epic family saga! This is a ‘doorstop’ tome written way back in 1974, but is now been formatted into digital form by Open Road Media. Susan Howatch, at one time, was the queen of the family saga. I didn’t get around to reading her books until decades after they were published, but I loved this style of family drama, which covers several generations of related characters, and is packed with life’s trials, triumphs and tragedies, and often includes scandals, mysteries, murders, and a touch of Gothic melodrama. Well before the current love affair with various first person POV’s, this novel allows each of the key characters a chance to tell the reader a part of the story. I am not always a fan of this format, but it works beautifully here. The story begins with Edward de Salis, a widower, with a young son still living at home, one he has trouble understanding and keeping in line. When Edward travels to America, he meets his wife’s cousin Marguerite- a young girl still in her teens. She’s plain compared to her sister, but Edward is immediately smitten with her, and he quickly proposes marriage. Once they are finally married, Edward brings his new bride home to Ireland, to his grand estate-Cashelmara. From there the story follows three generations as they face hardships, difficult marriages, and relationships, while struggling with secrets, forbidden passions, and jealousies, which will eventually set in motion a tragic and shocking chain of events. The book is allegedly based on Edward 1, 2, and 3 of England, but is set in 19th century Ireland. While it might appear as though there is not much happening, but there is a lot going on- if that makes any sense. It’s an incredibly absorbing story, and for its time, it was pretty spicy. It wasn’t all that sexually explicit, but it dealt with subject matter that had yet to make it into mainstream literature. It also included adulterous behavior and co- habitation between unmarried partners… who were both married to other people. That would have been quite the scandal in the 19th century- and in most areas it still was in 1974. The mystery doesn’t develop until later in the saga, but when it does become obvious something is amiss, the suspense leads the way to a stunning conclusion. It goes without saying that I loved this book. I have a weakness for family dramas, and I’ve often lamented the demise of the big, thick generations sagas. I think it’s good to lose oneself in a good, expansive tome from to time. The only downside is that once I’ve immersed myself within the shelter of a long, dialogue friendly, dramatic, nuanced and atmospheric historical novel, it is sometimes jarring to return to the brash, loud and fast-paced contemporary world of today. 4 stars
