I thought I had read every book in this series, but the list on Fantastic Fiction indicates otherwise. That’s outstanding news, since I love the opportunity to visit Barnard’s Crossing and learn of life and decency from the always-excellent Rabbi Small. Ah, and of course, if you hang with him long enough, he’ll likely solve a murder and show you how he did it—always a bonus. As we time travel to Barnard’s Crossing, disco music is all over the AM and perhaps to a slightly lesser degree the FM band. The Equal Rights Amendment is a hot topic at dinner tables throughout the community. Rabbi David Small is in danger of not having his contract renewed for several reasons. The board president insists that you need gimmicks to bring people into your congregation. One such plan is the proposed bar mitzvah of Ben Segal, a wealthy businessman who never had the ceremony as a boy. The board president of the synagogue is sure that people will flock to the group once they know the highly successful Segal is part of them. Rabbi Small has no problem with people affiliating with the group, but no way will he do that bar mitzvah. His contention is if you're 13 or older and Jewish, your bar mitzvah is automatic regardless of whether you had a ceremony. Naturally, the board president is angry, and he quickly spreads the infection of anger to other board members. Worse still, many of the women are sure they should be able to be part of the minyan—the group who participates in the morning prayer services. While Rabbi Small admits that getting 10 men together in the morning isn’t always easy, he’s sure he will lose the orthodox members of his congregation if he opens the service up to women. Now that contract renewal is increasingly in doubt. A local anti-Semite has been murdered, and Chief Lanigan considers several members of Rabbi Small’s synagogue to be suspects. Rabbi Small Solves the murder, using his Talmudic wisdom and his knowledge of human nature as a keen observer of people to figure out the real killer. These are not edge-of-the-seat heart-palpitation-inducing mysteries. They are wonderful glimpses into one 70s-era synagogue, be it ever so fictional. I’m fascinated by what I learn about those ‘70s snapshots of Judaism, as it existed in that fictional community in that block of time. Rabbi Small’s perspective on things may be quintessentially 1970s and rather traditional, but his observations of human nature and his ability to tie those observations to his scriptural understanding is ageless. It is that observation of human nature that enables these stories to hold up as well as they do.
