Another Austin story and wow! isn't it different both in tone and octave 🤭, cause we do get loads of music in this precious, which is so very wonderful. We have a host of new characters (Mr Theotocoupulos and Canon Tallis being singularly wonderful, with wit and fun that had me mesmerized) the slightly somber feeling hovering, reminiscent of Moon by Night, yet not so bone-marrowly pervasive that it upsets you in a disquieting way. It's a mysterious kind of somberness which is the reason the book is more a detective story than the usual first-person Vicky account from the first two books. Now the focus is more on Josiah (Dave) Davidson (who is awesome in a very swaggery kind of way, Zachary and Andy all mixed together, yet with a uniqueness wonderful to behold) who finds himself in a mysterious, hardly believable plot, dragging along the Austins, the dear Austins, in a mad version of New York, in "parlous times" ruled in fear by a gang of Alphabats, a member of which Dave used to be, trying as hard as anyone to get rid of the "mark", the mark of sin and delinquency, trying nonetheless to find who he truly is and to make sense of all that happens around him. Alongside we have vicious doctors, petty make-believe bishops, swarty deans and mysterious canons. I was surprised to find myself often feeling that I was again reading about the Murrys, mistaking Vicky for Meg, Rob for Charles Wallace and the parents for the Murrys parents, and I actually got the feeling of the cosmic danger prevalent in the Wrinkle series, what with the evil lurking on every step, Echtroi distorting and confusing, trying to conform and thus distroy more easily, a force in this case which threatens to distroy not only the order of the city but also the family unity that used to be so warm and close. And I could not help see the main engine, the Laser, the Micro-Ray, as some sort of the Ring in Tolkien's masterpiece, with a self-righteous eccentric trying to do just what someone wielding the ring would do, whether is someone good like Gandalf or bad like Sauron, make of it a tool for coercion, to coerce the world, to transform and control it. The ring that for ever so long changed, distorted and filled every kind, hobbit heart with fear, uncertainty, disquiet and foreboding. And also maybe because Dave first sees him as an ape, I could not help thinking of Shift, the ape from The Last Battle , plotting and ordering, pretending to do good by people, and managing only to distort and thwart and blemishing, all for his own purposes. Oh, I liked this story so much that I wished it'd go on and on, the new characters becoming very dear to me, and I am glad that Madeleine L'Engle wrote this precious, which not many fans seem to enjoy that much, how she skillfully made all the seams come together in a delicate but beautiful pattern, finishing with a dear quote by Saint Macrina, which I was very pleased to discover.
