I’m not usually a big fan of non-fiction, and despite my fascination with space, probably never would have picked this book up but for my dad. When my mom won a trip to Hawaii in May, Jerry Linenger was one of the guest speakers at the event. My dad came back and told me all about it and how much I would’ve loved the talk, so I got his book from the library. Off the Planet is a fascinating look at what life aboard the Russian space station was like for an American astronaut. The beginning was a little tough to get through: Linenger spends the first 50-60 pages talking about his academic work, how many degrees he has, how he can beat some of the Navy SEALS, etc. Other reviewers have said they couldn’t get past this section because it was so much bragging, but I’ll repeat what Linenger said in the book: astronauts have to be over-achievers. They have to be self-motivated. They have to be awesome at a lot of things and they absolutely have to be confident, because when you’re in outer space and something breaks, or there’s an emergency, or you want to go home and you CAN’T, you can’t be weak then. There is no room for human error and you have to be more and capable of more than most people. Once you move past that into his actual training for the Shuttle launch and then subsequent training for the Mir, it’s really eye-opening. His training in Russia was all verbal, no handouts, everything was outdated, and there was the small matter of not speaking much Russian. Once he got into space, it got even more interesting. There are so many things that we don’t even think about here on earth because we have never not been bound by gravity. Simple, everyday needs like going to the bathroom are complicated when you are floating, therefore your intestines are floating inside of you, and that’s not even to mention the mechanical aspects of using the space toilet. What I did not expect was the political side to Linenger’s adventures. The Mir program was basically a funnel for the Americans to give Russia aid without it being overtly called aid, so when we gave them money to build new housing or new space station components, and they didn’t deliver, NASA didn’t really do very much, because it wasn’t really about getting what we paid for. This was very frustrating for the American astronauts and their families, who on top of the language barrier, were not getting what they expected. While the on-planet stuff was I’m sure very frustrating, what was worse was the off-planet stuff. Russian Mission Control would tell NASA blatant lies about safety concerns or near misses aboard the MIR so that the US wouldn’t stop funding the MIR project. A fire that burned for fourteen minutes and nearly sent them into the Soyuz capsule for escape was brushed off as a “small fire that lasted less than 90 seconds and was successfully put out by the crew.” When the Russians forced the crew to test a new method of docking the Progress resupply capsule, and the two vessels nearly collided, they brushed it off as “pilot error” even though the computer stopped working (again) and the crew couldn’t even see the Progress capsule until it was nearly on them. Russian Mission Control didn’t even tell NASA how close they had come to killing all three crew members and destroying the MIR. It makes you wonder what really happens up there versus what the public is told, especially when you hear about “small incidents” aboard the International Space Station. On the whole, I found the book really interesting and informative. Linenger’s writing style was entertaining and intelligent, and his whole journey was incredible to follow. While I agree that he comes off as cocky or arrogant, it didn’t put me off reading the book. You don’t get amazing opportunities like going into space for five months unless you’ve worked your tail off AND you’re better than everybody else in the running.
