This is the third installment in the Soulmates Dissipate series by Mary B. Morrison. In this novel, readers meet Fancy Taylor, a twenty-two-year-old who wants to marry a rich, handsome man with status. The problem is that while she’s on the hunt she will use anyone to get what she wants even her best friend Desmond who can’t seem to shake her damsel in distress cries. Fancy is a diva and a selfish one who wants everyone to constantly cater to her. Her friends SaVoy and Tanya are sometimes no more than a backdrop to her. SaVoy loves the Lord and bad boy Tyronne who sleeps around town. Tanya is involved with William who keeps her on a very tight leash bordering on mental abuse. Desmond, her best friend is a mechanic with a dream of going to law school but gets no support from her. It took him several tries to save her from herself and from her other lovers before he realizes he needs to be with Carlita, a more mature woman with four kids. There’s a lot of drama and moments where I simply shook my head at some of the decisions these young women and young men made and some of the situations, they willingly placed themselves in. But I have to remember they are young and finding their way through life with many lessons to learn. However, I couldn’t support Fancy not having any self-esteem and leaving herself open to such abuse by some of her suitors (married and single). Also, there were moments when the story didn’t track but it wasn’t a bad read. If nothing else, it’s a guide to identify the players and signposts for women to love themselves more. Maybe I’ll read the 4th installment, Somebody’s Gotta Be On Top, to see if Fancy has matured or if she’s still up to her old tricks. Some of my favorite lines: The men who were fortunate to be on her regular dating schedule were now Fancy’s sponsors. Adam sponsored her rent, Toney sponsored her Top Notch hair weaves, manicures, and pedicures, and Steven sponsored her wardrobe. That’s how Fancy balanced her budget. She determined what she needed to be paid, and then calculated which guy was wealthy and worthy enough to pay her bills. If she didn’t insist that her men take care of her, they certainly wouldn’t volunteer. Taking care of herself had become such a full-time job, Fancy seriously considered quitting her nine-to-five. She was willing to trade in all of her sponsors but not until after she was married.
