This book made me mad, made me cry, and made me think. It is a much more powerful depiction of race relations in a small, sleepy southern town than "To Kill a Mockingbird". That book was written from a child's point of view. "Strange Fruit" gives us the facts as seen through the eyes of many people in Maxwell, Georgia in the early 1920's. Black and white, man and woman, parent and child; by the last page we know them all, we understand what motivates them, and it makes us sick. The bare facts are these. The son of the town's white doctor (Tracy) has been carrying on with a beautiful, college educated, very light skinned black woman (Nonnie). She loves him completely, is available whenever he wants, and eventually gets pregnant by him. His parents want him to settle down with the good Christian daughter of a neighbor, get religion, and make something of himself. The story takes place in an insufferably hot week in August during a tent revival. Reverend Dunwoodie gets his claws into Tracy and sets off a series of events that culminates in tragedy for a great many people. End of synopsis. Lillian Smith used this story to illustrate the ignorant, wrong thinking ways of white people using God to justify their cruelty and injustice to a race of people they considered below them, not even willing to dignify them with feelings and emotions common to us all. The blacks used good manners to whites, humbling themselves and saying what had to be said to keep the status quo. As one character said, whites are as much prisoners of the whole system of Jim Crow as the Negroes, and if they spent the same amount of time and energy getting along as in keeping them in their place, just think what a great place the South could be. The dialect was perfect, the plot was engrossing and suspenseful, the characters were real people with real problems, and we knew what made them tick. It's not an easy book to read, but it needs to be read. One reviewer suggested it be taught in schools instead of "To Kill a Mockingbird." That could not happen today because of the frequent use of the N word, and the way the author shows the utter hypocrisy of the church and "good Christian people". Ironically, it was a brave book to write and to publish in 1944, and was in fact banned in some places, enabling it to become a best seller. I recommend it to anyone who cares to challenge ways of thinking. It's going on my "best books of 2016 list."
