Wildfire is my all time favorite 80s teen series. There are only a handful that I haven't read and I have been saving them, since unread 80s books are finite. So, my first encounter with Just A Summer Girl is from an adult, modern perspective. It was certainly an innocent time, one that makes my heart ache to return. Here we have Nina, a sixteen years old girl from an upper class Boston family who summers every year in Grantham on the Cape. Summer people and townies don't mix or socialize together. Nina is passionate about both art and the beach. On her first day back, while going to the cove to sketch, she sees a boy she has never seen before and becomes intrigued. This part made me giggle- because in 1982, America was overwhelmingly white, Nina sees Olive skinned, Portuguese Ben Turner as exotic and Mayan looking. He's so different that she goes a little gaga over him. Thus begins the classic tale of two people who are markedly different having to learn that attraction is not the only basis for a relationship. As the summer wears on, Nina is thrust into a lifestyle she can barely imagine, where women are tired, bear too many children and have their dreams unfulfilled. Ben asks Nina to marry him, because these townies marry as teens and start popping out babies. Nina realizes she's gotten in over her head and doesn't quite know how to tell Ben that his lifestyle isn't for her. During all this, Nina's real life friends have been having a grand summer without her, including her best friend Sandi who has finally landed the boy she always wanted, brainy John, along with prospective suitor Ross, who is blond and gorgeous. Ben is not just a hick, he's also very demanding and doesn't want Nina socializing with her own friends, as they make him uncomfortable and lets her know that she won't have the freedom to even purchase what she wants once they are married. These scenes made me cringe, because Nina already knew Ben wasn't right for her, but didn't know how to tell him. Luckily for Nina, summer comes to an end and she finally breaks it gently to Ben that she is going to Paris after all after high school, that she is serious about her art and that she won't be marrying him. They break up amiably and as Nina is getting ready to leave, good old handsome Ross shows up and we get the feeling that Nina realizes he is the right one for her after all. A good tale highlighting the perils of young love, putting yourself first and understanding that opposites don't make good long term relationships. Show more
