Feeling as if her life had no meaning, now that her children were grown and living far away, the widowed Mrs. Emily Pollifax of New Brunswick, New Jersey was slipping into a depression when a doctor's visit prompted her to take matters in hand, changing the course of her life. Recalling her childhood desire to be a spy, the retired lady headed to Washington, D.C., there to offer her services to the CIA. To say that she was unexpected would be an understatement, and no one, from the hard-bitten Mr. Carstairs, who made the unusual choice to give her a job, to Mrs. Pollifax herself, could have predicted the extraordinary adventure ahead. From Mexico City to mountainous Albania, this wholly unconventional heroine won allies in unexpected places, revealed unexpected skills and grit, and triumphed over extreme (and unexpected) challenges... A book I read countless times as an adolescent, The Unexpected Mrs. Pollifax is the perfect blend of exciting adventure story and endearingly humorous character study. It's a Cold War spy novel with a cozy, heartwarming feeling to it, a fabulous sense of humor, and an engaging, endearing, unexpected heroine. Stories of espionage are not a particular favorite of mine - save for this series, I can't think of many others I have read, off the top of my head - but the Mrs. Pollifax books have always been a reading pleasure. This one, in particular, is simply marvelous, and I can never read it without chuckling in appreciation at its many humorous scenes, or racing along in suspense at its more action-driven sequences. The settings are fascinating, and I credit this book, read sometime when I was twelve or thirteen, with inspiring in me an interest in the small, mountainous nation of Albania. I'm not sure why it came to mind today, four weeks into this extraordinary quarantine, but when it did, I immediately sought out a digital edition, and read it again for the first time in years. It did not disappoint, and I am off to reread the entire series! Highly recommended to anyone who enjoys adventure or spy stories with somewhat unusual (one might almost say unexpected) characters...
