I’m probably repeating myself, but no one writes complex female characters quite like Winston Graham. Graham writes such characters that live deep in their own convictions, while being open to change. The women, especially, are those who not only move forward in life in an attempt to make their own choices, but they influence others to act accordingly, be it by kindness, thought or action. In this book, Ross thinks of the four swans in his life: Caroline Penvenen: A woman who marries below her station in life for love. She becomes Caroline Enis by her marriage to Dwight Enis, the town doctor and overall a good, decent man. Dwight suffers from his days in the war and in the French prison and we see her silent strength as she acts selflessly. She has grown throughout the series, her selfish ways almost all forgotten. Elizabeth Warleggan: Elizabeth continues to attempt to dampen the jealousy her husband, George, has for Ross. She is not as manipulative as George, but that streak is definitely inside her, especially when it comes to the wellbeing of her children. I am always unsure as to who would have made a better match for Ross, and I do think that Elizabeth would have been perfect for him had he not run off to war. People change, and Elizabeth, too, has changed quite a bit since the beginning. Morwenna Whitworth: Poor Morwenna is in the worst position imaginable. I have never hated anyone more than I hate the man she was forced to marry. He really is an evil character, one who I envision being killed more or less all the time. However, taking such a gentle and innocent woman and marrying her off to a man who is cruel only gave her a quiet strength. I sincerely hope to read about his death soon. Followed by which, reading about her marriage to Drake Carne. She deserves kindness in her life. Demelza Poldark: Marriage is not easy and we see this in the interactions between Ross and Demelza. After Ross’ infidelity and the death of their child, their relationship has been rocky at best. As she is being ignored by her husband, her attention is drawn to a young poet. Hugh Armitage is smitten by Demelza and she finds herself flattered and more by his attentions. The women in Ross’ life might have been the center of most of the story, but I wish we had seen more from their point of view. When it comes to George, his jealousy of Ross keeps his character interesting and it was nice to read that Ross is no longer financially spent. I look forward to the next book in this series. I am invested in this story, and in the characters. I hope there can be a few happy endings soon.
