Despite reading Susan Howatch many years previously, how did I ever miss this one back in the day? Yum, yum, yum. One of my three favorite formats is following a house through the centuries. And this one- an epic tale that follows the patterns of past English monarchs on top of it! The Baron of Cashelmara in different generations mirrors in his character, tastes, and temperament, the actual ruling medieval and post-medieval English kings. I loved and recognized the parallels. But beyond the excellent demonstrations of class mores and nuance of each period, this book (and I read non-fiction in number)is set within the Irish politico in such a relative way that for ONCE, I actually started to understand the crux of both "the troubles" and of Irish independence. And its tribal roots. And NOT in a non-fiction form. It's just as complex as the Sicilian or Italy city-state history. At times, maybe MORE complex. Dark and sordid? Oh yes, but why do you think so much of the still living population emigrated? Not because of mild inconveniences. This is an epic tale. It took me probably 3 times as long to read as a "normal" book does nowadays to finish this and I read it at a lake with little interference. (LUCKY ME.) But not a minute lagged- and I HATED to see it end. Having enjoyed Penmarric and several others, I do not know how I ever skipped her Irish home estate tale. These characterizations were finely draw, not only in their core emotions, but in the sensibilities of their own times, as well. Sometimes it did border on the soap opera, but did not the courts? And the governments? And the manipulators of any type of power? Historical fiction like this one doesn't raise its head every year. Even the most loved protagonists in this tale have their glaring faults and their horrific blind spots of perception. And that is why, coupled with the complex Irish routes toward a path of relative "loyalty", I find it 5 star. Very real, very human. And the Irish genocides of starvation and disease a stone set in their proper setting here at the same time. All put in melodious language. Master writer of a complex tale. Not the least of which was the crux of each individual's self-identity. Am I American? Am I English? Or Am I Irish?
