"A platform, he said in his dry way, was like a Mother Hubbard dress: it covered everything and touched nothing. Platforms and campaign promises were meaningless; politicians issued them or made them, and then as soon as they were elected forgot them." - Robert A. Caro, Means of Ascent, quoting Coke Stephenson This was a different book from Caro's Vol. 1 of the Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Path to Power . 'The Path to Power' detailed the rise and early history of LBJ. It set the table. It showed LBJ as a boy, showed the Hill Country. It described his father (so much of LBJ can be explained by his complicated relationship to his father). It moved through LBJ's college career, early political connections, and how all the attributes that made LBJ who he was were formed. It ended as LBJ lost the 1941 election for the US Senate to W. Lee O'Daniel. He basically had the election, out stolen from him. He lost focus too soon. This book starts off with LBJ's brief stint in the Navy after Pearl Harbor, his attempt and failure to move up in D.C. (with FDR, with Truman, in congress with the Party). He was stuck. So it moves on to LBJ using the power he had, to buy a radio station in Austin. One that would later be the source of his and Lady Bird's enormous wealth (it is amazing how many of our politicos enter DC rich and leave quite rich). The last half of the book details the 1948 Senate election when LBJ ran against Coke Stephenson for the Texas Senate seat. At this point, it becomes almost a dual biography. One of opposites. Coke was old school, honest, thoughtful, popular, low key. In many ways he resembled LBJ's father. Caro never said it directly, but in many ways he didn't need to. LBJ's character was formed as a reaction to his father's unwillingness to get into the gutter. LBJ was all ends. He would use whatever MEANS were required. And in 1948, that meant MONEY and corruption. Anyway, it was hard to decide to give this 5-stars. It wasn't as impressive a book, in some ways, as Vol 1. However, it was beautiful. I loved reading about Coke. Coke was a good counterbalance to LBJ's style. But it is hard, too, not to admire LBJ's work ethic and his ability to take enormous risks and sometimes his brilliant ability to read and use people. The book is also a lesson on how we are also suckered by the exact things we think we want badly. I'm pretty sure, the men who bought/brought LBJ into office certainly loved some of the things he did, but I'm not sure they would ever have thought their "Man" would eventually pass the Civil Rights Act and much of his great society agenda. Eventually, many would come to regret their man. LBJ was never anyone's man.
