Mrs. Stoner and her grown step-children, Denis and Daphne have come to spend the summer with Mrs. Stoner's brother, Mrs. Middleton. Mrs. Stoner and her sister-in-law, Catherine (Catherine Middleton!) soon become fast friends. Denis also befriends Mrs. Middleton, whom he believes to be long-suffering and also becomes close with Lord Bond, who IS long-suffering. Daphne makes new friends too: Mr. Cameron, the law partner of Mr. Middleton and C.W., the son of Lord and Lady Bond. She soon makes herself indispensable to the local gentry and falls in love... with cows. Lady Bond and Mr. Middleton are incensed that someone would build a garage on a historic piece of land and are determined to DO something about it. As the summer goes on, no one wants anything to change; but change must happen sooner or later. This story is relatively simple for Angela Thirkell. It took a few pages to figure out all the characters but once I knew who they were, I got into it. The romantic plot is slightly more complicated than I expected. I dislike love triangles as a rule but this one was interesting and I wasn't sure who would end up with who. There is one romance that borders on emotional affair but it is never acted on. The social satire of the novel centers around Mr. Middleton and isn't laugh out loud funny, but it is the sort of thing Jane Austen would have picked up on and made fun of in her novels. Angela Thirkell also skewered the gluten-free health craze. I know certain people CAN'T tolerate gluten but here we have a hypochondriac who can't eat starch or ice or anything else really. She has a special diet bread that she eats and makes her hosts track it down for her. Miss Starter would be right at home in Jane Austen's unfinished Sanditon. I loved the bucolic countryside and the quirky people of the neighborhood, except Mr. Middleton. He's a prosy bore and completely self-centered-most of the time. Once in awhile he would surprise me by being very sweet. He's sort of a more intelligent Mr. Collins (Pride and Prejudice) while his wife is too kind and good to be married to such a man. They make it work somehow and are very fond of each other. I simply adored all the old men in this book. Lord Bond is especially sweet and I felt very sorry for him to first be lorded over by his mother and then his wife (at one point BOTH). He seems a very dear man who has few pleasures in life. Another funny character is Ed, who is a bit simple but knows everything about cars and naughty old folk songs. His driving made me cringe, want to be sick and laugh all at the same time. Mr. Pucken is also hilarious with his cows and his knowing eye. The secondary women were also great characters. Lady Bond is frightening! Lu Pucken, the maid named for Lady Bond (Lucasta) is silly, romantic and clumsy but somehow endearing. I felt bad for her having to work under her mother's hyper-observant eye. Mrs. Pucken is pretty funny, unintentionally on her part. Flora the dog even manages to be funny despite her master's insistence on her devotion to him. As for the main female characters, I wasn't crazy about any of them. I did not like Daphne at first. She seemed ditzy and sounded like she was going to be an annoying twit like Rose, the Dean's daughter. Daphne surprised me. I loved the way she handled bullies. I grew to like her because of it and because of her fondness for the country (and cows). Mrs. Stoner (Lillian) is gentle and kind but kind of silly at times and her speeches were always rambling and incoherent. I wasn't crazy about the way she smothered Denis though she did what she felt was right. Her story ends in a surprising way. I didn't see that coming. Mrs. Middleton is in a tough spot but she went into her marriage as an adult and knew it wasn't ideal. She's the Charlotte Lucas character of this book. Catherine is kind and caring but her nerves wear down listening to her pompous idiot husband. I could not stand being married to him but she is fond of him in her own way and he of her. The main male characters were not quite as appealing. Denis is a musician and also a semi-invalid. I wanted to tell him to throw away the doctor's medicine, eat healthy and exercise and he would be fine. He's not a hypochondriac, he's just been fussed over too much and made to believe he's sickly and sensitive. He's more astute than the rest of his family and a little more gentle and kind. Mr. Cameron is a nice enough chap but completely blind to anything except what he thinks he is feeling. C.W. is a wonder considering his mother. He is not at all spoiled or affected and will make a great lord of the manor someday- if he survives. I liked him best of the younger men. This is a simple, sweet book. It's not quite Angela Thirkell's best but it's a very typically English countryside set novel. I plan to read more of the series.
