I've enjoyed a great run of books recently, and Hesse, who can lay a serious claim to being one of my favourite writers, has produced a small, gentle and deeply affecting novella, a book of real soulful beauty. The story (or stories, since it's told in three parts) is a simple one, presenting the life of Knulp, a happy wanderer possessed of the kind of nature and personality that makes people want to embrace him. Men dig in their pockets for coins that might be spared and offer willing accommodation, women smile and flirt, drawn to his handsomeness and craving even a little of his freedom. Charming and enigmatic, and completely alive in the moment, he flits in and out of various lives, enhancing everyone's existence. 'Early Spring' introduces us to Knulp, freshly sprung from a hospital stint and taking shelter with an old friend, a tanner named Emil, who has recently married. Emil's bride is quickly captivated by the wanderer's charms but Knulp is happier to turn his attentions in another direction, and to provide comfort to a lovely and very homesick young country maid. The second part, 'My Recollections of Knulp' switches narration to an unidentified first-person voice, of someone who, for a brief but precious time, had shared the road with the lovable vagabond. In this section, Knulp deepens a dimension, firming up what had been alluded to and implied in part one; a soul set free, but also one possessed of a seriously philosophical nature and who passes much of his free time considering the facts and matters of life, death, dreams and missed chances. 'The End' brings things to a conclusion that, in hindsight, was inevitable from the first page. Knulp, stricken with consumption, encounters an old school-friend, now a doctor, and allows himself be cared for. But he has a desire to see his home town again. Without going into detail, it's here that we learn of his sad past, and how he came to be on the road, and it is enough to say that this piece contains some genuinely poignant and in moments devastating passages you will ever hope to read. Hesse, a true master, has produced a number of essential reads. The pleasure of 'Knulp' isn't in the plot, which is slight, but in the weight of truth and human understanding that thickens the writing. It makes for a remarkable and deeply affecting reading experience. In the days since finishing, I've found myself drawn back again and again to its pages, so much so that I have to count this as one of the great and most welcome surprises of my recent reading life. An unhesitating five stars.
