“Autumn rains are often as fierce as the assault of a legendary dragon. The colored leaves fall like jewels from a broken necklace.” My best buddy handed this down to me, and I couldn’t be more grateful. What a gem of a book. A memoir, and more. Gladys Taber was a brilliant writer who applied her craft to writing about everyday life. I love this kind of book, but am often disappointed. So I spent a lot of time obsessing over what makes this one so very good? Her skill of course, but I think the key is that she mixed it up. Like a good conversationalist, she didn’t spend too much time on any one topic. Nature, weather, restoring old houses, friendships, family, grandchildren, neighbors, recipes, wildlife, cats, dogs, education, technology. People who are interested in things are interesting, and Gladys Taber was very interesting! She wrote beautifully--perhaps due to a lifetime of reading Keats. This example shows the way she wove deeper thoughts in with food, friends, and life in the seventeenth-century Connecticut farmhouse she restored and maintained: “The Full Snow Moon is one of the loveliest; perhaps the crystalline air itself affects her. My friends Helen, Vicky, and Olive grow restless after supper and decide to walk in the moonlit woods, even if the temperature is zero. The shadows on the snow are like etchings, and the only sound is the occasional cracking of an icy branch. On such a night in the woods, they feel a strange link with the universe and a renewal of their own identity. When they come in, they bring the smell of snow and pine and damp wool, and it takes a little time before they are ready to get out the popcorn and melt the butter and poke the fire. In this age of tenseness, we all need such times to renew our souls.” This book is a balm to modern life. It’s broken down into four sections by seasons, and Taber found things to appreciate at every time of year. Reading it felt like sitting down to talk with my mom, not just because my mom was also a curious and observant person, but because it just felt so comforting. I’m so glad there are more Gladys Taber books for me to savor. I can’t recommend this highly enough. I came away with inspiration, recipes, renewed calm, and more appreciation for each beautiful day we get to live in this world.
