Hermann Göring, the second most powerful man in Nazi Germany after Hitler, fancied himself an art collector and scoured Europe to acquire masterpieces. In 1945, his collection was seized by the Allies while he was on trial at Nuremberg. Among many other works of art, they found The Supper at Emmaus , signed by Johannes Vermeer, Göring’s favourite. The origin of that painting was then traced back to a Dutch art dealer named Han van Meegeren, who consequently was arrested and charged with the crime of collaborating with the Nazis. A few weeks into his trial, van Meegeren confessed: the Vermeer was a forgery, a fake he had painted to fool Göring and the Nazi art experts. As the judges, incredulous, asked him to prove his claim, he requested that a canvas and some painting be brought to his cell. He painted a beautiful Vermeer. Van Meegeren’s charges were dropped, and he became a Dutch national hero. Göring committed suicide. In Philip K Dick’s Man in the High Castle , one of the early novels of his career, there is a major storyline about an art and antique dealer, named Robert Childan, who sells old American artefacts to Japanese amateurs. He eventually teams up with a skilled jewellery craftsman, Frank Fink. They both end up involved in a counterfeit antiques business. Just as in the van Meegeren anecdote, it’s almost impossible to tell the difference between the authentic pieces and the fake ones. But the former have “historicity”, the latter don’t. In fact, Dick’s whole novel deals with this question: the nature of history and reality, the nature of time. In this book, Dick depicts a world where the Axis powers -chiefly the German Reich and the Empire of Japan- have won World War II. The cause of this complete geopolitical reversal is an event of practically no account: in 1933, the anarchist Giuseppe Zangara manages to assassinate U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt (he was in fact arrested before he could carry out his plan). As a result, the United States withdraw into isolationism and let Nazi Germany and Japan conquer the world and become superpowers. What’s even more interesting is the mise en abyme . Inside Dick’s novel, there is another book, titled The Grasshopper Lies Heavy , written by the mysterious “man in the High Castle”, which depicts yet another alternate reality, where Germany and Japan have lost the war, and the U.S. and the British Empire gain hegemony over the world. And, on top of it all, there is still another book, The I Ching or Book of Changes , which some of the characters use as an Oracle to try and read their fate. It is interesting to note that The Grasshopper has in fact been written using (or more exactly by ) the I Ching . Too, it is said that Dick himself used the hexagrams in the I Ching to write The Man in the High Castle . In the end, what is the nature of the actual reality we live in? Does it have more “historicity” than other possible, virtual, fictional, “fake” realities? other hexagrams? As Dick puts it to conclude his novel: “there must be world after world unseen by us, in some region or dimension that we simply do not perceive”. To say that this book is puzzling is an understatement. Ridley Scott’s production of the Amazon TV show is loosely inspired by Dick’s plot line, but still very entertaining.
