I had totally forgotten what it was like to read some Neechy and now I remember what it was that I loved about reading his stuff. It’s like an alien mentality. Some of the points he makes and his insights into human nature seem as though they come from an alien that has been secretly observing us for a few hundred years. This book is about the burden with which we transpose the lessons and the fetters of history into our reality today. His point is that the real superman is the iconoclast who can throw away, no, destroy the ballast of history and look at the world as though with a fresh pair of eyes and almost in a history-agnostic kind of way. There were a few very interesting points that he raised: • Our culture is not so much something that we are continuously improving but rather something that is handed down from generations before and we acquiesce to its norms. Our culture today if truly understood is more knowledge of culture rather than culture itself. A bouquet of words which beautifully describe rather than an explosion of action that actually amount to something real. • If we want to progress scientifically as quickly as possible then we are likely to destroy science as quickly as possible also. A more patient approach would be ideal when it comes to scientific progress rather than jump headfirst into the next app, or technological theory that comes our way (internet of things, Ai, robotics, big data, cloud, virtual reality). Patience is bravery as imam Ali once said. • Education does not need to follow the historical model that it has always followed. We don’t need to have one teacher standing up in a class in front of 30 eager to please imitators. The greatest have always bought their children up differently. • Build your homes on the slopes of Vesuvius was one of Nietzsche’s famous quotes and if once erupted there are only a few that would dare to build their homes with their loved ones on its slopes and yet we live our lives building our existence around the simmering volcano in ourselves. Our worlds are shattered once in a while by some catastrophic event - we don’t crawl into a ball and die but continue to live around the Dantesque inferno that could explode at any time. This takes one away from a mind-set of security and calm and further away even more from the belief in the eternal. How can you look a day in advance when you fear the molten rock rumbling deep within your soul. The superman can Nietzsche says.
