Sorry, George. I just couldn't do it. I tried, by golly. I just couldn't get through it. I finished the first in this trilogy, and got about a hundred pages away from finishing the second. But in the end, I just couldn't make it happen. Let me tell you why. I had so many problems with this book that I find it hard to remember them all. First of all, the author introduced so many characters at once that I couldn't follow who was whom. And another sub-point to that: when you introduce that many characters, you tend to blow right over any attributes that might be important just trashing any hope of character development. You're too busy dropping new names to care about giving them any depth. You don't care, so I, therefore, do not either. Secondly, he made large leaps in time. And I'm not talking about time travel. I would have actually liked that. But instead of a quick dot-dot-dot, "Six Months Later" or something, it just popped forward. So literally from one paragraph saying they had this long amount of time before something happened, to the next paragraph where it was happening, I was like, "Oh. Okay. So I guess that time has passed." He did this with a frequency that was unforgivable. Thirdly, Mr. Weber expected us all to know what his acronyms stood for, and understand all his science. I'm okay with hard science. I'm like Bill Mothereffing Nye, doodz. But don't drop some big hi-tech device on me and expect me to know what it is, and how it works. Just give me a sentence or two. Fourthly, I don't think it's necessary to delve into the minds of the Alchultaani. They're the bad guys. And so when he says, "Whatever-his-name-was sat on all four legs and both of his stomachs were in knots..." I got a bad taste in my mouth. I almost put the book down at that point. Onely, because I just don't really dig space warfare crap. Twoly, because dude, why do I need to know what he's thinking? He's the bad guy! Keep him a mystery! Let's tell it all from the perspective of the humans and give it a shroud of unknowing, like it would be in real life! We may never know why those aliens were hostile, and attacked us! Don't try to humanize them by giving me their POV. Just bad writing. Fifthly, I had to invoke rule number 23, section 5, paragraph C-1, of my reading allowance rules, where it says there are just too many good books out there to spend time reading horse shit like this. (And there's another reason right there.) Yeah, he would do that very frequently. Several times throughout the books, someone would quote some rule or law or policy, referring to the page, chapter, subtext, paragraph, section, sector, blah blah like people actually remember that crap. Dude, just don't. Okay? In closing, I wanted to finish this because it's the first book George has recommended to me. Sadly, it was part of a trilogy. Well, this doesn't bode well for George. But really, there are just too many tales out there, and even a bunch in my to-read collection on my reader for me to be wasting time reading something I just don't like. Bad writing, too many characters with less depth than the paper the words were printed on (and that's especially bad considering it was an ebook), and no feeling of connectedness. Just sourly disappointed. Oh, and one more thing real fast... One of the human characters spoke in medieval tongue. Huh? "Thou hath not seen thy breasts ha'thy?" Huh? Why? What the effing eff. Why in... Where does... How... Just effing NO. Writing: Storyline: Storytelling: Total Score:
