A dangerous game of cat and mouse will have you holding your breath all the way to the finish! "Don?" I said. I walked toward him. "Donald!" He didn't hear me. A policeman, however, did. He came swiftly from the sitting room in his dark blue uniform, took me by the arm, and swung me strongly and unceremoniously back toward the door. "Out of here, sir," he said. "If you please." The strained eyes slid uncertainly our way. "Charles... " His voice was hoarse. The policeman's grip loosened very slightly. "Do you know this man, sir?" he asked Donald. "I'm his cousin," I said. "Oh." He took his hands off, told me to stay where I was and look after Mr. Stuart, and returned to the sitting room to consult. "What's happened?" I said. Don was past answering. His head turned again toward the sitting room door, drawn to a horror he could no longer see. I disobeyed the police instructions, took ten steps, and looked in. The familar room was unfamiliarly bare. No pictures, no ornaments, no edge-to-edge floor covering of Oriental rugs. Just bare grey walls, chintz-covered sofas, heavy furniture pushed awry, and the great expanse of dusty wood-block flooring. And, on the floor, my cousin's young wife, bloody and dead. ****** This review is for the audiobook edition of In the Frame by Dick Francis , narrated by Ralph Cosham . Set primarily in Australia, the story is fast paced, tension filled, and exciting game of cat and mouse that has potentially deadly consequences. I enjoyed the characters and the unique storyline and the narration added an extra pop, making it more enjoyable then if I had read the printed edition myself. Narrator, Ralph Cosham , has a natural flair for story-telling and I really liked his ability to use different accents for the characters making it very easy to follow what's happening, earning him 5★'s for his performance of this book. I listened to this audiobook from beginning to end, all six hours of it, as I had to know how it ended! I was rewarded with a well written story with unexpected twists and an ending I couldn't have predicted! *About the author. Wikipedia: 'After wartime service in the RAF, Francis became a full-time jump-jockey, winning over 350 races and becoming champion jockey of the British National Hunt. He came to further prominence in 1956 as jockey to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, riding her horse Devon Loch. It fell when he was close to winning the Grand National. Francis retired from the turf and became a journalist and novelist.
