Every form of crime generates an opposing force, and to fraud, drugs, and murder one could add the Kidnap Squad, except that the kidnap squad is unofficial and highly discreet ... and is often us. Andrew Douglas is a young man with a secret kind of job. He is a partner in a private enterprise that advises companies and people on how to deal with kidnappings, how to prevent them or how to respond to them. The less anybody knows about him and about his job , the better he can help his clients and the police. Yet on his last job in Bologna, things go from bad to worse when a publicity seeking local officer barges in with guns drawn and sirens blazing on a very carefully arranged money drop. The life of a young woman who was snatched out of an open top sports car right in front of her mansion is most likely squandered. But Andrew, like most other lead characters in a Dick Francis thriller, is made of sterner stuff, and he doesn’t give up so easily. Methodically, calmly, he continues to pursue the release of the victim. Also typical of the usual developments I have come to look forward in these sort of books, the girl is not only lovely to look at, but also resourceful and funny and smart. Alessia might suffer terribly from post traumatic stress after a weeks-long isolation, but she’s willing to fight back, and she makes quite an impression on the British stiff upper lip and unflappable seriousness of Andrew. “Logic doesn’t stop you feeling. You can behave logically, and it can hurt like hell. Or it can comfort you. Or release you. Or all at the same time.” I’ve always been charmed by the laid-back, yet professional heroes and their determined approach to problem solving in the Dick Francis novels, and am eager to come back to one of his stories. As it can be expected by now, after about 30 of them finished, there is also something about the author’s all consuming, enduring love for horses and the racetrack. Alessia is one of the few top jockeys on the international racing circuit, and as she moves back to England to see if she can get back in the saddle, both figuratively and literally, she uses the opportunity to show to Andrew the charm of a quiet cold morning on the downs, leading a pack of thoroughbreds to their paces. Unfortunately, the kidnappers are not ready to take a vacation, and Andrew is called upon once more to help a family in distress, this time on the home soil. A young boy is daringly kidnapped at the beach, right under his mother’s eye. More disturbingly yet, the method and the following calls and notes point out that Andrew is dealing with the same man he thwarted in Italy. His path, Alessia’s and the kidnapper’s seem merged together and somehow linked to the world of horse-racing. A third case in Baltimore, when the older steward of the Jockey Club is himself kidnapped and held for ransom, is forcing Andrew to leave his game in the shadows and join in the danger directly, putting his own life on the line. The Danger is for me one of the best novels in a long backlist that sometimes uses similar plot developments and typecast characters, but never gets boring or truly predictable. I find the branching out of the author beyond the racetrack and into different fields of activity (banking, insurance, air lifts, etc) has infused the novels with fresh plot ideas, with a globetrotting wider landscape and with well done background research while staying true to an inner code of right and wrong that guides the actions of his unprepossessing ordinary people that will rise to the occasion when danger knocks on the door. We sometimes did, as a firm, work for no pay: it depended on circumstances. All the partners agreed that a family in need should get help regardless, and none of us begrudged it. We never charged enough anyway to make ourselves rich, being in existence on the whole to defeat extortion, not to practice it. A flat fee, plus expenses: no percentages. This is just one example of that decency, that common sense that I’m talking about, sorely lacking in higher corporate boardrooms, like pharmaceuticals or high flying lawyer offices, where the main consideration is only how much the client or the market can be fleeced for. Needless to say, I plan to continue reading (or-re-reading) these novels in publication order, even as I pace myself in order to avoid burn out.
