This is a very mixed bag, but if you’re curious about the Known Space Universe, it gives a good overview. I prefer Niven off earth since many of these stories have some of the most unintentionally funny “swinging 60s-70s” visions of future humans. Get your nudist pass everybody, well as long as you’re a hot woman or a guy who is temporarily declothed for plot reasons. "The Coldest Place" (1964) 2 Stars Some cool ideas, but underdeveloped. "Becalmed in Hell" (1965) 3 Stars Much better! I feel like I’ve read this before, but it is cute. "Wait It Out" (1968) 4 Stars I really like several of the ideas and the ending in particular here. It seems like “How the Heroes Die” would have been a better title, though Niven had already used it. "Eye of an Octopus" (1966) 3 Stars It’s fine. I like the idea of using the principles of evolution, but it didn’t come together for me. "How the Heroes Die" (1966) 1 Star This story badly shows its age with its treatment of gender essentialism and homosexuality in particular. I guess I just never cared about the struggle; the characters are just stupid, and the old school masculinity just bores me, especially with the “hyper-logical” duel being the focus. "The Jigsaw Man" (1967) 3.5 Stars This idea of organ harvesting seems scarily like something that could be made real, and I guess it was in the news in 1967. Outside of that, the characters and story were fine. "At the Bottom of a Hole" (1966) 2 Stars This story continues the Martian trend, and outside its curious title, I didn’t find much of interest here. It summarizes “Eye of an Octopus” and “How Heroes Die.” It has an encounter with the Martians that wasn’t that interesting. "Intent to Deceive" (1968) 3 Stars A cute little story about the dangers of automation. "Cloak of Anarchy" (1972) 2 Stars I read this one previously in 2020 Visions , and it’s worse on reread. "The Warriors" (1966) 3 Stars Love the Kzinti telepath! The human stuff is pretty standard. "The Borderland of Sol" (1975) 3 Stars [In earlier editions] I actually thought this was a pretty fun adventure story. It ticks a lot of the boxes for space adventure and has some fun James Bond spy gadgets. "Madness Has Its Place" (1990) 1.5 Stars [In the Three Books of Known Space edition] There’s an interesting idea here, but it’s kind of drowned out in some really boring relationship crap. It’s interesting that between this and "The Ethics of Madness" from Neutron Star , written 23 years apart, it still doesn’t seem like Niven did much research into mental health. The hints at the Kzinti stuff were just too weak. "There Is a Tide" (1968) 3.5 Stars This is a pretty fun play on some of the ideas from "Neutron Star" (see Neutron Star ). The idea of chance and cheating in the context of an alien encounter is rather fun. "Safe at Any Speed" (1967) 2.5 Stars It’s fine, not much here.
