A friend loaned me this book months ago, during a personally tough time, with the comment, “I don’t know if you’re up for reading this because it starts with a terrible tragedy, but I find it very uplifting.” With such a recommendation, I shelved it and thought with vague guilt occasionally that I should return it to her. I picked it up a few weeks ago and did a double take at the author’s name. Yes, that Vonnegut. As in Kurt’s first wife. Curiosity piqued, I sat down to read. This memoir is split into three parts. The first narrates the tragedy and its immediate aftermath; the second and third are composed of essays, one for each of the children, plus two that consider memory and death. The tragedy was this: On September 15, 1958, a commuter train plunged over an open drawbridge into Newark Bay. Kurt’s brother-in-law was on the train. Thirty-six hours later, Kurt’s sister died of cancer. At her deathbed, Kurt promised that the couple’s four sons would not be separated. The relatives loaded up three cars with the four boys, their two dogs, and what possessions they could fit in the remaining space, and drove from New Jersey to Barnstable on Cape Cod. Meanwhile, Jane frantically prepared their derelict home to receive her new, grieving sons. The rest of the book tells of the trials and stresses of integrating the two families, the conflict within the extended family over the Vonneguts keeping all four boys when they were barely making ends meet (Kurt had yet to become successful), and the great joy that their sacrifices brought in the end. Vonnegut Yarmolinsky’s voice is unflinchingly honest as she strives to put down on paper emotions, dreams, and memories that were overwhelmingly intense. She barely touches on the breakup of her marriage to Kurt, which occurred a decade after the tragedy, nor does she write about her own role as his writing coach and chief encourager to dream. Instead she focuses on the ways that their entire family was changed, broken, and then enriched through the aftermath of the tragedy. She concludes her meditation on her own impending death from cancer with these beautiful words: "So what is there to say when you know you don’t have much time left? Or rather, what is most important to say, since you can’t say it all? I wrote this partly to find out what I might have to say. And in the doing I have discovered how absolutely madly in love I am with life and with all the people I was given—yes, given—to love. I am grateful to have learned so much of life….I’ve learned that paina dn joy are inextricably ,mingled, and that out of suffering does come love. It is a great mystery to me why this should be so. "But I know that there will be angels in the next underpass as well, and I am content."
