DNF at page 90 of 428. I really liked this story as it started out. I have been searching for a grumpy mountain man rescues a damsel in distress storyline for quite awhile. And this seemed to be exactly that. Yet this mountain man had a surplus of manners, emotions and patience. Didn't exactly fit the stereotype I was expecting. Not that this is a bad thing, yet.... it was obvious right from his first meeting of the heroine that she had been raped recently/wasnt a virgin. And he repeatedly kept apologizing to her for sullying her and her reputation because he looked at her, lusted after her, etc. Surprisingly citified-mannered mountain man. I also just could not understand the heroine's quick reaction to accepting the hero's touch. I would think if the heroine's brain is still stuck in trauma mode from her recent rape, then she would still be terrified to be touched sexually. But I am not well-educated on this topic, so I could be way off. It just surprised me at how quickly that topic resolved. Then a second mountain man showed up and kept trying to steal the heroine away from our hero so he could take her behind a bush for a few minutes of fun. He would sneak up in the middle of the night, he attempted to clobber the hero to steal her, he shot the hero to steal her but this mountain man hero had so much patience, he amazingly kept asking the nasty would-be rapist to 'please leave our campsite and do not return!' Really? A few attempts at murder and rape and our hero just politely asks the bad man to leave? Shoot his ass, come on! He eventually needed to use violence to stop the harassments, but his attempts at handling the situation were pathetic in my eyes. At around page 80, our hero came to the realization that he loved our heroine. I looked at the page numbers, and I still had another 300+ pages to go. That's not a good sign. So I jumped on to GR to read some reviews and came across a good one explaining that the rest of the story is filled with more unfortunate rapes done to our heroine, more mental trauma and violence. That's just not my type of storyline that I enjoy relaxing with, so I abandoned the book. I'm more into watching the main characters falling in love, once they profess their love, it's pretty much over. Oh, another reviewer complained of the love scenes being too racy. Not at all! I felt they were very clean and minimal description was given. (at least up until page 90)
