Wow. This is a book to re-read. It is thorough, slow and in-depth. ST covers not just the facts but the implications of WC's life. I have read Witness and was blown away. It has been called the greatest autobiography of the 20th century and deservedly so. ST highlighted several aspects of Witness that I had overlooked, such as how heavily WC's thought was influenced by the great Russian novelists. ST also develops WC's political philosophy, showing how WC always maintained a European rather than American mentality. WC saw the world through a class-based Marxist dialectic. His rejection of Communism developed from the same philosophy that first lead to his rejection of capitalism. It's easy to see why WC never really felt at home in the conservative movement. Then again, it is telling that it was the conservative movement that made a place for someone like WC to write and think as he pleased while the progressive movement could not. WC was too cultured to be much interested in commerce and the economically oriented conservative movement did not sit well with his quietist humanism. ST's book also provides a kind of parallel biography of mid-century liberalism. The progressive movement became more rigid and more class based as it became the default setting for the intellectual classes. Anti-anti-communism became more about distinguishing oneself from the goatherds as it was about principles. The liberal establishment rejected WC mainly for being a fat working-class slob. Admitting Hiss' guilt would be to admit that the enemy was not the Other but was one of the progressives themselves. Worse, they'd have to admit that the Right was right. A pathological denial of Hiss' guilt was better than admitting that the hoi polloi got it right. Here is ST on the liberal failure to see past political labels: “This failure, suggested by one shrewd analyst, the literary critic Leslie Field, grew out of 'the implicit dogma of American liberalism,' which inflexibly assumed that in any political drama 'the liberal per se is the hero.' For Hiss's supporters to admit his guilt also meant admitting 'that mere liberal principle is not in itself a guarantee against evil; that the wrongdoer is not always the other – “they” and not “us”; that there is no magic in the words 'left' or 'progressive' or 'socialist' that can prevent deceit and abuse of power.” This is a brilliant work and is highly, highly recommended.
