It all started with breadfruit. A guy called Joseph Banks spotted it when he was with Captain Cook on Tahiti. Joseph Banks later became a major ideas man and fixer for the British Empire ™ which was at that point in Phase One (steal anything that’s not nailed down in which case steal the nails and then steal it). There was a problem in the West Indian colonies – the poor slaves needed better food. As Wikipedia elegantly expresses it The late-18th-century quest for cheap, high-energy food sources for slaves in British colonies prompted colonial administrators and plantation owners to call for the breadfruit plant to be brought to the Caribbean. So Banks commissioned an expedition. A ship was to go to Tahiti and grab up lots of breadfruit plants and ship them over to Jamaica. Sounded fairly straightforward. What could possibly go wrong? I am young in years but old in what the world calls Adversity. It has made me acquainted with three Things, which are little known, First, the Villainy & Censoriousness of Mankind – second, the Futility of all Human Hopes - & third, the Enjoyment of being content in whatever station it pleases Providence to place me in Lieutenant William Bligh got the job and his little ship was called The Bounty. You may have heard of it. Captain Bligh was later played by Charles Laughton, Leo McKern, Anthony Hopkins and Trevor Howard. Off they went on 15 October 1787 with 46 men and they had a hell of a time of it, let me tell you. After 27,000 miles (they didn’t go in a straight line) on 26 October 1788 they arrived at Tahiti. They were knackered. They spent 5 months recuperating and canoodling with the local females who from all accounts were most beautiful and also most accommodating. One must therefore deduce that the Tahitian men were pretty broadminded too, but this is not mentioned anywhere. Several of the men had undergone traditional Tahitian tattooing over large parts of their body, particularly on their buttocks. All good things must come to an end so they eventually packed up their breadfruits and waved goodbye to their new wives and sailed off. At this point the mutiny happened. A very odd thing too. From all accounts Captain Bligh was the very opposite of the tyrannical naval captain handing out a hundred lashes at the drop of a hat. He really couldn’t do that anyway, because he didn’t think he could rely on his officers if push came to shove. So after three weeks sailing back to England the 23 year old more-or-less second-in-command Fletcher Christian, later to be played by Clark Gable, Errol Flynn, Marlon Brando and Mel Gibson, burst into Captain Bligh’s bedroom, grabbed him up in his nightshirt and thrust him and 19 others into a small launch and bade them go to the devil. Millward, your piece is cocked, you had better uncock it as you may shoot some Person. The mutineers were sure they had seen the last of that lot. A small boat in the middle of the Pacific? They were going to drown. Why did they do it? The only reason which makes sense to me is that they had just had 5 months of all-sex-all-the-time paradise, and all that Captain Bligh was promising them was a tough voyage back to Blighty and look sharp about it. It was more dignified to complain that Bligh was an intolerable bully, though. Okay, he did have a very sharp tongue. But these were tough sailors. When men are cooped up for a long Time in the Interior of a Ship, there oft prevails such jarring Discordancy of Tempers and Conduct that it is enough on many Occasions by repeated Acts of Irritation and Offence to change the Disposition of a Lamb into that of an Animal Fierce and Resentful By one of the major miraculous feats of navigation, the castaways didn’t drown. Bligh by his genius and fanatical management of food and water guided the tiny boat to a Dutch colony on Timor, 4000 miles away. It took from 28 April to 14 June, 1789 during which time only one man died. Bligh then got himself back to England , arriving 14 March 1790. Two sharks were caught and in the belly of one was found a prayer book, “quite fresh… not a leaf of it defaced” In November 1790 the British government sent a ship called the Pandora to catch the scurvy mutineers and bring them back alive. (In the crew of the Pandora was one of the loyal sailors from the Bounty.) It arrived on 23 March 1791 after a serene voyage and quickly rounded up the 14 mutineers they could find on Tahiti. Unfortunately, on the way back to England, the Pandora was wrecked on the Great Barrier Reef, where Sarli, the Barrier Reef turtle lived. 31 of the crew and 4 of the imprisoned mutineers drowned. The others took to the sea on four little boats and – yes, very ironically – they more or less had to duplicate Captain Bligh’s voyage of two years previously. Later in 1791 Captain Bligh was given a second chance to bring breadfruit from Tahiti to Jamaica. This voyage was successful. But alas, as Wikipedia laconically reports its immediate objective, which was to provide a cheap and nutritious food for West Indian slaves was not made, as most slaves refused to eat the new food The court martial of the mutineers, and the story of the second lot who made their way to Pitcairn Island and were discovered 15 years later is a tale too tangled to take up your time. Caroline Alexander’s long book is like this : Fascinating, wonderful dull dull dull page turning very interesting boring boring boring boring great stuff can’t put it down yawn bore bore bore interesting end She includes way too much detail about the hundreds of participants in this tortuous history, I think I could snip out a good 80 or 90 pages. She was clearly besotted with all of the details. But the tiresome stuff is easily skippable, so for the rest of it I am tattooing a fierce four stars onto its buttocks.
