I had no idea what I was in for when I ordered this tiny gem, but I will read it again and again. This was pure delight, it was a cup of tea shared with a friend, it was a poem of delectable beauty, it was rich with the Christian message! My review will probably wind up being as long as the book itself, so forgive me. I don't even know where to start. The writing style? Gorgeous! Breathtaking! As lovely as the flower itself that was the underlying premise of the book. Both descriptives and words were so beautiful, I was taken aback several times, thinking "I wish I could write like that!" I'm a florist in real life, who loves flowers and all things beautiful, so of course this book would win me over. I didn't realize it was a Christmas book. Darn. That must mean I'll have to read it again at Christmastime! (Not that I mind!) The character development was splendidly satisfying. I hated Clemma at first. Then, by chapter 2 I started to like her. Then, by chapter 6, I was in love with both her and Baine. The book contains several lessons that are so rich and deep in our Christian walk and so important. The first? Forgiveness, showing the love of Christ and, above all, not judging someone by the rumors you've heard of them. I got worried about halfway through when Baine started talking about how he was earning his way to Heaven. I was thinking, "Oh, no. Is this wonderful book going to take the direction that we must earn our way to Heaven by good works in addition to Jesus' sacrifice?" And then when the author (through another character) clearly stated, "You can't do anything to get to Heaven, it's all about what Jesus did, you can't save yourself!" (I paraphrase and not quote exact,) I leaped for joy. The ending chapter...let's just say there's something that ends the book, a secret revealed and the way the other character reacts to it that was just...I couldn't breathe. It was so beautiful and so utterly romantic...I wanted to read it again and again. Wow. I haven't read anything by Catherine Palmer before, but my goodness, this will not be the only book I read. To say I loved it would be an understatement. I highly recommend this amazing little gem. It is going on my "favorites" shelf, which is a privilege. Oh! One other thing! Can I just say... Icy blue eyes?! If anyone knows me, they understand that icy blue eyes are the end-all for me. So, yeah, this book was earning points long before the 5th page. Carry on! *fangirl gushes*
