I remember reading this book back in middle school and loving it. Since I had hung unto the book for years but never re-read it, I felt it was time to go back and refresh my memory. After all I love fantasy novels with female protagonists and rich worlds to explore or in this case, explore again. Just as I recalled, it was an engaging, quick read, other than a slightly slow start. The descriptions and world building felt rich or at least had the potential to be so. Unlike my memories though, I didn't enjoy this book quite as much as middle school me did. I didn't like how she was always waiting around, waiting to be saved; she never really grew a spine or developed as a character. I didn't like how the rape was handled at all and post-rape sex for her didn't cause any undue stress or emotional turmoil. I found this to stretch my mind's ability to suspend disbelief. I suspect as a younger me would have glossed over the implications as I was swept up in the romantic aspects. I also was left incredibly frustrated with this book. The removal of the curse... just happens. The whole end battle is very anti-climatic. The book, the adventure, everything is summed up in a few dissatisfying pages. Totally didn't remember that from my first read. There is so much hinted at regarding the world this is set in, the goddess, her harp and the upcoming end of the 10,000 years and none of it is resolved. No sequels were ever written so the reader is just... Left abandoned. Julienne is told to take the harp to Eld. It never happens. You never find out any more about the sleepers or the crazy thurge in the cave. You never find out what happened to the incestuous sister, or if Rihanna totally ends the world or anything. Just they lived happily ever after and ignored half the plot. The book gets 1 star for nostalgia, 1 star for engaging writing and romance, and 1 star for the creation of a world I was left wanting more of but will never receive. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
