“No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth century that this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligences greater than man’s and yet as mortal as his own; that as men busied themselves about their various concerns they were scrutinized and studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might scrutinize the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of water. With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe about their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empire over matter…” - H.G. Wells, The War of the Worlds Many Halloweens have come and gone since I first purchased H.G. Wells’s The War of the Worlds , intending it to be part of my seasonal reading. There it sat, with many other good literary intentions. With this book in particular, I never felt any urgency. That’s a function of how many derivative versions I’ve consumed. I’ve seen the movies, the television adaptations, and the parodies on The Simpsons . I’ve also listened to a recording of Orson Welles’s infamous 1938 radio broadcast. In short, I felt a nagging duty to read it, but nothing more. Having finally finished The War of the Worlds , I discovered that in some ways, the experience was superfluous. This is a short novel, coming in at around 200 pages, and it doesn’t have much in the way of plot. It is quite episodic, and the various filmed versions of this tale have ably captured the major beats. In other words, there wasn’t much left to surprise me, at least in terms of how it all unfolds. What did surprise me was its execution. For all the meanings heaped upon Wells’s slim book, it is first and foremost brutally entertaining. This has the gloss – and sentence structure – of a classic. But at its heart, it’s really just a pulpy clash between aliens and humans. *** A summary of The War of the Worlds is probably unnecessary. Suffice to say, at the end of the nineteenth century, cylinders from Mars begin burying themselves in the soil of Great Britain. From these cylinders emerge big-brained Martians, who immediately begin building war machines, which are then turned loose upon poor England. The story is told in the first-person by an unnamed narrator. We never learn too much about him – characterizations are not a strong point here – except that he is a philosopher, and that he is married. Most of The War of the Worlds consists of the narrator’s own experiences as he tries to get back to his wife. Somewhat awkwardly, however, Wells also has his narrator spend time relating his brother’s travails, even though he wasn’t present for them. (There are some truly great scenes involving the brother, yet I found this second storyline a bit of an authorial cheat). With our narrator as a guide, the reader is taken on a tour of a section of blasted-out Great Britain that really sets the bar for all the postapocalyptic fiction to follow. Showing an absurdly keen appreciation for local geography, Wells has his narrator travel from Woking to Weybridge, Weybridge to Halliford, Halliford to Putney, Putney to London, and so on and so forth. Along the way he witnesses battles between massed artillery and alien tripods; scrounges for food; gets trapped in a house with a raving curate (perhaps the most gripping set piece); and exchanges philosophical musings with an artilleryman who has lost his unit (and possibly a few marbles). Wells’s descriptions – as has been widely noted elsewhere – eerily prefigure the mechanistic slaughters to come in both the First and Second World Wars. There is poison gas and shattered cities. There are mass exoduses of terrified civilian populations, with rioting and looting in the streets. Though this is not graphic in the modern sense, Wells writes with a certain unsparing ruthlessness. In one memorable scene, a British ironclad engages in a suicidal delaying action in the River Thames. Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his tube and discharged a canister of the black gas at the ironclad. It hit her larboard side and glanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an unfolding torrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove clear. To the watchers from the steamer, low in the water and with the sun in their eyes, it seemed as though she was already among the Martians…They saw the gaunt figures separating and rising out of the water as they retreated shoreward, and one of them raised the camera-like generator of the Heat-Ray. He held it pointing obliquely downward, and a bank of steam sprang from the water at its touch. It must have driven through the iron of the ship’s side like a white-hot iron rod through paper… The evocation of total warfare and its aftermath is impressive, and Wells seems to take a bit of pleasure in fictionally destroying his real-life neighborhood. *** Far more than most novels featuring aliens and Heat-Rays, The War of the Worlds requires close attention. This was published in 1898, and it shows. Wells employs a rather ornate, formal style, with long, compound sentences that often try to do too much. Occasionally, I had to read a page twice to understand what was actually happening (it can be especially hard to keep track of the unnamed characters). Despite its brevity, this took me longer to finish than expected. Still, there are certain sequences that have the taut pacing and tension of a thriller. Furthermore, while Wells can occasionally be a bit wordy, he uses those words to good effect, creating lasting images. *** The War of the Worlds is one of those titles that is ripe for projection. Because it feels prophetic, there are many interpretations. The most obvious, of course, is that it is a critique of colonialism. After all, it features the world’s great imperial power being forcefully subjugated by a foreign invader. Wells pointedly suggests this himself in the text, referring to the Tasmanian people of Australia being “swept out of existence,” and then asking whether humans were “such apostles of mercy as to complain if the Martians warred in the same spirit?” This is all well and good, but it is worth mentioning that viewed from the twenty-first century, Wells has more than a bit of baggage. He was enamored of a certain construction of “natural selection” wherein all the “lesser” races would eventually disappear, a prospect he did not exactly mourn. Wells was also known as an anti-Semite, and some of that bleeds into these pages, especially in his description of an “eagle-faced man” who is run over by a fleeing cab while trying to pick up gold sovereigns that have spilled on the ground. For the most part, though, The War of the Worlds seems free of whatever reprehensible notions Wells carried. While there is definitely some Darwinian concepts interwoven into the narrative, the “natural selection” angle is played out vis-à-vis the conflict between humans and extra-terrestrials. *** Science fiction has always been a marvelous vehicle for addressing real social concerns through entertainment. The War of the Worlds is no exception. As noted above, it can be seen as a criticism of imperialism, or of technology, or of any number of other things. Wells has built a foundation that can support many different structures. Steven Spielberg, for example, used Wells’s setup to create what is perhaps the best film to deal with America’s post-9/11 anxiety and dread. If you want to think deeply about it, you can. Based on the introduction to the edition I read, many have. Just as importantly, you can choose to simply enjoy it – as I did – as the relatively lowbrow adventures of a man trying his best not to get blown up, while everything around him is spectacularly obliterated.
