To misquote Blackadder , reading The Clerkenwell Tales is much like a broken pencil… pointless. Basically, it’s a short novel – or novella – about London in the year 1399 when mounting tensions between the nobility see Richard II deposed and Henry Bolingbroke coronated as Henry IV. Peter Ackroyd introduces a conspiracy to bring about Richard II’s deposition but it fails to be interesting or meaningful. The reader probably already knows that Richard will be deposed and Henry IV crowned king since Shakespeare wrote some incredibly famous plays about it but rather than trying to introduce tension or mystery into the story, perhaps by making us care about his cast of largely invented characters, Ackroyd seems just to shrug his shoulders and keep churning out the story. Nor does he give us enough detail that we can get a sense of why the conspiracy exists and we can root for it to fail or succeed. No, Richard II must be deposed and Henry IV made king because of Reasons – Evil Reasons since the guys in the conspiracy are pretty evil but still Reasons. Yeah. They’re setting fire to churches and killing people because Reasons. No, Ackroyd won’t tell you want they are but they totally exist. At least I assume so. There’s also a nun who has visions and she may or may not be part of the conspiracy. I think there’s also another conspiracy to fight that conspiracy but it was kinda vague and thrown in at the end? Admittedly, at that stage, I just wanted to finish the book and had stopped caring about everything else. So, the big selling point for this book is that it’s kind-of a spinoff of The Canterbury Tales , almost using Chaucer’s pilgrims as the focal characters for the story and each chapter title is modeled after The Canterbury Tales (The Prioress’s Tale, The Knight’s Tale, etc.). It is an very interesting and exciting idea but, ultimately, it’s a pointless gimmick. Ackroyd neither cares enough about these characters to give them a lot of page time – The Pardoner, for instance, doesn’t appear until the chapter entitled “The Pardoner’s Tale”, then barely features in that and is never seen again. Nor can I say that Ackroyd’s characterisations felt close to Chaucer’s. They felt like complete strangers to me. Indeed, I would say Ackroyd has a distinct disdain and loathing for these characters that Chaucer did not. Chaucer’s characters were rogues and deeply flawed individuals but they were lovable and entertaining; these characters are not. Ackroyd seems to think medieval people were inherently bad people, very alien to ourselves. He also makes the Wife of Bath – a character feminists have identified with and reclaimed – a child trafficker, prostituting a eleven-year-old girl. Lovely. Let me go gouge my eyes out. Nor does this Canterbury Tales gimmick actually feel it enhances the story but rather, holds it back and limits it. I honestly don’t understand why Ackroyd used Chaucer as a framing device. It is apparent that the story he wanted to tell had nothing to do with Chaucer or Chaucer’s characters and that this device held him back from exploring his conspiracy plotline in detail. Perhaps this plotline would have been better served if Ackroyd had devoted his attention to it rather than trying to shoehorn it into a Canterbury Tales spinoff. As it is, the story is pointless.
