this will be the...5th or 6th from woodrell for me...kindle. begins w/a quote from marilyn monroe: all we demanded was our right to twinkle. and before that, 'this novel is dedicated to three ladies whose support made it happen" marian wood, ellen levine, and deborah sweet "and to the memory of my father robert lee woodrell" and then there/s this from his jazzy eulogy and he saieth, "let the trumpets and the saxophones swing, man, swing!" and grandfather pedro (peed-drow) daily "now, if a fella only knew..." --from his lips, many times has a foreward by pinckney benedict sounds like this pinckney character also grew up among hillbillies, these in the mountains of southern western virginia...goes into the story a bit...delivers a new term, for me anyway, a mountain william ...uncle hunter, who didn't want to be called a hillbilly, having been to college...description fits the novel's protagonist, doyle redmond...claims the folk there in the hills have an obsession with the past...mentions another name of pancake...breece d'j pancake...a story, "trilobites"...this pancake character is the patron saint of modern hillbilly fiction... story begins" 1 three finger jerks i had a family errand to run, that's all, but i decided to take a pistol. it was just a little black thirty-two ladystinger and i tucked it into the blue pillowcase that held my traveling clothes.... onward & upward update, finished, 20 sep 12, thursday 3:15 p.m. e.s.t. yeah, so i'm done with this one...can't help but wonder what all those long-dead holy guys of literature and art would think of this one...matthew arnold...wasn't he the one with the touchstone? or how about some of those other major statements...eliot...aristotle...plato...henry james maybe?...dryden? all the big yay=hoos... ...cause well, doyle, he acts like a papal-granting pope...indulgences...this story provides indulgences to those who have not had indulgences prior. almost like the establishment media, playing anal tongue darts w/fearless leader, barack "buster" obama...and well, so it goes, right? this one is not as poetic as tomato red or winter's bone...and perhaps it is earlier in the folio? does woodrell have a folio ? what, exactly, is a folio? shakespeare has one...the touchstone...and...have to pause here to reflect, to try to remember if willy has any stories like this one...and, surely he must... ...revenge...big big...blood...heh! niagra...she names her dog damned spot ! so...there exists a lineage...begats going back to willy's time. anyway...good story...imaru?
