"Billy Budd and Other Tales" showcased Melville's allegorical, gothic style of writing in its prime. The stories consisted of finely structured settings and carefully crafted character archetypes, both of which contributed greatly to the allegorical content created throughout this collection; however, in the case of Melville, (and many 19th Century English writers), his allegories were moralizing and this did not bode well for 1) character development beyond the setting of the story and 2) the appreciation of a modern reader. "Billy Budd" centered around the push and pull of iniquity and innocence, respectively represented by Master-at-arms John Claggart and simple seaman Billy Budd. An innocuous set of historical and personal circumstances unravels into a plot that brews and boils over quickly, with the swiftness of summary justice that Captain Vere delivers at the conclusion of the novella. I appreciated the allegorical content crafted by Melville in his discussion of iniquity and innocence aboard a seafaring ship, which often feels like a microcosmic society for Melville's writings. The tale turns tragic, which only heightens its effect for me. Similarly, "Bartleby the Scrivener" has a tragic turn that slowly builds from a simple outset. Bartleby takes up work with a Wall Street lawyer (the narrator) as a scrivener, copying legal documents in the lawyer's stuffy office; soon, Bartleby takes to idleness, using the common refrain "I would prefer not to" after every request made of him. The impetus for Bartleby's behavior is not obvious or logical, but nonetheless it occupies the mind of the narrator ceaselessly until its tragic end. A consideration of the depths of empathy, a consideration of the nature of work in our ceaseless, capitalist culture just budding at the time of Mellville's writing, a consideration of so much else, "Bartleby the Scrivener" delivered. I even appreciated most of "Benito Cereno", a short story concerning a mutiny-ridden Spanish ship and a good natured, affable American captain who climbs aboard and saves the ship's crew simply by that good nature. The story sat well with the theme of the other stories before it, essentially the individual vs. society; how one man's actions, or inactions, can take upon meaning in his life and how they're influenced by the expectations of the world around him; however I could not suffer this story, and for the most part the ones that followed until the collection's conclusion, because of its moralizing allegory. A product of the times, Melville's moralizing allegory comes across for me as serious overreach on the part of the narrator. This notion, in turn, is a product of our time, where the modern novel often nudges readers along and expects them to put puzzle pieces together; the modern form is imperfect if you're trying to deliver upon a particular message, unless its a small set of puzzle pieces or a particularly good writer, but I prefer the modern form to the moralizing allegory because the latter often creates a sluggishness and sultry effect in the text; it becomes immovable and insurmountable at times, especially given Melville's 19th century English diction. The moralizing allegory also comes at the expense of grander character development, which, in the eyes of the modern reader, comes across as a piecemeal approach; inadequate for delivering a fictional story with veracity, meaning, and applicability outside the confines of its pages. Regardless, the content of this collection was 19th century gothic tragedy in it truest American form and for that I thank Herman Melville. I look forward to setting sail with Moby Dick again in the future, as well!
