This is a haunting book. At first, it seems like it's going to be the stories of a motherless son, Lloyd Barrington, and a fatherless daughter, Gwen Curry, growing up in little rural Egypt, Maine in the 1960's, and the ways that their surviving, larger-than-life parents' expectations about what it means to be a man or a woman misshape their lives. Soon, however (relatively speaking, in a 650-page book), we meet lots of other characters, most of whose lives intertwine with all of the others--and all of them affected by the way that traditional ways of making a living like farming and logging had been taken over by corporate agribusiness by the 1990's, when this book was written. "Merry men," of course, were the companions of Robin Hood, and Lloyd grows up to practice his own version of robbing from the rich and giving to the poor. To her credit, the author only occasionally romanticizes him--more often, she shows us how what he does makes sense without ultimately making a difference. Two of my favorite characters don't emerge until the middle of the book: Carroll Plummer, a recovering alcoholic, and his much younger wife, Anneke, who writes endless protest letters to officials out of sheer disbelief that the authorities can be as unfeeling and stupid as (in author Carolyn Chute's world) they unfailingly are. What is this strange, sprawling book? A blurb by Madison Smartt Bell on the back cover compared it to the entire Faulkner canon in one volume. I think of Dreiser's An American Tragedy. I also read it as an introduction to a culture that I know very little about, and which may be dying out, but has been just as much a part of America as the immigrant experience in which my family is rooted. At times, it's a political tract counseling despair about Big anything and urging faith in small, local communities. That's a faith that attracts me, but I know that as a Jew I would be a stranger in this Egypt forever. At other times, this book feels like the rhythm of life, where people come and go and you never know who will turn out to be important in the end, and there are no happy endings, only people who live to tell the tale. This not a book to read when you're feeling low, unless your misery loves company. It is a book to read if you find yourself tempted to dismiss people as passive or apolitical when they are just struggling to salvage some dignity in their personal lives.
