The author of this book, David Leeming (emeritus professor of English at the University of Connecticut), was a close friend to James Baldwin (1924- 1987) for twenty-five years. They first met in 1961 in Istanbul where Leeming was teaching at Robert College. Back in New York, beginning in 1963, Leeming worked as Baldwin’s personal assistant, dealt with correspondence and did lecture research. Returning to Istanbul in 1965, he, Baldwin and Baldwin’s younger brother, David, lived together for a year. Leeming and Baldwin maintained a close friendship throughout their lives, writing and frequently visiting each other. During the last days of Baldwin's life at St. Paul de Vence, France, Leeming was one of the few there caring for Baldwin along with his brother David. Leeming's relationship with Baldwin was long, intimate and full of understanding. This is reflected in the writing. However Leeming does not whitewash Baldwin. Both criticism and praise are presented in full measure. Their long friendship allows us to better understand the emotions and thoughts of Baldwin, and it is a reason to choose this biography of the man. So why not more stars? Quite simply because I would have preferred more editing. Parts are repetitive. The book moves forward chronologically; every book, essay, play, as well as Baldwin's venture in film and poetry is detailed. Much of Baldwin's writing is semi-autobiographical. Much can be seen as metaphors of his life philosophy. Repeatedly people and events in his life are used as characters in his writing. This does become a bit repetitive. Some issues are covered only briefly and occasionally I wanted more information, for example concerning Baldwin’s scoliosis. Race, sexuality and love are the central components of this book. Baldwin was sexually active. He spent his life searching for love, honest communication and true commitment, between individuals and between races. For me, excessive use of a term ultimately leads to loss of its significance. Baldwin spoke of love so often and in so many situations and in so many ways, that for me it began to be washed of its value. This is in no way a complaint of the book; I am simply noting the effect this had on me. As an older man, Baldwin remarked, "It took so much time to learn so little." This struck home to me. His constant effort and battle to dig down deep to a person’s innermost feelings and thoughts, his introspection, fascinated me. He saw the femininity in men as well as the white in Blacks and the black in Whites. I like his search for what binds all of us together - Blacks and Whites, men and women, young and old. Baldwin's words are eloquent, intimate and lay bare his soul. His passion is felt. In this book we meet many of Baldwin’s contemporaries, authors and artists many of us have read about: Maya Angelou , Toni Morrison , Amiri Baraka , Malcolm X , Richard Wright , Ralph Ellison , Jack Kerouac , Martin Luther King Jr. and Beauford Delaney. I am naming but a few. Baldwin highly appreciated Henry James ’s writing. The audiobook is narrated by James Patrick Cronin. I think his voice wonderfully reflected Baldwin’s voice. There is an intimacy to it that reflects the intimacy in Baldwin’s character. It was always clear and easy to follow, but the French pronunciation was off. There are many French words since Baldwin spent so much time there. Such an interesting person – born in Harlem, so American, and yet not American too. He lived many years as an expatriate. Now I am going off on a tangent, so I will stop here. This is a good book, and it is worth reading. If you have read all of his writings you will probably appreciate it even more than I did.
