So, this has not aged well I think. First off, it’s set in the antebellum south which … on the other hand, interesting change of pace for a Regency. On the other hand, HERO IS ACTUAL PLANTATION OWNER. Don’t get me wrong, he’s One Of The Good Ones who has freed all the slaves and the slaves are so grateful they’ve stuck around anyway. I think it is implied he’s paying them now, which is nice? But also ignores the major economic reality of plantations, which is that they’re incredibly labour intensive, to the point of being non-sustainable unless you force some people you’ve kidnapped to do the work for free. Anyway, the deal here is that Josephine and Juliette are notably similar-looking cousins who fled France following Napoleon’s defeat. From there, Josephine married a rich planation owner, and Juliette ended up all impoverished and shit. Then Josephine reappears in Juliet’s life and wants them to play life-swapsies for a while so … and I am absolutely not shitting you here … she can buy a ship and hire a crew to launch a rescue mission to Elba in order to free Napoleon. The only complication here, apart from the fact it’s an entirely batshit plan, is Josephine is married and blatantly evil. But Juliet doesn’t have choice except to take up the mantle of Josephine’s life, where it quickly becomes apparent that she is awful, everybody hates her, her relationship with her husband has gone to the dogs, she is extremely materialistic, and also she’s banging anything that moves. This leads to a duel in which the husband is shot and a long sequence in which Juliet has to nurse him back to health. It’s a bit weird because while the husband (I’m sorry he’s so bland I can’t even remember his name – I think it might be Hyde? Hyde Something Orother) has the cool grey eyes and duel-fighting tendencies of a romantic hero … he’s so, like, completely absent. I have no idea what Juliet fell in love with or why. Like, he’s meant to be all ethical and bookish and stuff (and it does come out later that he recognised Juliet wasn’t Josephine instantly, which put some weight behind his much-vaunted smarts) but I just found him the blahest of the blah. And Juliet was, well, she was fine? But most of the book her internal monologue goes: I was about to say this very normal human thing but then I remembered I was supposed to be Josephine. I gave a tinkling laugh. “La, I can’t imagine anything so tedious.” Also if I’d been playing a drinking game where I had to take a shot every time someone said “I cry pardon” or “you look fagged” I’d be an alcoholic by now. The plot resolves itself when it turns out Josephine is already married to a dashing French dude who was captured by the Russians and believe to be dead, but then is not dead after all. So it’s decided that they’ll run off together and Juliet will just, like, be Josephine for the rest of her life. Which is pretty weird, but whatever. What really pushed me into the Absolutely Not Okay category is that there’s a scene where Josephine is being mean (because she’s blatantly evil) and her French dude slaps her and is like, enough from you. And then he’s all like, I can see you haven’t been keeping her in line. And well… So yes. Juliet lives happily ever after pretending to be someone else with one of the most boring men to ever grace a fictional page and Josephine is dispatched to Europe with a spousal abuser. Show more
