158.1 MAL 2002 PLAYER 158.1 MAL 2002 First published in 1960 by Dr. Maltz, who is the first researcher of self-image study. Dr. Maltz said the purpose of all psychotherapy is to build the self-esteem, which I totally agree. Main point of this book 1. important of self-image. 2. truly be yourself with its own limits and errors and wonders, use logical conscious mind to analyze unreasonable not truly yourself standard, establish truly to yourself goals. 3. invoke automatic success mechanism (ASM), avoid automatic failure mechanism (AFM), and our body will automatically achieve the goal, like guided torpedo. My summary: this book is all about how to build self-image that controls what you can and can not accomplish, self-image is slight different from positive thinking, obvious 2 high related. before I read this book, I have already figure out the important of self-image. The damage of emotional scar. To really change yourself, change your mind is the first step and it is the most hardest step. The idea of self-image as steersman, and "act as if " visualization are widely used in psychological treatment. You need another book How to Win Friends and Influence People to be social success. see more comment on that book. Methods to change your mind: 1. The Theater of Mind p 56, rehearsal practice p57 2. Act as if p64, p87 3. Practicing in the head, Patty Carlson: "How to Play Piano Program" video program p58 4. I Never want to Do These things Again List p90 5. Gaining Emotional Poise by Dr. James Gordon Gilkey, 1944, like hour glass on your desk, it comes to us in single file. p 113 6. intense conscious focus on a problem for a period of time, and then let it go (free grip of our conscious mind), let our unconscious mind work on its magic. Quotes from the book: 1. p1 Discovering your real self means the difference between freedom and compulsions of conformity. 1.p11 To really 'live,' that is to find life reasonably satisfying, you must have an adequate and realistic self-image that you can life with. You must find yourself acceptable to 'you.' You must have a wholesome self-esteem. You must have a self that you can trust and believe in. You must have a self that you are not ashamed to be, and one that you can feel to express creatively, rather than hide to cover up. You must know yourself-both your strengths and your weakness -and be honest with yourself concerning both. Your self-image must be a reasonable approximation of "you", being neither more nor less than you. When this self-image is intact and secure, you feel good. When it is threatened, you feel anxious and insecure. When it is adequate and one that you can be wholesomely proud of, you feel self-confident. You feel free to be yourself and to express yourself. You function at your optimum. When self-image is an object of shame, you attempt to hide it rather than express it. Creative expressions blocked. You become hostile and hard to get along with. 2.p27,83 , Your as creator of your own life experience = Rational Thinking leads to (1) Conscious mind decision + (2) Imagination communications Goal/Target to (3) Self-Image = (4) "Work Order" Instruction to Servo-mechanism. 2. Human beings always act and feel and perform in accordance with what they imagine to be true about themselves and their environment. 3. p50 You act and feel not according to what things are really like, but according to the image your mind holds of what they like. Your have certain mental image of yourself, your world, and the people around you, and you behave as though these image was the truth, the reality, rather than the things they represent. 4. p64-66 truth of yourself : is not to create a fictitious self that is all-powerful, arrogant, egoistic, all-important. Superiority complex is same as inferiority, superior self is a coverup, to hide from deep-down feeling of inferiority and insecurity. truth of yourself is a religion, The Fundamentalists is to "glorify God", Humanists is to "express himself fully". Liberating individuals from their own inner, mental, often unconscious self-sabotage, and the corollary premise of individuals being intended (if not engineered) to succeed, not fail. 5. 4 levels of learning 1. unconscious incompetence 2. conscious incompetence 3. conscious competence 4. unconscious competence 6. The essence of psycho-cybernetics is the accurate, calm, and ultimately automatic separation of fact from fiction, fact from opinion, actual circumstance from magnified obstacle, so that our actions and reactions are solidly based on truth, not our own or others' opinions. p123 7. p125 The picture of failure (FAILURE: acronym) Frustration, hopelessness, futility Aggressiveness (misdirected) Insecurity Loneliness (lack of "oneness") Uncertainty Resentment Emptiness 8. p195-197 Forgiveness is not a weapon , either make us "good", or in a superior position, or win out over our enemy. or glib "Don't merely try to 'get even'- forgive your enemy and you 'get ahead' of him, are common fallacies regarding forgiveness. ...True forgiveness comes only when we are able to see, and emotionally accept, that there is and was nothing for us to forgive... This is, what therapeutic forgiveness is, and that it is the only type of forgiveness that really work, no strings attached. 9. p213 .Poise: 沉着自信: is the deliberate shunting aside of all fears arising from new and uncontrolled circumstances 10. p230 calm mind, calm body; calm body, calm mind (or tension will make muscle stiff will harm body health) 11. p245 To perform well in a crisis, we need to (1) learn certain skills under conditions where we ill not be over motivated; we need to practice without practice (2) We need to learn to react to crisis with an aggressive, rather than a defensive, attitude, to response to the challenge in the situation rather than to the menace, to keep our positive goal in mind. (3) We need to learn to evaluate so-called "crisis" situations in their true perspective, to avoid making mountains out of molehills.. p246 If the animal is over motivated, the cognitive map is narrow and restricted, it learns just one way to solve problem. Otherwise, it is broad and general... Practice without pressure and you will learn more efficiently and be able to perform better in a crisis situation. p291 "We age, not by years, but by events and our emotional reactions to them. " Said Dr. by Arnold A. Hutschnecker Chapters 1. The Self-Image: Your Key to Living Without Limits 2. How to Awaken the Automatic Success Mechanism Within You 3. Imagination — The Ignition Key to Your Automatic Success Mechanism 4. How to De-Hypnotize Yourself from False Beliefs 5. How to Succeed with the Power of Rational Thinking 6. How to Relax and Let Your Automatic Success Mechanism Work for You 7. You Can Acquire the Habit of Happiness 8. Ingredients of the “Success-type” Personality and How to Acquire Them 9. How to Avoid Accidentally Activating Your Automatic Failure Mechanism 10.How to Remove Emotional Scars and Give Yourself an Emotional Face Lift 11. How to Unlock Your Real Personality 12. Do-It-Yourself Tranquilizers that Bring Peace of Mind 13. How to Turn a Crisis into a Creative Opportunity 14. How to Get and Keep “That Winning Feeling” 15. More Years of Life and More Life in Your Years 16. True Stories of Lives Changed Using Psycho-Cybernetics Mental training exercise. p41, p66, p81, p99, ... each chapter has a mental exercise. Terms: 1. p19 limbic memory: controlled by 3 factors, authoritative source; intensity; repetition. 2. Cybernetics: Geek word meaning: the steersman. 3. Purpose tremor p250 4. Crisis: A Greek word, mean literally decisiveness, or point of decision. books I think it is interesting to read: Battling the Inner Dummy: The Craziness of Apparently Normal People by David L. Weiner Think and Grow Rich by Napoleon Hill (classic reading) Anatomy of an Illness: As Perceived by the Patient by Norman Cousins Not so interesting: The Mental Athlete: Inner Training for Peak Performance by Kay Porter (very interesting: relieving pain and accelerating recovery) Revolution from Within: A Book of Self-Esteem by Gloria Steinem You're Working Too Hard To Make The Sale!: More Than 100 Insider Tools To Sell Faster And Easier by William T. Brooks Self-Consistency: A Theory of Personality by Prescott Lecky How to Have Confidence and Power in Dealing with People by Les Giblin Zig Ziglar's Secrets of Closing the Sale by Zig Ziglar Profiles of Power and Success by Gene N. Landrum (argue nurture is the basis for success) Break Out of the Box: A New Leadership Model for High Personal Achievement by Mike Vance Mind Over Golf: How to Use Your Head to Lower Your Score by Richard H. Coop Do One Thing Different: Ten Simple Ways to Change Your Life by Bill O'Hanlon Zero-Resistance Selling: Achieve Extraordinary Sales Results Using World Renowned techqs Psycho Cybernetic by Maxwell Maltz The Mental Athlete: Inner Training for Peak Performance by Kay Porter The Stress of Life by Hans Selye The Will To Live by Arnold A. Hutschnecker
