a cute above the average BSC book, probably because there's not much babysitting involved. in the first chapter, stacey is sitting for henry & grace walker, two little kids that live in her NYC apartment building. she's a little distracted, thinking about how her parents haven't been getting along lately. sure enough, when she goes back to her floor, she can hear her parents screaming at each other from the elevator. they are mostly arguing about money. apparently mrs. mcgill dropped over $11,000 on jewelry at tiffany (NOT "tiffany's," like it says in the book--you'd think stacey would know this). & that seriously is fucking insane. that is like 60% of my annual income. mrs. mcgill says she shops because she's bored because mr. mcgill is working all the time. then...get a job? or go be a museum docent or something? jesus eff. stacey runs off crying to laine's building (the dakota). laine doesn't know what to say & suggests stacey call the BSC. as soon as she does it, she kind of regrets letting the BSC in on her personal problems, even though dawn tries to be helpful. stacey just asks everyone about their own lives & goes home, & that's when her parents drop the bomb: they're getting divorced. stacey is pissed. she calls their marriage counselor a "divorce counselor" (zing!) & wants to hide in her room, but she has to eat because of her diabetes. she ignores her parents as much as she can though. when she gets home from the school the next day, they make her sit down & talk to them. they've both decided to leave their current apartment, & stacey will be able to choose who to live with. mrs. mcgill says she might want to move back to stoneybrook. this leaves stacey with a difficult decision: she loves new york, but stoneybrook would mean re-joining the babysitters club. & no matter who she chooses, one of her parents will be hurt. too bad the big reveal is given away in the book title. mr. mcgill finds a place for himself on the upper east side, & mrs. mcgill finds a cute house near the pikes in stoneybrook. stacey writes up a pros & cons list, & it clearly favors moving back to stoneybrook. so she does, even though it's hard. i heard that this book happened because stacey was the fan favorite babysitter & people were outraged when she was written out of the series in book #13. her return to stoneybrook does seem kind of abrupt. as an adult, i appreciate stacey books so much more than i did as a child. when i was younger, i found stacey kind of vapid & snobby, but now i think she's smart & funny (in the books she narrates--the other babysitters don't always do her justice). also, as an adult, i have adopted mrs. mcgill's catchphrase. whenever my boyfriend leaves for school, i always say, "have fun & be careful!" sometimes i add, "learn a lot!" from my own mom.
