Why Dick’s Stories Are So Good The fifth and last volume of Philip K. Dick’s collected short stories covers his literary output from the years 1963 to 1981, and I have to admit that I am glad to have read Volume 5 before Volume 4 because among the later stories by PKD there were some that I did not really particularly enjoy, and so I can round off my journey through his shorter fiction with more pleasurable, “traditionally Dickian” tales. Readers of this volume should be aware of the fact that in the late 70s and early 80s, as a result of the author’s personal experiences, Dick’s writing became somewhat gnostic and esoteric, which is also reflected in some of the short stories, namely The Eye of the Sybil or The Day Mr. Computer Fell Out of Its Tree , stories that did not manage to capture my interest. On the other hand, however, there are tales like I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon and Faith of Our Fathers , which also fall into the “esoterics” category but which nonetheless fascinate with the idea they have got at their core, an idea that is highly ambivalent and enigmatic in the latter case, and full of psychological implications in the first. We might count these two stories among the finest fiction PKD has ever written. Talking about ideas, I must say that in the course of my reading Dick’s short stories – and also some of his novels – it is becoming clearer and clearer to me that this man was a magic fountain of intriguing ideas and that it is probably this aspect that makes his fiction so fascinating. I am always reminded of this when I write a review on an individual short story: I sit down and start mentally interacting with the text, and as I am writing, the stories and the respective quotations that stuck with me whilst I was reading begin to interact with my own mind, and, without wanting to sound grandiloquent, I have the impression as though I were in a conversation with the story itself, at the end of which conversation my mind is suddenly filled with more understanding of the world around me. I am not saying that what I am reading out of his stories is exactly what Dick wrote into them, but then this was probably not what the author intended, anyway. Instead, these stories serve their purpose of inciting a reader’s imagination as well as his critical sense. Dick put the conditio humana into science fiction like hardly any other representative of this often wrongly spurned genre did, and this is probably why his stories age so well although some of the author’s attitudes – I am thinking of his sad misogyny in the first place, but also of his latter-life inclination towards the esoteric – most certainly do not. Dick said himself, in an “Author’s Afterthought” to a collection of his “best” short stories: ”The advantage of the story over the novel is that in the story you catch the protagonist at the climax of his life, but in the novel you’ve got to follow him from the day he was born to the day he dies (or nearly so). Open any novel at random and usually what is happening is either dull or unimportant. The only way to redeem this is through style. It is not what happened built how it is told. Pretty soon the professional novelist acquires the skill of describing everything with style, and content vanishes. In a story, though, you can’t get away with this. Something important has to happen. I think this is why gifted professional fiction writers wind up writing novels. Once their style is perfected, they have it made. Virginia Woolf, for instance. wound up writing about nothing at all. In these stories, though, I remember that in every case before I sat down to write, I had to have an idea. There had to be some real concept: an actual thing from which the story was guilt. It must always be possible to say ‘Did you read the story about –“ and then capsulize what it was about.” Now, I would not go so far as to say that novels are usually more about style than about content, but one thing is certainly clear, namely that Dick’s short stories are pulsating with content, with ideas that yearn to enter into a conversation with their readers. Otherwise, I would have found it rather difficult to write so much about tales that are rather short, and I am afraid that in numerous cases I could easily have written more. Neither would I agree with Dick that he did not develop style in these stories – as he seems to imply – because if you take a look at, for instance Ratavaara’s Case , you will find that he plays with different points of view and attaches a different tone of writing to each of them, something that he also does in a novel like The Man in the High Castle . If there is one weakness in Dick’s writing, I’d identify it as his tendency to underdevelop his characters, but that’s about it. And maybe, one could also say that sometimes, the plot in his novels is all too obviously a stage on which to parade his ideas, and here we are again at our starting point – Dick’s status as a magic fountain of ideas!
