Sincere, succinct, and laconic so its no surprise that this is one of the most translated texts. Tao Te Ching is an ‘every person’ book because everyone who reads it will take something from it, and everyone will resonate with at least one of the beautiful, reflective phrases within the book. Take the phrase “If you aren’t free of yourself, how will you ever become yourself.” – how true and if you think about it, this couldn’t be expressed any better. I also loved those texts that almost seemed like contradictions of themselves, and are so open to interpretation, such as “Its impossible to govern once you’ve filled people with knowing. Use knowing to govern and you plunder the nation, But use not-knowing to govern and you enrich a nation.” Initially I was resolute in disagreeing with this comment until I reflected on it, and yes of course it is my interpretation of what it means, but the essence of this is stated in the last sentence, and what might be needed to govern a nation. We all know its many things!!!! When I read such beautiful texts arising from this nation, I often find it difficult to reconcile this wisdom that is so clearly woven into the fabric of society and within its literature and then take on board the threats and rhetoric against its neighbours. Perhaps it’s time for leaders to reflect on one of the most credited scholars who demonstrates so much wisdom…. “You may govern the nation through principle, and lead armies to victory through craft, But you win all beneath heaven through indifference.” and for me ‘tolerance’. The short and singular comments, ideas, poetic reflections, inspirational quotes, and ideologies are very effective but from a reading experience, it felt too much to read in one go because the book doesn’t flow, and the messages were very disparate. This felt like a bit of a brain dump but then that’s how the book was constructed. I knew this going into it, but it still made the reading experience feel a little disjointed at times and the structure disorganised. Had they been combined by theme, message, or teaching then the actual reading experience would have felt better for me personally. Who am I to complain about such an ancient and reflective book of life and meaning. You cannot take away from the messages themselves, especially in ‘Te Ching’ and who wouldn’t want to read the wisdom of someone who puts ‘self’, universe, integrity, energy, heaven, consciousness, and meditation at the heart of their teachings. Some memorable quotes: “To know people is wisdom but to know yourself is enlightenment. To master people takes force, but to master yourself takes strength. To know contentment is wealth, and to live with strength resolve”. “The more you do for others, the more plenty is yours, And the more you give to others the more abundance is yours.”
