― “There was a saying among homesteaders in Wyoming: ‘If summer falls on a weekend, let’s have a picnic.’” ― John McPhee, Rising from the Plains Author John McPhee’s work Rising from the Plains almost defies categorization. While it clearly fits into the broad category of non-fiction, McPhee combines biography and geology to create a fascinating portrait of how the land on which America sits was formed. Rising from the Plains is part of his five-book series on geology and geologists in McPhee’s Pulitzer Prize-winning collection Annals of the Former World . McPhee is the Ferris Professor of Journalism at Princeton University. When this book showed up on my Goodreads feed, I became interested because of my fascination with Wyoming and its majestic natural beauty. I have been fortunate to spend 17 amazing days on two separate trips exploring the state. While Wyoming is known as the home of Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks, the state also features rolling plains and charming towns. My wife and I absolutely loved Jackson Hole. Starting at 6,311 feet of elevation, the landscape of Jackson Hole is rich with wildlife and pristine lakes. Soaring over Jackson Hole, the towering peaks of the Teton Range rise as high as 7,000 feet above the valley floor, offering majestic alpine vistas. Our hikes into the Tetons took us to altitudes above 9,000 feet, where we occasionally encountered as much as three feet of snow on the ground in mid-June. ― “Wyoming, in its one-thirty-seventh of the United States, contains a disproportionate percentage of American geology.” ― John McPhee, Rising from the Plains The central figure of the book is David Love, field geologist and specialist in Rocky Mountain geology who worked for the United States Geological Survey. McPhee first introduces the reader to David’s mother, Ethel Waxham. Waxham graduated from Wellesley College, where she studied classical literature, Greek, French, German and Latin, earning one of Wellesley’s first Phi Beta Kappa keys. She came to Wyoming as a single woman in 1905 to teach at a country school. She met a rancher named John Love; they were married in 1910. In addition to her chores around their isolated ranch, she taught her children. Clearly, she taught them well. Her son David would earn a bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Wyoming and his Ph.D. in geology from Yale University. The reader not only learns about the geology of Wyoming, they learn about the pioneers of the West. These bold, independent and curious spirits traveled to the west of North America with the aspiration to settle and develop the unexplored territories. What sets McPhee’s work apart from other works of nonfiction is his prose. He is a master of the mode variously referred to as creative nonfiction, literary nonfiction, or narrative journalism. McPhee demonstrates that, even when handling complex material, good prose need never be ordinary. His portrait of Love and his family is written with affection. ― “On the two sides of this fault, blocks of country swing on distant hinges like a facing pair of trapdoors—one rising, one sagging. The rising side is the rock of the nascent Tetons, carrying upward on its back the stratified deposits of half a billion years. One after another, erosion shucks them off. Even more rapidly, the east side falls—into a growing void. Magma, in motion below, is continually being drawn toward volcanoes, vents, and fissures in the north. Just as magma moving under Idaho is causing land to collapse and form the Snake River Plain, magma drawn north from this place is increasing the vacuity of Jackson Hole.” ― John McPhee, Rising from the Plains Somehow, the author enables the unsuspecting reader to become interested in the earth sciences. To get his material for the book, the author traveled around Wyoming in David Love’s Ford Bronco, stopping now and then to sleep under the stars. We learn that, in every corner of every mountain range and basin in Wyoming, there is a fascinating geological story recorded in the rocks. The reader discovers the important role that geology plays in mineral-rich Wyoming’s economy. McPhee takes the reader all the way back into the Paleozoic era and Precambrian time. Later in the book, he writes a fascinating account about some of the enigmas in geology. Why are there volcanoes where there are no breaks in the earth’s mantle? How did the western US, which had been a seabed at one time, become elevated? ― “What could explain Bermuda—a mountainous summit seventeen thousand six hundred and fifty-nine feet above the Hatteras Abyssal Plain? What created the Marshall Islands, the Gilbert Islands, the Line Islands, the Tuamotu Archipelago—where corals veneer the peaks of twenty-thousand-foot mountains that tend to run in chains? Like Yellowstone, like Bermuda, like Hawaii, like Mt. Cameroon, they lie great distances from the nearest intersection of plates.” ― John McPhee, Rising from the Plains In 1999, the American Geological Institute awarded David Love its first Legendary Geoscientist Award, which recognizes a geoscientist who has produced scientific achievements and service to the earth sciences that have lasting, historic value. Rising from the Plains is a fascinating account of Love’s work and the geology of Wyoming. Now that I am aware of the author, I will be sure to read more of McPhee’s works.
