In an interesting New Yorker piece, marking the bicentenary of Trollope’s birth in 2015, Adam Gopnik describes him as not a “sentence-by-sentence writer” or a “scene-by-scene writer,” but rather a “character-by-character writer.” I found that helpful as I read Can You Forgive Her? , which Trollope published around his half-century, in 1864-65. At the sentence-by-sentence level, Trollope’s writing is no more than workaday. His words do not spring off the page or fall into glowing cadences; and I found that off-putting at first, being something of a “sentence-by-sentence” reader myself. The novel does have a slow-burn, incremental power, though; so that, from around half-way through, I was thoroughly gripped by it. I think it’s true that this power derives from the characterization, which is notably subtle and credible and well observed. CYFH is a very unified and well-structured novel (not a given for Trollope, as I gather from the introduction to my edition.) The dilemma of the heroine, Alice Vavasor—the “her” whom we are being asked to forgive in the title—is reflected in that of two other female figures in the novel, Lady Glencora Palliser and Alice’s aunt, Arabella Greenow. The three are, respectively, unmarried girl, married woman, and widow; and the three plots are carefully matched, as well, in terms of tone and register. Alice’s is potentially tragic; “Aunt Greenow”’s is comic; and Glencora’s wavers interestingly between the two. All these women find themselves torn between two competing suitors (or a husband and a potential lover in the case of Glencora); and the relation between the male rivals is plotted in all three cases on some kind of “sense vs sensibility” or “head vs heart” spectrum. The rivals in Alice’s case are a highly eligible Cambridgeshire country gentleman, John Grey, and her rakish and impecunious cousin, George Vavasor. Glencora’s two rivals are her stiff, politically obsessed husband, Plantagent Palliser, and her handsome, penniless old flame, Burgo Fitzgerald. Mrs Greenow’s “loves,” which act as a parodic counterpoint throughout, are smug Norfolk farmer Mr Cheesacre and debt-ridden ne’er-do-well Captain Bellfield. This may all sound very schematic, but Trollope sets up these binaries meticulously in the first half of the novel only to break them down in the second (at least in the case of the two “serious” plots.) On the evidence of this novel, Trollope seems as suspicious as Jane Austen of romanticism and the forms of self-delusion it can breed. He uses geography ingeniously in pursuit of this theme. At several points in the novel, we are led into landscapes that are clichés of the romantic imaginary: a ruined medieval priory by moonlight; the wild moors of Cumbria; a balcony overlooking the Rhine. True to the tradition of pathetic fallacy, these sentimental spaces tend to be associated with moments of passion and reckless decisions, with the urge to overthrow the rational and calculating and socially expected; yet the course of the novel lead us to question the association of strong feeling with truth on which much romantic cliché depends. Around half-way through the novel, summing up her reasons for preferring the dashing spendthrift Captain Bellfield to the solid, and stolid, Mr Cheeseacre, Mrs Greenow invokes the importance of “the rocks and the valleys” in matrimonial choices, for those with the financial freedom to choose. Her nieces, understandably, find this phrase hilarious as shorthand for romance and sexual attraction; yet Trollope is quite serious in his investigation of the ways in which the human desire for “the rocks and the valleys” may be accommodated within a society in which marriages are largely conceived of as business transactions. This isn’t by any means a perfect novel. The tension slackens off towards the ending (I gather from the introduction that this is something of a problem with Trollope generally.) Worse, Trollope’s real-life love of fox hunting led him to include a full chapter of blow-by-blow hunt narrative at one point that I can only compare in its stultifying tedium to Paul Auster’s descriptions of baseball games in 4 3 2 1 . True, the chapter serves to introduce the character of Burgo Fitzgerald, but that doesn't seem any real excuse. A piece of advice to anyone thinking of reading this: don't buy the ebook Penguin Classics edition! It has the air of having been digitized by an illiterate drunk. There are errors on almost every page, some of which merely make you laugh ("'She is Mr cousin,'" said Alice"; "Tray for him tonight") but others of which render the text genuinely unintelligible. "I'll bring her to you in my room, if you bin it" quite defeated me, as did "unless it was to her tire woman." Trollope may not be a sentence-to-sentence writer, but he deserves a little better than this.
