Set in 1901 in a small town near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, protagonist Dr. Jon Ferrier has been acquitted of the murder of his wife but has been convicted in the “court of public opinion.” Her death involved a botched abortion. Due to the continued gossip, innuendo, and lies being spread about him, he has decided to sell his practice and move away. Dr. Robert Morgan has bought the practice and is accompanying Dr. Ferrier on his rounds to become acquainted with the patients. The plot revolves around the resolution to the death of Dr. Ferrier’s young wife, Mavis, as well as a new series of accusations against him. The primary strength of this novel lies in the characterization. The author develops the core ensemble of main characters in depth. Jon is a disillusioned idealist. He is cynical, caustic, angry, outspoken, and, at times, violent, but treats his truly ill patients with the utmost kindness, generosity, and compassion. He is not particularly likeable. Jon’s brother, Harald, is an artist that values materialism and leads a life of conflict avoidance. When Robert arrives, he is naïve and trusting, believing the best of people, but he gradually becomes aware of the existence of powerful people with nefarious plans. Jenny is an object of affection for all three men. She has been the topic of gossip regarding her virtue. Jon and Harald’s mother, Marjorie, is a keeper of a secrets and is trying to protect both sons. The supporting characters are provided enough depth to understand their motives. Some are motivated by money and power; others by honor and justice. These people seem complex and true-to-life. The narrative transports the reader to the early twentieth century through vivid descriptions of the architecture, interior design, and fashions of the era. Some of these descriptive passages are rather lengthy. The storyline is particularly effective in showing the challenges to those in the medical profession during a time of significant change, highlighting the difficulties in transitioning from traditional to scientific methods in the medical profession. The traditional doctors did not wash their hands between patients, or when delivering babies, and many people died of infection. This is a time when asepsis was becoming the norm but had not yet been adopted by all medical professionals. The author explores the nature of humankind, good and evil, and whether a person is capable of significant change. It shows the power of words to injure people. Testimony of Two Men uses the evolution of modern medicine as a backdrop for a story about human failings, disillusionment, faith, power, desire, jealousy, love, and betrayal. It is not a traditional romance or mystery, but contains elements of each. It was published in 1968, but the themes are timeless.
