I introduced myself to this book through my subscription from Rebel Women Lit, an open online and in-person book club based in Jamaica. They send me three random classic Caribbean books a month for five months, and I was excited to have a small gift for myself every few weeks. This book was a decent start to this collection, set in Guyana in the 1970s in which we follow Lula, our child narrator, through a portion of her coming of age experience. It isn’t the worst book, but not my favorite I ever read. I think the disconnect came from the book focusing more on collecting observations from a child’s viewpoint rather than building up a specific plotline that would significantly impact the characters’ lives. If I read this in a classroom setting, I would more appreciate it, since I never read these kinds of books for my classes. Learning about the Burnham regime, the patriarchy, and sexuality from a Guyanese point of view provides a rich foundation for discussion lacking in some undergraduate academic spheres. Although, I do want to point out opportunities for further discussion if you decide to read the book. I particularly loved a short part in the middle of the book, where we talk about Aunt Ruth, the Obeah lady. I wish we talked about her more as she seemed to have one of the most exciting plot lines. Still, the story leaves her as a point of interest just as she confronted the dictator Burnham himself (I was trembling for her) and prepared a baby who had an untimely death for her funeral. For me, that would have been a more interesting story because the reader would have had more of an opportunity to see how Obeah people become such an integral part of community development. But alas, we had to return to Lula’s sexual awakening, which was interesting, but not the most pressing topic for me. I need to investigate if other fictional Caribbean books focus on the lives of people who do Obeah work. The reason I give this review is not that this is a bad book, the writing, the imagery on Tamarind Grove, and the descriptions of characters were all far above the level of writing I have seen in many other books. However, at this moment I am a little tired of coming of age stories. From the controversy about Cuties, to Netflix just adding “Girlfriends,” media outlets have been bombarding me with so many traumatizing narratives about women of color growing up, all in the midst of me just graduating college over Zoom a few months ago. It can be tiring to be confronted with all these anxiety-filled stories about women of color going through hardship. For example, in the book, we end with one mother ripping off her daughter’s underwear when confronted about the daughter being with a man. When can women of color have a moment of peace in these stories that isn’t abruptly cut off by some traumatizing event? I could say that this is just art reflecting reality, but I could also say that art doesn’t always have to be so heavy, maybe it can provide just a short moment of release.
