Sometimes I know why I am a reader and not a writer Because sometimes it is hard to know what to say I don’t know what to say about this book And I fall into my habit of cajoling ill formed emotions, ideas, understanding, and typing something. Good? Great? Definitely a different kind of book. The first 60 pages a setup involving academics, like many, many, other writers who were also teachers. Then the bulk of the book is a medieval/reformation era heroic/fantasy tale. Anyway, I found the intro captivating but he doesn’t come back to it so we never learn what happens to those earlier characters. But the “Freddy’s Book” section is the adventure story from a much earlier age where the devil is whispering in everybody’s ear just to cause chaos. Hmmmm, I thought this was a bit of an escapist read, but it also fits, maybe, into our age of Trump, with people falling in love with bad ideas ,and chaos the most reliable result of those ideas. But enough of that. This has such a distinctive feel, I could imagine if it rubbed you the wrong way you could dislike it. But for me it was wonderful. I am not sure “what it meant” or even if it made “sense”, although even in some of the quirky and maybe illogical plot points, somehow it still seems right. The hero Lars is charged by the King to kill the devil, who helped to make him king (but now works against him) and they have this exchange… [Lars say about the devil]..."Surely he is here," he said Gustav’s look became sharper. “In me you mean? Speak plainly, old friend and kinsman!” Around the steeple of the church, sparrows flew crazily, unwilling to rest. Lars-Goren pointed up at them. “in the birds – in you – in the cobblestones under our feet perhaps. Who knows where the devil ends and the rest begins?” Pg 194 So he is off to kill the devil, and the devil may be part of us…? Sure. The cynical bishop is a foil for the good hearted Lars but I think he may also be a stand in for the author. Here him thinking about writing, and from some Googling I think this may tie into John Gardner’s opinions about writing moral fiction The attempt to write had come to nothing, of course. It was not that fact that he brooded on now, but the odd fact that he had wanted to write at all, that somehow, below reason and contrary to it, the childish impulse to tell the truth was still alive in him, that indeed he still believed, in some back part of his brain, that there existed some truth to tell. Pg 170 There is a side story about the Laplanders and their wisdom born from extreme simplicity required to survive. In the endless snowfall, one could not tell which of them were men, which of them were women, which of them reindeer. The Lapps called their reindeer “the people of six eyes.” It was reference to their queer alertness, their attunement with the wind and snow. Pg. 237 I just thought it was neat.
