I’ve always heard all the accounts of those famous corporate behemoths that have been around forever, and that have profited from the Holocaust—companies like BMW, Kodak, IG Farben/Bayer, and our own American company, Ford. To this day, there are still many people who boycott those companies for their part in what is probably the most heinous chapter in the history of humanity. One company, though, that I’ve never associated with that list was IBM. Reading this book was, therefore, quite the eye-opener. From beginning to end, the meticulously detailed and documented account of IBM’s greedy involvement in the war (sometimes a bit too detailed and even at times slightly repetitious), and IBM's eager contribution to the Nazi Wehrmacht, is astounding. The lengths that IBM had to go to in order to keep the Nazi machine well-oiled and their own pockets well-lined was truly despicable—even manipulating the U.S. government at various steps along the way! (And I am still reeling from the revelation that IBM actually had technicians *in the concentration camps* to service the equipment!) It begs the hypothetical question of what would have happened had IBM not been able to get away with what they did? How far would Hitler have been able to advance—both in military conquest and in mass murder—had he not had IBM’s technology at their disposal? While I’m sure Hitler would still have done quite a lot of damage, this book really shows IBM as the perfect catalyst that Hitler needed. Without this technology, Jews could not have been identified nearly as thoroughly, could not have been rounded up nearly as efficiently, and could not have been logistically shuttled through the camp system to their deaths nearly as quickly. The silence resulting from IBM's determined efforts to cover up this ugly stain on their history speaks volumes, loudly and clearly. And the fact that Edwin Black was still able to produce such a damning accumulation of evidence despite IBM's lack of cooperation is a testament to Black’s dedication and thoroughness.
