There are no explicit genre signifiers on the cover—the phrase "science fiction" does not appear at all, not even in its abbreviated form. Even so, the attentive reader will see several telltale signs that Full Spectrum 3 is an SF anthology. That cover painting, for example, wouldn't appear on a work of mimetic fiction. The quote on the front cover is from the long-running SF review magazine Locus . And the contributors' list on the back is chock-full of genre names, some of whom are even more well-known today than when this anthology was published back in 1991. I first read Full Spectrum 3 when it was brand-new, almost 30 years ago now. That's a long time, long enough that I was able—almost—to reread it with fresh eyes. Many of these stories have become dated in the meantime, either by changes in technology or in society—but fewer than I would have thought. That's probably because most of them are something other than "hard" science fiction—their authors aren't even trying to engage in rigorous extrapolation of current technological trends. In his Introduction, editor Lou Aronica calls these stories "fantastic fiction," a label which does seem more accurate to me. I would also tend to credit the balance of the editorial team, Amy Stout and Betsy Mitchell , for including a higher-than-usual proportion of women (at least for typical anthologies of the time) among the contributors. The first three stories have similar tones—they're all told in a kind of homespun voice, from a rural perspective far from the centers of science and innovation which must still exist although they're not the focus. James Morrow 's "Daughter Earth" gives us a farm couple who have a most unusual baby. A light-hearted story with a serious point that's only become more pertinent in the intervening decades. "Dogstar Man," by Nancy Willard , features an eccentric cheesemaker in rural Wisconsin who wants only the best for his beloved team of sled dogs. "The secret of cheese is patience," he said. "Cheese has taught me everything I know about life." —p.23 And Tony Daniel 's "Prism Tree" also concerns an old farmer, whose beloved land is soon to be inundated by a reservoir project. Hardly a fantasy concept, at least to begin with. This rural thread is broken with the very next story, though. "Desert Rain," by Pat Murphy and Mark L. Van Name , has no farms, or farmers, in it whatsoever—it's a powerful exploration of one artist's relationship with a nascent artificial intelligence (and of our ability to anthropomorphize even un intelligent systems). Marred only slightly by incorrect terminology (one use of "terrabytes") and dated references, the philosophical concerns that Murphy and Van Name's story raises remain relevant, if not even more pressing, today. "Precious Moments," by Kristine Kathryn Rusch , is about an interview with a ballerina who once danced for the Peróns in Argentina. Rusch's story has become dated politically—there are still Soviets, and the setting in a left-wing talk radio station seems much less believable these days, somehow—but observations like these remain knife-sharp: Sometimes I wished I was a conservative. They seemed to have only three lines of ideological bullshit instead of two hundred. —p.100 Peg Kerr 's "Lethe" takes us off-planet for the first time in this anthology, to Calypso, a world where death is managed a little more... gracefully, let's say, than in Matthew's residency at Los Angeles County General. A powerful and underrated work, reminiscent for me of Ursula K. Le Guin (who puts in her own appearance later in this anthology). Jack McDevitt 's "Lake Agassiz" dips again into that rural well shared by the first three stories. A farmer in North Dakota, far from any body of water that currently exists, digs up a long-buried sailboat that just happens to be in excellent condition... "Transfusion," by Joëlle Wintrebert is short, feverish, and surreal. Barbel Hachereau's frustratingly vague predicament leads her, and those around her, to some exigent choices. This vignette was translated from the French by Kim Stanley Robinson , about whom it is said in "About the Authors" (p.535) that "he is at work on a trilogy about the colonization of Mars." The brevity of the late Patricia Anthony 's SF bibliography (she stopped writing genre stories in the 1990s, and died in 2013) belies her impact on the field. "The Dark at the Corner of the Eye" turned out to be one of the best stories in Full Spectrum 3 , and its inexorable intensity would make that so even if individual lines like these weren't still sharply relevant: "You shouldn't leave a wallet unattended. This is a police station. There are all sorts of crooks here." After a perfectly timed comic pause, he added, "Some of them wear uniforms so you can spot them, but what about the others?" —p.171 "Tracking the Random Variable," by Marcos Donnelly , highlights the pitfalls of taking a statistical approach to human interactions. Ronald Barr thought he had Jessica all figured out ... Ted Chiang , whose name you may have heard once or twice of late, sets off a string of three mathematical apocalypses in a row with "Division by Zero." Then comes SF veteran Gregory Benford 's "Matter's End," a tale of appropriation both cultural and otherwise, which follows through on its title. "Yes, for a scientist certainty is built on deep layers of doubt." —p.240 And third, the promised Ursula K. Le Guin with "Newton's Sleep," which portrays a dystopian space ark in the making. After all, " {...} Earth was not a viable option." —p.252 After the apocalypses, though, we get a little breather—an uncharacteristically hopeful Norman Spinrad story called "The Helping Hand." Before Kevin J. Anderson became a toiler in others' vineyards, back when he had only two novels to his name, he explored the horror to be found in the "Fondest of Memories." "Loitering at Death's Door," by German author Wolfgang Jeschke (translated by Sally Schiller and Anne Calveley), is a similarly horrific story about memories that are somewhat less fond than those in Kevin Anderson's story. The two make a good pair. Stylized and compelling, Poul Anderson 's "Rokuro" was an interesting departure for this author, who was old-school even in 1991. "Police Actions," by Barry N. Malzberg , maintains relevance by means of its determined nonspecificity: That was the year before the year in which the gunfire and the huge lights winked and blazed, roared and stumbled, the year before that time when parties became hopeless and we were forced to consider the unavailing manner of all options. —p.342 Karen Joy Fowler does not disappoint with her stunning novelette "Black Glass," which is not just a Temperance tantrum but also a biographical fantasy about a resurrected Carry Nation , as seen through the eyes of a jaded DEA agent who may , inadvertently, have imbibed some substances he really shouldn't have... On the other hand, I'm afraid I found R.V. Branham 's "Chango Chingamadre, Dutchman, & Me" casually offensive from the title onward. It's a Beat jazz junky thing that I probably lapped up and spit back out, back in the day, but this one was probably my least-favorite story in Full Spectrum 3 , upon rereading. Michael Bishop 's "Apartheid, Superstrings, and Mordecai Thubana" was hard for me to reread as well, although for different reasons. It just goes on and on, an extended nightmare... but even though apartheid has ended, the themes Bishop explores remain relevant. "What we do," said Van Rhys coldly, "we do to protect." —p.446 Close to the end, we are treated to another rural fantasy: "Snow on Sugar Mountain," by Elizabeth Hand , a fable of lost boys and Native American shapeshifters that I'd especially recommend for Clifford Simak fans. Full Spectrum 3 concludes with "When the Rose is Dead" by David Zindell . This one's an odd combination, of details that wouldn't be out of place in our mundane reality, offset by unsettling worldbuilding, in which a doctor working for the state forms an inappropriate relationship with one of his most criminally-inclined patients... "And that was the diagnosis, that she was suffering from an illness the doctors call 'Desire for Utopia.'" —p.506 "Rose, your life has been so hard—aren't there some painful memories you'd rather not have?" —p.521 I can't say that Full Spectrum 3 is the best sf anthology I've read—it's not even the best I've read this year—but nevertheless this book stands out for me as a significant snapshot of its time, and I'm glad I had the chance to rediscover it after all these years. I would also like to thank The Internet Speculative Fiction Database for the Table of Contents data I used to write this review.
