Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy is not my type of book. I never read stuff like this. I don’t like contemporaries (unless there are vampires or witches in them) and I rarely read mysteries. I loved the movie though (I’m a big Gary Oldman fan) so I thought what the heck, I’ll read the book. After all, it’s not really a contemporary…at least not anymore. The action takes place during the early seventies. So here I am. First off, I have to say Le Carre writes with amazing detail. These guys aren’t like regular characters. They’re like real people with complex motives, their own dialect, and little nuances that are personal to them. I got to know them, slowly, intuitively, especially since Le Carre never tells you what you should think of them or explains them. He just lets the reader develop their own opinion. You get to know everybody though dialogue and body language -- little tidbits like how someone sits down on a child’s swing set. It’s excellent! That’s not to say it wasn’t disorienting though. At first I felt like I had started a new job. I'm meeting all these new people, there are new rules, and there’s a whole new work lingo I have to learn. I was a bit lost at first, trying to keep track of names and figure out what people were saying (especially since I’m not a Brit.) There are so many characters, and no one can be cataloged in a nice neat box. To my surprise though, this sense of confusion actually made me pay closer attention. I loved being just thrown in there. I do believe it hit me on a deeper level too since I dreamed about this book. :D Were the characters likable? Yes and no. I liked Smiley a lot, but I would hate to work with him. He’s too tight-lipped and ruthless. You’d never know where you’d stand with him. He’s also waaay too observant, looking for everyone’s weaknesses. It was great being inside his head though. You can tell he unnerves people. That’s why so many people take a certain glee in telling him his wife is sleeping with someone else. They want to needle him. The other characters were great too. Percy is a worm. Jim is tragic and compelling. I couldn’t stand Bill. I thought Ricky was a hoot, even though he’s an ass. As you can see, I definitely had an opinion about everybody. Of course, all these different motives and dynamics make the book seem strangely complicated, yet the story is simple. There’s a mole in the secret service which has made everyone paranoid, and George Smiley is trying to lure him out and trap him. There are a lot of mind games. This brings me to the part of the book though, which I think was lacking. There’s not much suspense. Maybe if I hadn’t seen the movie, I would have been more curious to find out who the mole was, but I don’t think that’s it. I think the lack of action and danger made this a somewhat dry read. I would have never finished it if I hadn’t seen the movie. The beginning is slow. And while yes there are conversations and confrontations that are dynamic and thrilling, not much happens. That’s why I knocked a star. On the whole though, I’m very much impressed. Le Carre is a great writer. I want to read Smiley’s People because I’ve heard it’s even better than this book. I’m curious to see how George traps Karla, and I’d love to spend some more time in Smiley’s astute and clever brain.
