“The Book of Black Magic And Of Pacts” (that’s full title from 1898; it was later reprinted in 1910 under the title “The Book of Ceremonial Magic”) – by Arthur Edward Waite. I (and many others I’m sure) know A.E. Waite’s name from the ubiquitous Rider-Waite-Smith Tarot deck. But I never read any of his substantial writing (beyond the small booklet that came with the cards – side note- I still intend to read the full book he wrote for that deck one day) … but anyway, this seemed like a good place to start with A.E. Waite, especially since I am trying to learn about the history and important literature of various schools of magic. “The Book of Black Magic” essentially compiles and compares several of the most influential Grimoires of antiquity (or pseudo-antiquity, as Waite often likes to point out). These include the ‘Grimorium Verum’ , ‘Grimoire of Honorius’ , ‘ Arbatel De Magia Veterum’ , a so-called ‘Forth’ Book of Occult Philosophy (falsely attributed to Henry Cornelius Agrippa), and of course, ‘The Key of Solomon The King’ and its complement the ‘Lemegeton’ or ‘Lesser Key of Solomon’. A.E. Waite was obviously an intelligent man, quite skilled in language (I believe he did a lot of this translation work himself) and amazingly enough, he even has a sense of humor at times amid such grim subject matter, but his writing style is JUST SO DRY. He writes such rambling, verbose sentences that I often had to re-read passages for clarity. Which is funny, because when I read “Moonchild” (the 1917 novel by Aleister Crowley) he (Crowley) made a bunch of characters barely-veiled spoofs of real people he knew from the Golden Dawn, including A.E. Waite, whose character was unambiguously named Edwin Arthwait, and always acted/spoke in EXACTLY this rambling, pedantic manner. It made me laugh. But I digress… Honestly, reading this book was an uphill battle at times. Even though it contains long repetitive text of full ceremonies, I still read it cover-to-cover (as I almost always do). A.E. Waite goes into how some rituals or books are derivative of others, and that some were published later than they claim (sometimes falsely attributed as well), etc. As I learned by reading it all, these ceremonies can be repetitive and loooong, and I can certainly see the commonalities. One plus side though – this book has tons of great illustrations and detailed sigils / talismans / etc… credit is due to Weiser Books for that - many lesser-quality print-on-demand versions of this book are probably missing a lot of these images. I feel like this book could have (almost…sorta) been a prototype for what came almost 70 years later, a book called “The Black Arts” by Richard Cavendish. Granted, that one takes a much more wide-ranging survey of occult literature and practices, but both give thorough scholarship and history. It’s too bad that in all his copious (and usually very helpful) footnotes and even in the main body of the text, A.E. Waite likes to be smug and condescending, to the point of sarcasm or seeming as if he’s making fun of fellow occult students/writers. He was probably not very fun to hang out with at parties, even if he was a good researcher. -------------------------------------- follow mother_lachrymarvm on instagram for occult content and more... https://www.instagram.com/mother_lach...
