Terrible book, and surely had to be seen as terrible even when it was published 30 years ago, but it's aged horribly. If Peter Mayle was alive, I'd like to think he would have disavowed this one. How's this for a clinker of a line that rings off-key in the Epstein-Trump era: "He liked young girls and old wine." And this is said with a nod to the charm of both the subject of the comment and the narrator, who feels the same way. There's also the narrator's dog-like obsession with women's butts; he's practically sniffing at the heels of the women in the novel when they bend over. And he's keen on the young model who bounces into the room braless. These are observations made by a 35-ish male, not by a 14-year-old, but this book is deeply rooted in adolescence that was never escaped by the author as well as the narrator. I can't imagine a woman reading this novel to the end. Peter Mayle apparently an advertising guy in NYC. This book is like he lived in Mad Men days and wished that world never ended. He must have used his NY contacts to get this book published, likely by the wife of one of his business colleagues or clients, because it's hard to imagine anyone taking this book on its merits. Just for the record, the plot goes something like this. Bennett is 35-ish and British, but living in southern France. He loves it there, but is having trouble making a living. He'd given up being a producer of TV commercials and likes the slow life, though he misses sex with all the young actresses he'd apparently met and wooed with his power and money. Desperate for work, he places "will work" ad, and it's answered by a mysterious guy who tells him to impersonate him by living in Monte Carlo, all expenses paid. This will save the guy taxes by making him seem like a Monte Carlo resident. But there's a catch. The guy is crooked, and not only does he want to save on taxes, but he wants Bennett to be the go-between for a briefcase with a secret formula and fertilizer to grow truffles. Up to this point, truffles are only grown wild, and there are never enough of them to meet demand. If you could grow them intentionally, you'd make a fortune. Bennett is unwittingly caught in an intrigue when a girl he has induced to come to Monte Carlo gives the briefcase to the wrong thieves. A series of preposterous maneuvers follows, led by a a gorgeous 25-year-old Jewish (exotic!) New Yorker who is the jilted girlfriend of the original con man. She's also a former Israeli army sergeant, able to disable a man in 10 seconds, hot-wire cars, and detect detecting devices. And she has a great butt, so obviously she's going to fall for Bennett's charm and wind up as his new girlfriend. And obviously, they get away with re-stealing the briefcase, getting $1 million to return it, and then are saved by a shooting and the police, who let them off with no charges. Terrible, terrible, terrible. I read books for a book festival. Sometimes, these are self-published, and you can tell with 10 pages that they will not make the grade. If I review them after the festival, they get 1 star because they really are unbearable to read (and I don't finish them). This book deserves the same 1-star grade, and the only reason it gets 2 stars is because it is made up of competent sentences and has a plot that moves forward sort of logically, if stupidly. It's not incoherent like the worst-of-the-worst of self-published books, but it's as bad as an accredited book can be.
