Lost in the city is an apt and appropriate title for these 14 short stories. All take place in the African-American sections of Washington DC and all of the characters are black. The first story, The Girl Who Raised Pigeons, demonstrates that the characters are real and that they have the same feelings of love and self that whites have. Betsy Ann is eight when she first sees pigeons being raised by a barber friend of her father. It is love at first sight. Over the years she bothers her father for pigeons of her own. He relents and they construct a coop on their apartment roof. The flock grows. But the telling part, the indication of great paternal love, is that her taxicab-driving father gets up every morning before Betsy Ann wakes up and inspects the coop to spare her the sight of any dead birds. The Store and Young Lions demonstrate the characters provincialism, lack of education, victims of their environment and their being generally helpless. The Store is told in the first person and the protagonist is unnamed. In his late teens he looks and finds a job in a small grocery store owned and managed by Mrs. Jenkins. She is a strict taskmaster and at first mistrusts him. As years go by she gives him more and more responsibility. She finally physically leaves and he becomes the store manager. He and Mrs. Jenkins meet infrequently away from the store. All is well until he receives a letter from Mrs. Jenkins telling him that the store is sold. The letter contains $4,000 in “Severin pay.” His whole experience is based on the store. He does not know where to turn. He is lost in the city. Caesar in Young Lions tries and eventually convinces his girlfriend, Carol, to participate in a scam. Together they talk an older woman to remove her savings from a bank in cash. They rob her and in the process Carol ends up with the cash. Caesar pushes Carol into a park and, in an attempt to get the cash beats her. But Carol is tough and strong, holds onto the cash and walks away. The story ends with, “There was something in the air, but he (Caesar) could not make out what it was. He walked out of the park. He kept looking behind him, expecting something or someone, be he was alone in the street and he saw nothing but the swirling of dead leaves. He continued looking behind him as he made his way up 17th Street. He took out the address book, but found that he could not read the name or the numbers under the feeble streetlights. He hurried, hoping for a telephone booth where the light would be brighter. He began to run, and as he ran, he kept trying to read the numbers, but the rain was now turning them to blurs. He did not know what was in the air. He only knew that tonight would not be a night without shelter.” He was lost in the city.
