Donald Rayfield’s 1997 ANTON CHEKHOV: A LIFE benefits from access to letters and other documents that were unavailable to earlier biographers or available only in bowdlerized form under Soviet censorship. I do not know but strongly suspect that the highly enjoyable vulgarity and ribaldry in passages Rayfield quotes were not a feature of previous Chekhov biographies. Chekhov was rather a rooster, and the language with which he describes his erotic adventures, including dalliances with other men’s wives and frequent visits to brothels, is not for the easily offended. Chekhov had a miserable childhood under a puritanical, patriarchal, thrashing-prone father. Family relations and responsibilities remained consistently vexing after he achieved maturity. When he escaped the family for an extended sojourn to assess conditions in Siberia, he returned with his vision as a writer considerably darkened: “He rarely referred to Sakhalin (Siberia) in his fiction, but his confirmed distrust of ideology and his preference for unspoiled nature over spoiled humanity are Sakhalin’s legacy. Chekhov’s remarks to Aleksei Suvorin that December (1890) echo those he would give to his fictional heroes: ‘God’s world is good. One thing is not good: us.’ “ I don’t recall coming across this 1894 letter to Suvorin when I read Chekhov’s collected letters: “Tolstoy’s morality has stopped moving me, in the depths of my soul I am hostile to it, and that of course is unjust. Peasant blood flows in me, and you can’t astound me with peasant virtues. Since I was a child I have believed in progress and could not do otherwise, since the difference between the time when I was thrashed and the times when thrashing stopped has been enormous. I love clever people, sensitivity, politeness, wit … I was affected not by the basic propositions, which were known earlier, but the Tolstoyan way of expressing oneself, the didacticism and probably a sort of hypnotism. Now something in me protests; calculation and justice tell me that electricity and steam show more love for humanity than chastity and vegetarianism.” Chekhov was a lifelong active proponent of social reform. Near the end of his short ife, he was on an excursion accompanied by Savva Morozov and others. “Morozov may have been one of Russia’s ‘Rockefellers,’ subsidizing the arts and revolutionaries such as (Maxim) Gorky, but his workers lived in squalor with a drunken paramedic and an empty pharmacy to treat them. On discovering conditions at the plant, Anton made forcible protests, to which Morozov responded magnificently: the working day was cut from twelve to eight hours.” Reading that, I reflected that the peculiar marriage between exploitation and philanthropy is probably as old as time and remembered how Waste Management, inc., before legal action, simultaneously fouled the environment and underwrote productions of operas, giving us the opportunity to appreciate TRISTAN UND ISOLDE before being poisoned. A pitfall of biography or almost any researched writing is the inclusion of details for no better reason than that the writer has been able to discover them. Rayfield does not by any means avoid this trap, and it severely burdens the book. Who cares if someone’s second cousin’s driver was stung by a bee at an outdoor luncheon attended by fourteen other guests, all of whose backgrounds are detailed, after which they never appear again? I spent several minutes trying to make sense of this sentence in the first printing of the first U.S. edition: “As the family thinned out rows because fewer.” I even got up and paced the room, trying different inflections. Then it dawned on me that “because” was obviously a typographical error and should have been “became.” I hope this was corrected if there were subsequent printings. Proofreaders (if you still exist): know what an offensive disruption a typographical error is to a reader caught up in a text. It’s like having an actor forget or blow a line during an engaging stage performance.
