Le Guin fascinates me again! This is another highly intelligent and well-thought-out fantasy story. I loved that in this sequel, Ged wasn't the only main character and that we are introduced to Tenar, a very well developed female character. The story starts with a young girl named Tenar, with given name Arha, and she is separated at a young age from her parents to become a High priestess in the temple of the Unnamed ones. So this is not just story about young wizard Ged, it is mostly about Tenar, as Ged is a visitor in her world. The story could also be read as the maturation of the Anima aspect in Ged, as well as the development of the womanhood of Tenar. Le Guin her demonstrates the capability of describing both men and women's path of psychological development - for each integration of the opposite sex aspect is inevitable for maturity, and unity of both male and female parts of the psyche are inevitable for the process of individuation, to find a true, authentic Self. ''You have set us both free," he said. "Alone, no one wins freedom. '' Without each other, both Ged and Tenar would be destroyed in some way. I highly respect that Ged and Tenar played such a big part in each other's lives in liberation and progress without being romantically involved in any phase. I love that their unity is represented in two parts of one ring as a higher spiritual principle that brings peace to mankind, rather than physical unity in sexuality that brings relief only to them. Interestingly, the previous book could be interpreted as Ged's beginning of the process of individuation in the integration of the shadow aspect. According to Jung, the next step in individuation is the maturation of the Anima - the female aspect of the hero. When a male hero has to undergo the development of the female aspect he is always stripped down from his manpower - as Ged lost his staff and clothing in the Labyrinth of Thombs. It is also interesting that the Labyrinths are completely in dark - that can represent unconsciousness. Ged can bring light to one level, but it eventually goes out. Tenar is the one that knows the maps of the labyrinth by hearts and sees in the dark - Ged would be completely and utterly lost without her. Symbolically man principle is represented in Apollo - light, reason, logic and consciousness, but the female principle, for example Aphrodite, reigns in unconsciousness, the world of impulses, instincts, fertility and creativity. This is not the first story in with male hero is guided out of the labyrinth of unconsciousness by the help of female wisdom - we have the same situation with Ariadne that gave Theseus gift that guided him through the labyrinth of Minotaur, and enabled him to find a way to defeat the monster. Ged can also be viewed as Tenar's Animus. He helped Tenar by giving her the light and truth od reason, a perspective of the outer world she didn't know about, that helped her to break out of the dominion of a repressive matriarchal world she lived in - priestess were the servants of dark forces, but had the highest power in the community - men only excited in their word as slaves with cut out tongues or eunuchs that served them - both representing castration (in one way striping men of power to produce form and meaning by language, one of stripping men of sexual power and potency). That is the guiding principle of the toxic matriarchal world - men have no purpose or value, they only exist to be dominated and serve the feminine (mirror principle can be found in a destructive form of patriarchy - but that is by far more talked about when on an individual level both pathologies are common). By creating a real human relationship with a man, Ged, Tenar violated the law of matriarchy and had to be punished. Now in this new state of being she could stay and dye, or run and break free. As Neumann said in the study of the psychological development of women, in her path to maturity women can use matriarchal principles to take control and be empowered and independent, but the key is not to integrate the destructive part that hates and wants to destroy the masculine, as Tenar in the end successfully did. As Tenar did with Ged, women can take constructive parts of masculinity without harming the masculine. Ged helped Tenar by calling her by her true name, she guided him through unconsciousness and he guided her through consciousness about her identity. "You told me to show you something worth seeing. I show you yourself.'' Tenar was only known as Arha (with meant the eaten one - her true identity was eaten by rules and expectations of others, mostly the ruling principle of a tyrannical mother) and only Ged had the knowledge of her true name, and hearing her true name gave her the freedom to be true and authentic self. She critically questioned the world she lived in and came to her unique perspective and conclusion, and in the process broke out of the darkness of unconsciousness and inauthenticity. Hearing her true name created the connection to true self - her own identity and desires outside of what is expected of her to due, and what other people told her she is made for. "I am Tenar," she said, not aloud, and she shook with cold, and terror, and exultation, there under the open, sunwashed sky. "I have my name back. I am Tenar!'' But even freedom and consciousness have their weight and are not easy to deal with, and in the end this is just a starting point for both Ged and Tenar. ''What she had begun to learn was the weight of liberty. Freedom is a heavy load, a great and strange burden for the spirit to undertake. It is not easy. It is not a gift given, but a choice made, and the choice may be a hard one. The road goes upward towards the light; but the laden traveler may never reach the end of it.'' Le Guin's capability to write such an enlightened but simple story astonishes me. Can’t wait to read the rest of the series as this is such a brilliant synthesis of a book that is highly enjoyable, yet profound.
