In his time, Ian Fleming was one of the edgiest popular authors on the scene. After five acclaimed James Bond novels beginning with Casino Royale in 1953, 007's propensity for morally loose living caught up with his author. Critics questioned James Bond's validity as role model to young men caught up in the romance of the super-spy lifestyle, and started consistently panning Fleming's work as a bad influence. Partly due to the stress of a legal case surrounding his latest James Bond offering, Ian Fleming suffered a series of heart attacks and died in 1964, but not before penning a novella unlike any he'd written, a children's book based on the ongoing bedtime story he used to tell his son Caspar. Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang was released two months after Fleming's death, and for critics who couldn't buy into his greatness as creator of a legendary spy who would make cinematic history for untold decades, there was more to consider: this cheerful book about a family that sticks together no matter what and doesn't take life for granted. When you have a chance for adventure, you take it, and that's how the Potts cross paths with an enchanted car that changes their lives. Just as James Bond became a staple of the silver screen, Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang was adapted into a major motion picture, in 1968. Theatergoers warmly received the British musical starring Dick Van Dyke, and Ian Fleming posthumously branded his name in pop culture nearly as much for it as for James Bond. I wonder if he had any inkling how beloved Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang would be. Former Royal Navy commander Caractacus Pott earns a substantial monetary windfall when he invents a musical novelty gumball. The candy is an immediate hit with his eight-year-old twins, Jeremy and Jemima, and a sweets company pays top dollar to secure the rights to manufacture it. Pott decides this largesse calls for a treat for the whole family, and buys a fixer-upper automobile to see what can be made of her. Commander Pott works for weeks on the old wreck, but when he's finished, his family can scarcely believe the transformation. The car is beautiful: clean chrome exterior, soft red leather upholstery, and dozens of functional buttons and knobs, so many that Commander Pott has yet to learn the purpose of them all. Commander and Mrs. (Mimsie) Pott and the twins take off in the vehicle, which Jeremy cleverly dubs CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG for the sounds that erupt from the tailpipe when it starts. CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG is no normal car, as Commander Pott realized when he restored her. There's an undeniable magic to her, which becomes blatantly obvious when she sprouts wings and soars through the air like a plane. The Potts could go on the biggest adventure in the world in a car like this. But, but, but! And once again, but!! Even a supernatural vehicle can't bestow immortality on its passengers, and the Potts get into trouble when they stumble upon the hideout of a notorious gang in a cave near the English Channel. Fearsome Joe the Monster and his mobster minions won't let the Potts off easy for interfering with their business, and when Jeremy and Jemima get separated from their parents, it's up to CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG to keep the exciting adventure from ending tragically. Will the Potts mourn the day they ran afoul of Joe the Monster...or will he regret crossing them ? It's easy to tell that Ian Fleming had limited experience telling stories for kids, but Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang has a lot going for it. The sense of humor is fresh, mischievous, and surprising, the book's best asset. CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG, herself, cops an attitude when she thinks the Potts are slow on the uptake. There are also lessons to learn from the story, like how the Potts come to possess CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG. The car is a disaster when first they see her, a run-down pile of parts that appears beyond salvaging. The family could have walked away and purchased another automobile with their gumball money, but that car wouldn't have had magic in it, and the story would have ended there. Because Commander Pott was willing to put in the effort, because he saw more in CHITTY-CHITTY-BANG-BANG than its beat-up exterior and he worked hard to heal her, the magical car returned his investment a thousandfold, maybe more. There's no sweeter reward than believing in someone and having that faith validated. But perhaps Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang 's enduring message is Commander Pott's admonishment to his family when they hesitate before plunging into the epic adventure on their horizon. "That's no way to treat adventures. Never say 'no' to adventures. Always say 'yes,' otherwise you'll lead a very dull life." There's truth in that, I know. We'd be advantaged to hear Commander Pott's words echo in our minds when tempted to take the safe route too often. One only has so many opportunities for adventure in a magical car, and they're too precious to squander. Ian Fleming's most read books are Casino Royale , Goldfinger , Doctor No , and other James Bond classics. Popular as it was on page and screen, Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang will likely never eclipse those novels to be considered Fleming's signature work, and that's probably only right. There's much deeper and more challenging kid lit out there. I'd give Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang one and a half stars, though, and I'm going to round it up to two by the slightest of margins. Everyone who enjoys the movie should read this at least once. I'm glad Ian Fleming bequeathed at least one children's story to the world; his legacy is significant, and it won't fade as long as James Bond and Chitty-Chitty-Bang-Bang find their way into the hands of readers. May that always be the case.
