Stephen Ambrose once again proves his power as a historian by making the story of the Lewis and Clark expedition clear, thrilling, and emotionally impactful. This is a topic that has interested me for a long time because I am somehow related to Meriwether Lewis… (these last couple of weeks I’ve been trying to figure out exactly how…finally signed up for an Ancestry.com DNA test to see if it could bring clarity that family trees so far do not….stay tuned!)... On our travels, my brother and I often stop at Lewis and Clark sites, so I’ve learned quite a bit about their journey as a result of that. Still, there was tons I didn’t know that I was excited to learn in this book. Additionally, Ambrose’s accounts of the events leading up to and away from the actual exploration are as fascinating as those of the trip itself. Sadly, Lewis’s experiences after the expedition were mostly grim, his life brought to a tragic, early end as a result of mental health issues (lifelong depression seemed to run in his family), disease (lingering malaria and perhaps syphilis –both of which almost all the men on the expedition apparently picked up), plus alcohol and drug abuse. A dismal conclusion to a memorable life. And, of course, behind it all is the sad realization that the Native American tribes and the boundless wildlife they encounter on their route will be so negatively impacted by those who quickly follow after them. Sigh. Ambrose acknowledges this, too, without dwelling on it. A more recent historian might have spent more time on these disturbing events. But the focus of this book is on the incredible and unique accomplishment of the Corps of Discovery: Lewis and Clark; their thirty-some soldiers; Clark’s slave, York; a couple of translators; Sacagawea (hers is an amazing story in of itself!) and her baby, Jean Baptiste (born on the journey!); and Lewis’s beloved and loveable Newfoundland, Seaman. Ambrose ranks Lewis and Clark, but especially Lewis, right up there with Columbus and Cook in terms of their greatness as explorers, and deservedly so.
