Molly Anderson was 12 when she first laid eyes on Dylan Black her older sister’s boyfriend. She had always been the outcast in her family but Dylan never reacted to her that way. He always took an interest in everything she was doing, her school, or her ideas. At 18 he was by far the most handsome guy you ever saw. Unlike all her other boyfriends he would talk to Molly. He would tell her jokes, tease her about silly things but never in a mean hurtful way like her own family. Since Janet saw no future with Dylan, coming from a trailer park kid and show no future in him she broke up with him. Dating and marrying Thomas. On the day of the wedding Dylan shows up only making it to the back of the church. He needed to see for himself that there was no hope left for him and Janet. When Molly sees him from the alter and sneaks off with no one noticing. She catches up with Dylan. She finds out he’s leaving and reminds him that he said that he would take her on an adventure when she was grown up. He said he never breaks a promise and gives her the gold ring he never got a chance to give to Janet. He tells her when you’re grown and you’re ready, find me and give me this back and we’ll go. Dylan would never guess that Molly would not only have had an awful childhood but that the last week she had, had the three most horrendous days of her life. So, who would ever guess that 14 years after he’d given her that ring she would be standing before him. Dylan’s mind is expecting little 14 year old Molly with braces, acne, and glasses. Yet the Molly he sees is little full grown voluptuous Molly. He wouldn’t say she’s model beautiful but she’s pretty in a cute way, with soft curves. Not his type he said to himself. She was nerves as they talked and since it was close to lunch they go out. Molly explains in a roundabout way why she wants, no needs, to go on this adventure. Dylan is sure she is keeping some secrets but before he can follow his brain he says yes. Partly because he has issues going on with his business he has to make decisions on too. They plan on leaving the next afternoon. He needs to get his business in line you see. He has become a successful businessman, but that is all I am telling you… I loved this story beyond words. The emotions that come in the waiting that Molly has to endure is beyond accurate and painfully true I felt every moment again with her. The dynamics between Dylan and Molly are unbelievably touching and erotic. Their love scenes are a scorching hot bag of fire. But like the rest of the story line done in a tasteful manner. I give this 5 stars ++. Provided by Net Galley. Follow us at: www.1rad-readerreviews.com
