This is an imagined biography of the real Dominican Friar Servando Teresa de Mier (1765 – 1827); written in 1966 by the author of The Doorman. It starts very much in the magical realism mode but does rather tend to lose steam to more ‘standard’ Latin America novel near the end. This is like many of Mario Llosa’s (e.g. Feast of the Goat, The War of the End of the World, Way to Paradise) or Souza’s (e.g. Mad Maria) work in that it is a brilliant narrative where you begin to wonder about the true facts rather than clever fiction. The magical realism style, is a mixture of first and third person, is in deed more like a hallucination reflecting the inner and outer struggle of this real life revolutionary priest. It starts in Mexico with Sevando childhood and education in Monterrey; then preaching in 1794 that the ‘Virgin of Guadalupe’ who originally appeared 1541 actually visited New Spain as part of the indigenous religion many years earlier. Arrested and exiled to a Spain, he was given the chance to plead his case but got lost on the way to a council meeting. Rearrested and escaping; so starts his remarkable journey from escapades in France (where he meets Simón Rodríguez, Simón Bolívar's former teacher); Rome then Spain (arrested for his Mexican Independence views) escaped, recaptured escaped, released for converting Rabbis; military priest in the Franco-Spain war captured and escaped the French; met General Blake (witnesses the Battle of Trafalgar) and moves to London; writes Revolutionary newspaper; travels to New Spain captured by the Royalists; ends up in Havana and escapes to USA; revisiting Mexico after independence is arrested by the Spanish; released by the Mexicans but is then arrested for his anti-federal views and yes escapes (his seventh). Dies. Mummified body sold to circus in 1861 and exhibited in Brussels but is soon lost never to reappear. You can imagine what could be made of this history and this book does not disappoint. Some quotes: “There’s just no way out. It’s as if I was realising the whole time how useless all this running away is. All the time I keep telling myself: do everything you can, do everything you can. And I do. But the trouble is you never know how much you can do. And if everything were possible it might as well be impossible, simply because it can be done and nothing is gained by it. Routine would be the only thing left, routine and more routine” “Summer. I ask God to grant me proof of His existence by letting me die. But I doubt that He can hear me. If God were here He would have gone mad.” (Not for me, but Servando’s memoirs, in translation, are available to read). This, though not a perfect attempt, is another 5 star magical realism tale.
