Machiavelli considers that human desires and states of spirit are always the same. Thus, he studies the past and seeks explanations for the reality of his time. The account can predict future events and use the same old ways or fail, creating other forms of action. Machiavelli asserted that selfish interests drive all men with no particular personal ambition and material prosperity at any cost—homo hominis lupus (The man is the wolf of man). Deprivations lead man to work and to associative life. However, conflicts arise within the associated groups because individuals pursue their own interests. Politics emerges as an instrument of power whose importance manifests in the search for tools and the definition of objectives to establish order and prevent the destruction of society. Machiavelli is called the father of modern civilization. Machiavelli traced the first ideas of the doctrine of the Modern State, that is, the absolutist state, as necessary to be consolidated and strong, without moral limitations on the actions of the governing authority, and notably a positivist conception, away from natural law. Machiavelli: an exchange of classical political doctrines, based on limited government ideas and ethical (moral) bases. The ends justify the means. For Machiavelli, the state was an end in itself. The supreme duty of the ruler is to maintain the order, power, and security of the country he governs. For this, the ruler must use the necessary means to enable him to achieve this obligation, adopting: a) There must be confidence in the governed. b) They should not expect loyalty or affection but respect in their decisions; c) If need be, be cynical and misleading to convince the governed who are working for them; d) Do good in small doses, but if you need to do something more substantial or violent, you must do it quickly so as not to cause horror or revolt, but compliance and respect. e) In the work, The Prince points out that rulers can be praised or hated; f) The Prince must act in such a way as to avoid ruining himself, but rather preserve himself. If necessary, he will launch an attack against the other for his advantage or let things happen. g) The Prince must be prudent, and prudence is his chief virtue. He should use other attributes carefully to avoid ruin. On the contrary, if he has vices, he should make them look virtuous, aiming at his security and well-being.
