This review was originally posted on Addicted To Romance In Wildest Dreams, Originally Published 1994, we have a story that through Sourcebook Casablanca comes back alive with a republishing. We are taken to an era that was full of discovery, danger, and finding one's full potential through the test of trials, grief, suffering but also love, devotion and passion for life. The story takes us back to the era of the civil war and after the war and reconstruction. This period of America's history was full of strife and Rosanne Bittner makes these challenges come alive within these 600 pages. I know that amount of numbere of pages sounds daunting, however I savored each moment of this story. We are taken back to a story that begins with our two main characters....Lettie Mcbride and Luke Fontaine. Lettie along with her parents and siblings are traveling west on a wagon train in search of a new hope. Lettie has suffered from the raids on their home, when in an effort to protect and save her horse, she herself was attacked and raped. She had a son from that horrific night, Nathan. When Lettie meets Luke, Nathan is only a few years old. Luke Fontaine, has recently learned that he is a bastard, and his father favors his brother over Luke. So Luke leaves the only home he has ever known, and is driven to succeed. When he meets Lettie, and they start spending time together while traveling west, they fall in love. Lettie's family heads to Colorado but when she agrees to marry Luke, she knows that life is going to be full of troubles and trials. Luke and Lettie head to the Montana Territory. A territory that has plenty of land, but is rugged, dangerous and untamed. Luke wants to make an empire and even though Luke and Lettie start in a shack, they make a home together. The first few years wear on Lettie and Luke with battles with indians, rustlers and more. They make friends of neighbors, but one fateful night will test them. They lose their son Nathan to indians, not knowing if he is alive or dead. Luke and Lettie only become stronger, they build up their ranch and the land, they begin building a family with three sons and two daughters. Even though they build up a wondrous dream, they also have their griefs and losses and battles. What is most wonderful about Rosanne Bittner, is how she handles these love family saga's. I have never read a author that handles them so well. There were many moments in this story where I want to break down in tears. The emotion that Bittner conveys in this story is truly heart wrenching at times. It really brings home, what trials these men and women----true pioneers suffered. Luke and Lottie are one of my favorite couples to read, because the one thing that keeps them strong and vibrant is the love they have for each other. We see them grow from newlyweds in their twenties to their forties, with grown children having families of their own. This is not your average romance that we see, and quite frankly sage romances are so rare that its also so delightful to immerse myself into one and boy this one had everything I needed to be a full satisfying romance that I couldn't get enough of. There are some trajedies but there are also many great triumphs for Luke and Lettie. We see the joy they find in each other and in each of their children. It was so charming to see the growth of their relationship over the years. And they really get challenged at a certain point that almost tears them apart. But what was most endearing about this pair, was their strength and devotion to each other. Both Luke and Lettie have such courage and stay together no matter what comes their way. The literally learn to fight for one another both physically and emotionally. They learn how important it is to rely on each other; especially in the most challenging times of their marriage because that is when they need each other most. We see the trials their children have to go through, and boy my heart ached for all of them. And those that have read this story already, know which ones I am talking about. But we also see how they overcome the trials they each have been dealt and overcome them to claim a life of love and fulfillment just like their own parents. Wildest Hearts is a love story that will endear you forever to Luke and Lettie, will take you back through the time of the reconstruction era of America's history, introduce you to the beauty of the Montana land and this poignant love story to remember forever!!! SIMPLY MAJESTIC!! Just as a seed can sprout new life after being tossed aside, forgotten and left to die; So can love buried by pride and guilt come to bloom again...Stronger, Healthier and even more beautiful. Books N'Tunes Challenge
