Unterm Rad-Hermann Hesse Tw for the book: mental illness, depression, suicide, death, sexual assault, alcohol This book hurts. Especially as a student, moving closer to graduation. Having witnessed various effects of school on different types of students throughout the last 11 years in different school systems I think we all can agree that this book is in its vast majority still from importance. It tells the story of the perfect student, Hans Giebenrath, who lives in a small town in the southern west of Germany. He does everything his teachers expect and want from and for him, people, including his very proud father, place their hope and project all their dreams onto this boy. From the beginning on the reader feels the pressure and I am sure a lot of people relate to it. Seeing him abandon all his interests and joy in his hobbies, his friends and family and just life in general was painful. He later on develops a, lets say special, relationship with someone, I want to keep this review spoiler free. But this “friendship” was one of my favourite things in the book, it was so real and wholesome and especially painful, just like everything else. The book follows him throughout the time span of about a year and the ending was not very surprising. Honestly, nothing in the plot was, because this is not what made the book captivating. The writing was refreshing, clear, describing and kind of innocent. By innocent I mean the way mental illness, relationships, sexuality and alcohol were depicted. I kinda like this old German language, so many words and expressions I don’t normally use, they just have a special vibe to them. Also nature played a great role, which was used well in my opinion. The writing style fits the story and does its job. Some expressions were so well chosen, I had to read them twice! Now, should you read this book? I am convinced that its a good book, but not an easy one. Maybe don’t read it when you’re not well rn, when you’re under pressure due to school as well (this is why I read it during my holidays) If you are someone that has the power to influence a student, the system itself, then please read it. It is still from importance, it still shows how school as a system works, however, if you read it now, you (hopefully) will realise that a lot of things actually have changed to the better and they probably will continue doing so. Also, near the end, it also shows the beauty of alternatives to the “academic” way. (I don’t mean dying by that lol) A lot of people are convinced that going to university is the only way, or that artisanry is somehow less valuable or primitive. My favourite character was Hermann Heilner! Bye:) let me know what u think if u read it!
