Shootdown is a fascinating piece of Cold War techno-paranoia, a web of circumstance carefully stitched together by British academic R.W. Johnson. The basic facts are clear. At 13:00 UTC, August 31st 1983, Korean Airlines Flight 007 departed Anchorage en route to Seoul. It strayed over Soviet territory, and was shot down at 18:26:46 UTC on September 1, 0626 local time over Sakhalin Island. 269 people were killed, including an American congressman. All parties involved began making accusations and counter-accusations, an international investigation was stonewalled, and the truth disappeared, along with the plane. Tensions between the superpowers escalated another notch, and the situation resumed. Johnson argues that it is unlikely that the highly trained KAL crew could have made such a fatal navigational error. Rather, he sees KAL 007 flightpath as part of deliberate ploy orchestrated by National Security Adviser William P. Clark Jr. and CIA Director William J. Casey to gain electronic intelligence of Russian defenses in the volatile North Pacific. This effort was part of long tradition of aggressive surveillance by aircraft, most famously Gary Powers U-2 shootdown in 1960. The flight was monitored by an armada of sophisticated sensors, and arranged with the help of the strictly anti-communist Korean Central Intelligence Agency. An earlier incident, KAL 902, had ended in only two deaths, and the gamble of using a plane full of civilians was seen as worthwhile. After all, the Soviets wouldn't shoot an innocent airliner down, right? Except they did, and then the Reagan administration had to arrange a cover-up, which was aided by the tone-deaf propaganda of the Soviet Union. It's a convincing story, with the single flaw being that it is entirely wrong. Johnson argues that the flight data recorders (the black box) were either destroyed by the US, or never recovered. What he had no way of knowing was that the black box was recovered by the USSR, and their tapes were released in late 1992. The revised report, with all the evidence, is clear. The crew of KAL 007 made a navigation error and failed to switch the autopilot from compass heading to INS waypoints. They never knew that they had entered Soviet airspace, and the Soviet Pacific defenses, far from being the well-oiled machine Johnson believes them to be, were beset by broken equipment and sclerotic command and control. It was a tragedy, and the Soviets shot without provocation. For what's it worth, Johnson makes a bold stab at the getting the story straight. There was never much reason to trust the official Reagan administration stance on anything. His accounts of superpower technological confrontation are still gripping. The intrigues and incompetence of Reagan administration officials is very familiar. While at the end of the day, this is a conspiracy theory built on circumstantial evidence and gaps in the official record, it's at least plausible that KAL 007 was an unauthorized ELINT probe. Meanwhile, in our present darkest timeline, the right-o-sphere and even some Trump people are fixated on QAnon*, a series of cryptic hints delivered over childporn board 8chan that (((Globalist Deep State Bankers))) are engaged in a massive child sex-slave ring, and that Trump has arrested thousands of these people on double-secret warrants, and that commands are being sent via the web equivalent of number's stations. Can we have the Cold War back, please? *QAnon description is approximate. It's... nuts, is all I can say. Show more
