This "little" book [only 79 pages] has more wisdom per page than any book I have every read. Please read the following quotes below and ask God to give you that Perfect Trust in Him! He empties himself in order to be full. He admits he is wrong so he can be declared right. He goes down in order to get up. He is strongest when he is weakest, richest when he is poorest, happiest when he feels the worst. He dies so he can live. He forsakes in order to have He gives away so he can keep. ~A.W. Tozer describing a Christian with perfect trust in the Savior Many, many years ago, Felix of Nola was escaping his enemies, and he too, took temporary refuge in a cave. He had scarcely entered the opening of the cave before a spider began to weave its web across the small opening. With remarkable speed, the insect completely sealed off the mouth of the cave with an intricate web, giving the appearance that the cave had not been entered for many weeks. As Felix’s pursuers passed by they saw the web and didn’t bother to look inside. Later, as the godly fugitive stepped out into the sunlight, he uttered these insightful words: Where God is, a spider’s web is a wall; where He is not, a wall is but a spider’s web. ~Charles Swindoll Helen Rosevere was a British medical missionary in the Congo years ago during an uprising. Her faith was strong and her trust was confident, yet she was raped and assaulted and treated brutally. Commenting later, she said, “I must ask myself a question as if it came directly from the Lord, ‘Can you thank Me for trusting you with this experience even if I never tell you why?’” What a profound thought. God has trusted each of us with our own set of unfair circumstances and unexplained experiences to deal with. Can we still trust in Him even if He never tells us why? ~Charles Swindoll The secret to responsible trust is acceptance. Acceptance is taking from God’s hand absolutely anything He gives, looking into His face in trust and thanksgiving, knowing that the confinement of the hedge we’re in is good and for His glory. Even though what we’re enduring may be painful, it’s good simply because God Himself has allowed it. ~Charles Swindoll Faith is not belief without proof, but trust without reservation. ~Elton Trueblood Strength comes from choosing to fully trust, pray, and praise. Our circumstances may not change, but in the process we change. ~Charles Swindoll We continually encounter hardships. People disappoint us. We disappoint ourselves. But God is constant and compassionate. We are not alone. He cares. Against all reason, the transcendent God loves us so much that He has committed Himself to us. ~Charles Swindoll The more impossible the situation, the greater God accomplishes His work. ~Charles Swindoll Remarkably his [Job’s] first response to God was the response of worship. ~Charles Swindoll He [Job] worshipped. And not because he understood what was happening to him, but in spite of all that was happening to him. Not only did Job worship, he accepted what God had sent into his life. That is wisdom. That is perfect trust. ~Charles Swindoll It’s the nature of the beast within us to keep going back to the familiar rather than to strap on faith and face the future. ~Charles Swindoll We want the safety of yesterday even though we know it’s not where God would have us. ~Charles Swindoll When a person does something, it has the man or woman look about it. It drips with humanity. You can follow the logic of it and see the meaning behind it. ~Charles Swindoll And when God steps in, His working is like the difference between a skyscraper and a star. ~Charles Swindoll “Do not lean on your own understanding.” That means don’t bring in the crutches and lean on them, those crutches that you have designed and made to handle such situations. Stay away from them. Don’t lean on them; lean on God. ~Charles Swindoll I don’t have to explain or defend the will of God. My job is simply to obey it. ~Charles Swindoll Things will happen that seem to be totally contradictory, but these are God’s arrangements. It was a wonderful day when I finally realized I don’t have to explained or defend the will of God. My job is simply to obey it. ~Charles Swindoll Anxious. Intriguing word. It literally means, “to be divided” or “distracted.” It conveys the idea of being so mentally ill at ease that you cannot do what you need to do because you are so distracted in your thinking. ~Charles Swindoll One of the problems with worry is that it keeps you from enjoying what you have. ~Charles Swindoll Worry is assuming responsibilities that you cannot handle. They truth is, they are responsibilities that God never intended for you to handle, because they are His. ~Charles Swindoll Another problem with worry is that it makes you forget your worth. Worry makes you feel worthless, forgotten, and unimportant. ~Charles Swindoll Worry is a complete waste of energy. It solves nothing. ~Charles Swindoll Worry erases the promises of God from your mind. ~Charles Swindoll Worry is characteristic of the heathen, not the Christian. ~Charles Swindoll Faith is like lighting the torch that passes from one person to the next. You can’t light the torch of another if yours isn’t burning. ~Charles Swindoll You may be going through a trial so overwhelming that it’s borderline unbearable. You want to see the end of the tunnel. Which is only natural, because once we see that little speck of light, we feel we can make it through to the finish. But God’s tunnels are often twisting, too complex and dark to see the light for many days. In such settings He says, “In that dark, twisting, seemingly endless period of time, trust Me. Stop running scared! Stop fearing!” ~Charles Swindoll Pressed out of measure and pressed to all length; Pressed so intently it seems beyond strength. Pressed in body and pressed in soul; Pressed in the mind till the dark surges roll; Pressed by foes, pressure by friends; Pressure on pressure, till life nearly ends. Pressed into loving the staff and the rod; Pressed into knowing no helper but God. ~Annie Johnson Flint You see, this people [Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Jacob, etc.] Simply believed that God existed in the situation they were faced with, and they trusted Him rather than themselves. The result? God said, “That pleases Me.” They were men and women just like you and I, which is the most encouraging part of all. We don’t find golden haloes, or perfect backgrounds, or sinless lives, we just find people. People who failed, who struggled, who doubted, who experienced hard times and low times in which their faith was eclipsed by doubt. But their lives were basically characterized by faith. ~Charles Swindoll Faith does not change my circumstances; faith changes me. Faith may not bring in the tuition check when I need it, but faith will give me what it takes to hang on. ~Charles Swindoll Trusting God doesn’t alter our circumstances. Perfect trust in Him changes us. ~Charles Swindoll You see, when we talk about perfect trust, we’re talking about what gives us roots, character, the stability to handle the hard times. Trusting God doesn’t alter our circumstances. Perfect trust in Him changes us. ~Charles Swindoll You know one of the most encouraging things about faith? It pleases God. ~Charles Swindoll He’s building our character through the process of waiting. Perfect trust is a character building process. ~Charles Swindoll Strength comes from choosing to fully trust, pray, and praise. Our circumstances may not change, but in the process we change. ~Charles Swindoll I encourage everyone to read this book!
