A 2024 update follows the 2011 book review. Paul Findley was a U.S. Congressman from Illinois, defeated in 1988 by Dick Durbin with the aid of the Israel lobby. Durbin has gone on to become one of Illinois' Senators. His newly elected fellow Senator from Illinois is Mark Kirk, the Congressman most heavily financed by the Israel lobby in his previous position. This book is a collection of fallacies, each one followed with a detailed explanation of the truth the fallacy attempts to hide. You'd think this would be a very boring, monotonous read, but the writing is well done and the topics all come together to impress the reader with the fact that the entire history of Palestine has been presented to Americans in a way that tortures the truth if it doesn't completely hide it and that the propaganda has been both relentless and comprehensive. With extensive footnotes, Findley uses quotations and historical facts to prove his points, never expecting the reader to simply accept his opinion. One fact that hit me - Findley admits that when he was in Congress he never voted against Israel. What hope do we have with others who do not share Findley's knowledge of history? A second fact that is very depressing to me is that this book was written in 1993 and I don't believe there is one word of it that would need to be changed to be an accurate account of the situation today, almost 20 years later. Even worse, George Ball, who served in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations (and pleaded with JFK to stay out of Vietnam) was opposing the U.S. position regarding Israel 20 years before Findley, 40 years ago today. Americans are completely misled and/or indifferent to the terrible plight of the Palestinians due to the powerful influence of wealthy and influential Zionists in America. Any person who thinks for him/herself should read this book as a tutorial for a new approach to Israel based on the facts. The rest of the world (and many Israelis) is on to Israel's game, it is time for the U.S. to take off the blinders. UPDATE in 2024 , 13 years after this review was written Israel has cemented its domination of the Congress with AIPAC boldly boasting of its power to determine who gets elected. When President, Trump moved the US embassy to Jerusalem to please his biggest donor, Sheldon Adelson. Adelson's wife, Miriam, an Israeli, has pledged $100 million to Trump's re-election campaign asking that if elected he approve of Israel annexing the West Bank. Thus it is shown that the power of the pro-Israel lobby has only increased as President Biden has delivered all the bombs Israel has used to flatten Gaza and kill tens of thousands of Palestinians, not hesitating to make himself a war criminal by doing so. The two presidential candidates in 2024 are equally dedicated to Israel. The only ray of sunshine is that a Palestinian, Rashida Tlaib, has been elected to Congress.
