You know shit just got bad when an arrogant self centred and despicable prat like Gaston is correct. Now..... Oh Bloody hell where to start? I haven't been this disappointed in a novel since last year with the Red Tent and finished that one! Heck 'Lion of Ireland' has the dubious honour of being my first DNF of 2015. IMHO a book that fails so badly on several accounts-characterisation, historical accuracy, writing style, treatment of female characters, etcetera.... Lion of Ireland is the story of the one of Irelands most famous High Kings, Brian Boru of the Dal Ceis. The novel follows Brian from his early childhood in Thomond located in southern Munster and presumably ends with his iconic death at the over hyped Battle of Clontarf on the 23rd April 1014, a battle whose overall importance was grossly over exaggerated in both contemporary and modern times. I say 'presumably' as I could only take 127 pages; any more and there was a seizable chance of me using it for firewood. Highly drastic I know but personally the book was a train-wreck IMHO. THERE WILL BE SPOILERS AHEAD. PROCEED WITH CAUTION Lets start with the obvious. Brian Boru. Who is he? A chieftain? An Irish nobleman? A wealthy patron of arts? A shrewd and intelligent negotiator? A pragmatic and resourceful leader ready to form alliances with Viking rulers in order to destroy native Irish opposition to his tenure of High King of Ireland? A man who butchered, burned, raided and ravaged throughout Ireland, attacking both Irish and Viking, all pursuit of power? If that's the portrait of Brian Boru you're looking for you certainly wont find it here! I had such hopes for this book. Such hopes for Brian Boru. And all I got was a Gary Stu. In a published novel. By a well respected author. Even now Brian's portrayal leaves me befuddled and dismayed. He's a caricature, a cypher, a cliché for the good aul days of Ireland before the Vikings and the English walked in and messed up Ireland and her people for a couple of centuries. Its painfully clear that Llewellyn harbours great admiration and respect for Brian. And so she should. Any man who can claim the rank of High King in the politically murderous and hierarchy strict society of 10th century Ireland deserves a fuck load of respect. Llewellyn, however, goes above and beyond in her quest to make Brain absolutely perfect. This is my image of Brian Boru from reading her novel. Why yes that is He-man from the 1980s. Thanks to Llewellyn, he and Brian share more in common than reality should ever allow. Brian Boru is perfect. A child prodigy. The Captain Marvel of 10th century Ireland. There is nothing he cannot accomplish and within the very first pages the adults of his tribe are awed and humbled by talent, maturity and nauseatingly perky attitude. He is a god among men; powerful, well-built, handsome, rugged, skilled on the battlefield and in the bedchamber (even though at twenty he has only slept with one woman and fought in only a few skirmishes) and who can inspire die hard devotion from his people for unreasonable and highly dangerous plans. HE'S A GARY STU. NO FAULTS, NO CONSEQUENCES FOR DUMB ACTIONS AND HIS WORDS ARE ALWAYS OH-SO INSPIRING. Blarg! I don't want idealism and romanticism in my characters especially those who lived and breathed in the past. That's for fan-fiction and finding such characters in any novels always breaks my heart. I cant (and bloody wont) take them seriously. Why should I? Their real-counterparts would justly stab them through the heart. No one is ever that noble or flawless in reality and especially not in 10th century Ireland. What I found most disbelieving about Lion of Ireland was the portrayal of the Vikings or Northmen as they are called here. Now I did a history module on early medieval Ireland in college so I'm probably over aware of Llwelleyns flawed reasoning in her characterisation of the Vikings. Needless to say, she followed the clichéd and thoroughly unoriginal route. The Vikings are evil, depraved, avaricious, cruel and savage raiders who live to pillage, rape and enslave the native Irish and its up to Brain to end their reign of tyranny. Newsflash: The Irish were not exactly known as the angels of mercy. Ireland was a vicious, unstable and cut-throat place before the Vikings ever set sight on Irish land. To portray the Vikings as the doom of a benevolent Christian Ireland and as the ultimate incarnation of evil is beyond inaccurate. The Vikings and the Irish were more alike than Llewellyn cares to admit. Its how they assimilated so well and thoroughly into Irish society as a whole. Eventually they became Christian, spoke the Irish language and raised the first true towns of Ireland, Limerick, Cork and Dublin to name but a few. In Lion of Ireland they are the depraved demons who plague and molest Ireland for their own gains; here Llewellyn conveniently forgets that the Irish were just as capable of cruelty and deceit. Ever heard of Dermot MacMurrough, King of Leinster? Hated for bringing the Normans over to Ireland to regain his lost kingdom in 1171, MacMurrough was banished for kidnapping a fellow king's wife, for burning down rival monasteries and pillaging holy artefacts. And he wasn't the only one. The Irish raided, pillaged, murdered and enslaved one another like there was no tomorrow; brothers slaughtered brothers to gain a crown, kings drowned annoying rivals in rivers, sold their own people into slavery and were constantly engaged in relentless war. What I am trying to say here is that the Irish were never corrupted by the marauding Vikings and needed to be rescued from their clutches. Honestly they didn't need to. They were perfect little savages by themselves and THATS why the Vikings joined Irish society so easily. They were just like them. To simplify relationship between the native Irish and the Vikings into the cliché of good versus evil, Christian/Pagan, Native/Invader is just an unoriginal and untruthful way to tell an otherwise fascinating story. I'm going to quit while I'm ahead. To summarize the writing style is uninspired, drawn out and has far too much telling. No suspense or complexity. Very workmanlike and boring. In 127 pages Ive only encountered three female characters, Bebhin, Deirdre and Fiona- so far two have been raped, one murdered and one falls in insta love with Brian within seconds of their first meeting.
