Philip K. Dick's Dr. Bloodmoney Or How We Got Along After the Bomb is a post-nuclear apocalyptic dark comedy taking its title from the popular Stanley Kubrick film Dr. Strangelove. Though the novel is not related to Kubrick’s movie, the action could occur after the end of Dr. Strangelove as the world copes with life after the bombs fell. It is also vaguely reminiscent of Ayn Rand or, murkily, darkly resembling a John Steinbeck work. Dr. Bloodmoney represents PKD’s best use of eclectic characterization. The work focuses on a community of people struggling to survive after nuclear war. Set in Berkeley and northern California, the group of characters maintain a semblance of community. Though references to off stage barbarism color the action, PKD provides his readers with a lesson in hope for humanity and, more than just survival, an idea that man as a social and communal animal may even learn to thrive. Dr. Bloodmoney also introduces readers to one of PKD’s most enduringly complex characters, the thalidomide victim Hoppy Harrington. Like most of Dick’s work, the novel is a fun pulp fiction on the surface but contains a wealth of philosophical, psychological, and theological references. A close observation will also reveal that the producers of Total Recall may have been influenced by Dr. Bloodmoney in the mutant scenes. *** 2023 reread - I have said before, and I think other PKD fans have said similar, that you can divide Dick’s canon into three categories: The Hugo contenders (and one winner). These are his top tier books, Ubik, Man in the High Castle, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, A Scanner Darkly, etc. Paying the rent. These are the lower tier efforts. Dick struggled with poverty for most of his adult life and sometimes bills need to be paid and so our Phil took speed and banged away on an old typewriter at 70 words a minute on first drafts to Ace paperbacks and got paid. Not all terrible but also not his best. The middle books. A prolific writer like Philip K. Dick will win some and lose some and will also hit close to the mark without a bullseye top tier. Many in this category are inconsistent (a ubiquitous problem in his bibliography) as he describes eclectic themes and some good solid SF without winning awards. I had thought before that Dr. Bloodmoney would fit high on the middle ground but now after rereading I think this should be considered one of his best. Like many (most?) of his books, there is a lot going on and an observant reader has lots to unpack. Actually, this metaphor made me think obliquely of John Byrne’s run on Alpha Flight. Marvel’s Canadian supergroup has a character named Shaman who is a Native American mystic who has this bag that he can pull just about anything from, seems empty but he can reach his hand in and pull out pine needles or a stone or whatever. Philip K. Dick doesn’t just have a bag of narrative goodies to sort through, he’s got Shaman’s bag that may be linked to extra dimensional luggage and obscure references. Anyway. Ubiquitous elements of PKD’s canon can be found here: isolation, abandonment, surveillance, paranoia, mental illness, drug use, psychic powers, etc. We also have Hoppy Harrington, a man born without arms or legs, but who makes up for these disabilities with extraordinary telekinetic powers. Walt Dangerfield, condemned to orbit the Earth forever, but tying the world together with his homely charm and well meaning optimism. And the eponymous Dr. Bloodmoney, haunted by past sins and suffering from delusions, real and imagined. And like the best of PKD (of which I now include this 1965 work) this works on many levels. Dick’s eclectic style features metaphor, simile and this may also work as an allegory about power and loss and redemption.
