BOOK 63: Mid-20th Century North American Crime Readathon - Round 2 "Six Frightened Men" (I could find no separate listing/ISBN for this short story nor could I find this story listed as being in any Silverberg anthology, so I took a guess and placed it here. A friend located this on-line and pointed it out to me, but I lost the link.) I thought Silverberg's "Blood on the Mink" crime novel to be very good (4.0) but I couldn't locate further Silverberg crime novels at my library. I like syfy, and syfy crime is one of my favorite subgenres. Isaac Asimov once published an article and stated one might think syfy crime stories couldn't be done fairly: the rules could be any rules, so could that be fair to the reader? Then Asimov published three very good syfy murder mysteries, the first being "The Naked Sun". He established 3 rules as guides for readers, and he played fair. As does Silverberg here in this short story. Hook=4 stars: A group of 8 men land on an alien planet. It is explored by 6 men at a time via rotation so that 2 men man their ship at all times. A 60-foot-tall monster appears out of thin air. Pace=3: Short story solid. Plot=3: One by one, our explorers are murdered. If this sounds familiar, it should. It's Agatha Silverberg does a beautiful job in this homage to Dame Christie, but if you remember Christie's stunning solution, you'll figure this one out instantly.Christie's famous "None" novel, and the isolated area (Christie's island) is an isolated planet. This is a very good plot, but not original, for a 3-star rating. People=3: You'll remember the monster but no one else. Place=2: A missed opportunity. Silverberg is a good author, but he doesn't give us anything about this ship, the planet, nothing. But, 8 men on an isolated planet does propel the story and creates an uneasy atmosphere. Summary: My average rating is 3.2. If you like crime syfy AND you're a Christie fan, this one's for you. Blood on the Mink: 4.0 Six Frightened Men: 3.0 Robert Silverberg Author Average: 3.5
