It was love at first sight (pun intended) and my affection with Catch-22 continues for over a decade. It is strange that I never thought of reading another one of Joseph Heller's, until one of my close mates bought "Something Happened" for me. I would have abandoned this book at the first 20 pages, if not for that kind soul who gifted it and the lingering memories of Catch-22. In hindsight, I should have moved on. You are on a crowded bus, the journey is tedious, you don't how long it is gonna take to reach your destination, no place to even stand properly, sweat, irritation, all kind of bad smells. You can get off at the next stop and forego the journey, but you don't. You don't even know what makes you to go through the ordeal. At every other stop, you get some breeze briefly when people shuffle around. After three fourth of journey, you are no longer bothered about anything. All you want is, to get over with it. Bob Slocum is a mid level manager in an american company, at the outset he is living the American dream. The are comic troubles In the office in which he works. His wife is unhappy. His daughter's unhappy. His little boy is having difficulties. There is no getting away from it. Oh, this is not just the plot, they are also chapter titles. 569 pages of first person narration (à la 150,000+ words of self ejaculation), seriously? Same things are repeated over and over, in the name of stream of conscience. And, it is not a first rate stream of conscience either. He keeps on talking about his urge to kick his daughter at her ankles. At the seventh time, I got fed up and wanted to shout, "If you wanna kick the shit outta her, please go ahead and get over it, just don't talk about it again". Imagine 10,000 Dilbert comic strips stacked up continuously, sans sketches. Juxtapose them with a mediocre soap opera. Thats what this novel is. I don't recommend this book even if you are interested in a satire about 'American Middle class Consumerism', you are better off with Sam Mendes' 2 hours flick "American Beauty".
