1960. 1966. 1983. 1999. 2000. Low Men in Yellow Coats When I first read Hearts in Atlantis, as soon after the paperback copies came out in print, Stephen King had not yet written the final Dark Tower books. Those three novels would be written back-to-back to complete Roland's quest, and only three short years away. King may have known he would write them in succession at this point, but I don't think so. He has stated that everything he wrote during this period of time had been turning towards the Tower. It was simply on his mind and coming out of him. Hearts in Atlantis, Black House, Everything's Eventual, From a Buick 8. All of them had become Dark Tower related in one form or another. But when I opened the pages to the first story in Hearts in Atlantis, I didn't know what to make of these Low Men. They were something new, something strange, and as Jake would say, “from a world other than this”. The Low Men would return within those later Dark Tower books, but in this book they were more frightful than they would ever be again (my feeling anyway). Regulators in yellow dusters wearing the skin of men, in an effort to hide whatever lay underneath, and carrying the eye of Sauron. Their cars were not simply gaudy, chromed land cruisers with dice. They were alive. Keep in mind though, that besides these elements, this was not a horror story. First, there was time to meet Bobby Garfield and Ted Brautigan. I liked them immediately, and more so as the story progressed, so I worried for them. With Bobby, it was childhood, the known and unknown fears ahead of him, because he had come to love Ted. In the span of only a few short days, this stranger with a heart of gold had become a father figure, and a friend, one Bobby hadn't realized he needed desperately. Now, in this recent reading, I worried for them once again. And loved it for that. “A week from now, I won't remember what was so neat about him. A year from now, I'll hardly remember him at all." Was that true? God, was that true? No, Bobby thought. No way. I won't let it be. Hearts in Atlantis Hearts. Love, of course. Feelings. Unexpectedly, there's a little card game named Hearts too. All three seen through the eyes of Pete Riley in his first year of college. A character from the first story makes her way into this second. The twelve year old life of Carol Gerber is a distant six years in the past, along with the 1960 America, replaced by the fervor of the middle 60's. H ow did I forget a majority of this story? Must be father time again. This is heartfelt King. Sentimentalism permeates this story as it does much of this book. There also may be a few things out of King's own past within these pages. Certainly he knew young hearts, a game called Hearts, and the prevalence of the Vietnam War. Once again horror doesn't apply here, excepting the fear of dying across the sea, and the loss of love. Blind Willie If you're counting the years Vietnam should be long gone, but no, it's closer here, living both sporadically and constantly in the memories of Willie. This is the third story addressing the boy William Shearman, the first you'd hear the name Blind Willie. Climbing a ladder, Willie leaves Bill one floor down to enter his other self, the Harwich of long ago, and the regrets that are more complicated than they appear. This is the only story in the bunch that doesn't click with me. Why We're in Vietnam Sully's turn to remember one horrifically painful day in country , and how war changes everything. It changes more than one life, that is certain. I had not remembered Old Mamasan . She haunts Sully, and has been since that one day in Vietnam. To know, you got to read it of course. Mostly, this is a “trying to get through fuckin' life” story. The closing pages are wild and a little wondrous. I appreciate the adult Sully far more now. Heavenly Shades of Night Are Falling Open with Bobby. Close with Bobby. It can be no other way.
