Playboy Paperbacks published an eclectic mix of books in the 70s/80s, including horror, science fiction, erotica to just plain weird. Hellstone is marketed on the spine as 'occult' and that just about fits. While we know from the backflap that this novel will have something to do with the Loch Ness monster, this is much more than a creature feature. Our main protagonist, one Jonathan Gant, works as a self-employed newsman and started his career in Vietnam (this was first published in 1980). One day an old friend, Dr. Honig, calls him to discuss an expedition to Scotland to seek out old Nessie. Dr. Honig has been obsessed over Nessie for years, but thinks he finally found a way to find the beast. He just developed a new type of camera that, with computer controls, can basically see through the impediments found in water; it uses some crazy tech to isolate and eliminate 'noise'. Finally! A way to see underwater in the peat-stained Loch Ness! Sounds like a creature feature for sure, but Spruill decided to mix things up a bit by adding in a band (coven?) of druids in Scotland that have some sort of ties to Nessie, and some ruthless corporation who wants the camera tech and will do just about anything to get it. If such a camera was, say, placed on a satellite, it could 'see' through camo netting, fog and such. What government would not pay a bundle for that! So, besides our expedition members, we have some modern druids running around trying to stop the expedition to save Nessie, and some hired thugs out to steal the camera. If all this is not enough to get you interested, Spruill adds in the titular Hellstone. It seems back in the time of Nero's Roman empire, some Druids pissed off the mad emperor and he set a legion to track them down and kill them. The druid leader carved a stele and left it on the bank of Loch Ness. 1000 years later, some intrepid Vikings also fought a battle on the shores of Loch Ness, and used the stone of the stele to carve their own tidings. It should be noted that the original druids and the Vikings were not for long in the world. What does this have to do with the story? You will have to read it to find out. Also, expect some erotica here; this should come as no surprise given the publisher. Jonathan Gant has the big time hots for Dr. Honig's beautiful young wife Sandra. Take a create feature, stir in some druids (with wicked mind powers I might add), a handful of ruthless 'contractors' engaged in corporate espionage and dump it on the shores of Loch Ness. Fun read, although at times it became a little difficult to follow all the different characters. 4 OTT stars!
