In ''Caribbean,'' Michener follows the same formula used successfully in many of his other novels like Poland or Chesapeake: hopping from place to place, inventing fictional characters who interact with historical figures, and explaining historical events and their context through the lives of those characters. It worked masterfully in many of his other novels but unfortunately fell short in this novel. I think this is largely because “Caribbean” has no central characters or families that appear consistently throughout the book. The very diversity of the islands, each influenced differently by various Spanish, English, French, Dutch, and African cultures tends to undermine Michener’s typical method of telling the history of a region by following a few key fictional families over time. The vast cultural mosaic of the region necessitates a constant introduction of new characters that have no relation to one another from chapter to chapter. Instead of a flowing history, we are left with a choppy patchwork of stories awkwardly forced together. Perhaps that in itself sheds some light on the turbulent history of the Caribbean Islands. The novel covers almost 700 years of Caribbean History starting with the native Arawak Indians in the 1300s and ending in 1989 when the novel was published. Despite the book’s flaws Michener, true to form, does not shy away from covering the disturbing history of mankind’s interactions with one another including the conquests, slavery, and colonialism that once flourished in the Caribbean and continues to influence the region to this day. Its starts with the native Arawak Indians on the island of Dominica who would be overrun by the ferocious and cannibalistic Carib Indians. The novel continues with the arrival of Christopher Columbus, the 400 year period of Spanish domination in the “Spanish Lake,” and the subsequent rivalry between Spain and England. This backdrop is used to recount the adventures of Sir Francis Drake, Henry Morgan, and Horatio Nelson. What I found particularly fascinating was the geo-strategic importance these islands played in European and world affairs. The wealth generated by the sugar plantations made many of these islands more valuable than most of the colonies on the mainland at the time. Likewise, the plantation owners on Jamaica and other British isles were able to acquire seats in Parliament enabling them to punch way above their weight in forcing political decisions of consequence to the entire British Empire. For instance, many of the onerous restrictions on the flow of trade for the colonies on the American mainland were initiated by MPs whose seats represented the West Indies. This was a slap in the face to American patriots popularizing the phrase “no taxation without representation” and no doubt directly contributed to the American Revolution. Michener does help to explain the unique character of many of the islands. Oliver Cromwell and the English Civil War are used to recount the history of Barbados, commonly referred to as “Little England.” French verses English attitudes towards mixed-race (creole) relations and the export of the French Terror into the islands are used to paint a picture of life in Guadeloupe. The Haitian revolution is told through the story of fictional general Cesar Vaval. Communist Cuba is explored through the eyes of Cuban refugees who have made a prosperous new life for themselves in Miami. Michener explores, in excruciating detail, the meaning and influence of Rastafarianism in Jamaica and other islands. He explores the introduction of Indians (from India) from lower castes into the islands to do many of the menial jobs that former slave refuse to do after slavery is abolished. While I have a much greater appreciation for the Caribbean, at over 800 pages the book turned into much more of a slog than his other books and I found myself struggling to get through the last third of the book. Thus far, this ranks as my least favorite Michener book.
