This is exactly the bracing kind of story I needed. Jolly good fun, as the general population of characters in this book would say. Georgette Heyer has always been good at adventure stories set amongst the British upper class, but in this she has far outdone herself. Her research is astounding. The second half of the book largely consists of an enormously through (about 150 pages long) play by play account of the battle of Waterloo, and its' immediate lead up and aftermath. Heyer seems to know every small action, every commander, each failed and successful strategy on both sides, not to mention her unbelievable knowledge of 19th century warfare and British army cant of the time. This part of the novel reads like something between a history tome and the narrative novel that its supposed to be. I certainly didn't know about 3/4 of any of the stuff in there. I think her main character, Charles Audley, one of the aides-de-camp to Wellington, was about the only person who was invented. In further praise: I think Charles and Barbara are one of the more realistic couples she's created, and each of them three dimensional and changing throughout the course of the story. Their love is somewhat unmotivated at first, but if you just accept it, there's no fault to be found thereafter with it. The first half of the novel is wonderful in the fact that it combines the farcical romance stories that she does so well and weaves in hints of the military drama to come over the course of it. It really creates a sense of the hysteria and surreality of being in society in Brussels before the battle of Waterloo, one second at balls, the next wondering when the cannons will fire on you. I wouldn't think of this as a romance novel, whatever it may say on the back of the book. Romance novels don't discuss battles and histories for 150 pages and hint at it for the rest. Also? The character of Wellington is wonderful, well researched, and not idealized in the slightest. She used many of his dispatches from the battle to make him even more realistic. The only thing I would comment on as a problem is that the romance and the description of Waterloo don't quite go together. It's like one story ends and entirely different one begins when the second half starts, with some of the same characters. Then for the last 30 pages, the first one starts up again, wrapping up all the storylines from the first part of the novel affected by the outcome of Waterloo. Were it not for Audley, the two would seem to have no connection at all. It did need to flow better, and perhaps not have /quite/ so serious a shift in tone. It was a little extreme. I was jolted, and I had to step back and take a breath before resuming after being plunged headfirst into 19th century military strategy. PS- For you fans of Heyer's These Old Shades (one of my favorites) and Devil's Cub, Barbara is Dominic and Mary's granddaughter (the couple from Devil's Cub), and they make an appearance. Bonus!
