"Cause Celeb" was Helen Fielding's debut novel, in advance of her overwhelming success with "Bridget Jones's Diary" and its sequel. This book does not have the sparkle that the Bridget Jones twosome owns, but all the same elements are there and show the promise to come. The main character and narrator is Rosie Richardson, a literary publicist obviously chosen for her job because of her decorative function at literary events. She is not as shallow as her employer and celebrity friends believe, as events prove in the novel. Rosie lives in London, as the story begins, and meets many of the City's glitterati at publishing receptions, book fairs, hot restaurants, and the homes of the glamourous. She meets the incredibly handsome TV presenter Oliver Marchant who moves from her rich fantasy life to her real life. Marchant is a Jekyll-and-Hyde, seamlessly transitioning from caring boyfriend to demanding egotist. 'Dysfunctional' is not a sufficiently complex adjective to describe their relationship. When Rosie is with Oliver in one of his aggressive moments, she recognizes that he is poison; but she misses him and longs for him, both physically and as her own 'arm-candy', even when she knows she should be looking elsewhere and even when she knows he is with another woman. Finally, she has enough and packs her bags, not simply to escape the London limelight and Oliver's rants, but to go to Africa as a volunteer to help refugees in a (fictional) border camp in a war-ravaged country called Nambula where famine and disease are constant. The story shifts back and forth between Rosie's London life as conditions with Oliver worsen and as the reader is gradually acclimated to her life in the refugee camp. The contrast is considerable because of the glitz factor but also because the generally warm, if eccentric, collection of characters at the refugee camp accentuates the frigid environment with Oliver in London. Rosie is the director of camp at Safila on behalf of the organization 'SUSTAIN'; and she shines spectacularly well at managing the complex politics, fund-raising, assessment of conditions, quantities of food and medicine, and the many organizations with their fingers in the mix. Her assistant Henry Montague has simply moved his marmalade-and-tea routines to the African desert; the occasional drama queen, he is still a capable administrator. Their doctor Betty is due to leave the camp to be replaced by the American Robert O'Rourke, who worked with nurse Linda previously in Chad (and, perhaps, has a relationship with her). Muhammad Mahmoud is a local who is not an official director of the camp but who has the skills and personality to rise to the occasion. Dr. O'Rourke arrives at Safila just in time for rumours of a locust plague, more famine, a huge influx of refugees, and a missing supply ship. Rosie decides to lead an expedition to see these locusts and try to get an estimate of the expected number of refugees. She takes photos to try to twist the arms of the powers-that-be for supplies and aid. A tragedy occurs, and this event plus the sight of thousands of refugees and fields stripped by locusts cause Rosie to call on her media skills. She returns to London to organize an appeal in a very short time. During her absence from London, her celebrity 'friends' have forgotten her. But the rumour mill quickly kicks back into gear as her old boyfriend, the inconstant Oliver, is the leading famous face to step forward to help her organize the famine appeal for television. There are essential details--like getting a broadcasting satellite into position--plus the overwhelming concern about whether or not the starving refugees will show up to their party. Timing turns on a dime, while Rosie wrestles with her own heart over Oliver and the American doctor. "Cause Celeb" is well worth reading, although I found I was at the middle of the book before it picked up steam and I got seriously interested. The book is filled with the comic twists associated with Fielding, but, because she spent time in Africa working in a relief camp herself, both the poignant and biting details feel very real. It is fun to watch Rosie turn from social butterfly to socially-conscious (and amazingly able) force of nature. It is also amusing to see in the book the reflection of celebrity faces that daily clamour for our contributions from the latest aid programs on TV.
