THE CONQUEST OF PRIDE. The road winds in Listlessness of ancient war, Langour of broken steel, Clamour of confused wrong, apt In silence. Memory is strong Beyond the bone. Pride snapped, Shadow of pride is long.... T.S. ELIOT, RANNOCH AT GLENCOE Which way I turn is Hell - Myself am Hell. SATAN, FROM ‘PARADISE LOST’ When T.S. Eliot visited the Scottish Highlands in his later years, he saw at first hand the site of the Glencoe Massacre at the time of the doomed Jacobite uprising of 1689. As he mused, who knows if he also thought of his own earlier words on this poetry, poetry that was composed at a religiously fractious moment of British history in the same timeframe as Glencoe - Milton's Paradise Lost? Perhaps he was remembering his comment that Milton could never endear himself to us readers. But maybe also this great twentieth century poet called to mind, as he meditated on war and pride, his own opinion that "there is no wisdom beyond the wisdom of humility.“ Pride begins and ends all wars, and pride can be the downfall of anyone’s religion. But humility is grace. And pride is the last enemy we must defeat on the road to self-knowledge. John Milton was a proud man, and he was valiantly attempting to "work out (his) salvation with diligence" - as Eliot‘s character of the psychiatrist says in The Cocktail Party - within the confines of a religion of Love, in which his own immense ego could barely fit. A doomed enterprise. As it was for me. My wounded heterosexual ego - for years - was crushed by the modern burden of sexual diversity. And the crushed, blind Milton of the later Samson Agonistes was still smothered in the smoky remnants of a hellish pride, as is his Satan in this work - with whom Milton subconsciously sympathizes. And that's the problem. William Blake, in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, implies that Satan’s fall is in reality Jesus’ fall, which totally appalls me, but there, but for Grace, have gone I. Obviously with this revelation evidence is mounting that Milton was Gnostic. What is a Gnostic? Someone who puts themselves first, over against God and goodness (more than guilty, your honour). So Gnosticism is the oldest cult of them all. Again, that applies to my own dark past. For as John Milton was rooting for the puritanical underdogs over and against the “licentious” Stuarts, so did I, albeit in a more modern sexual context. Which is it - the humility of the Lord or the pride of Satan? Get with the program, Fergus! It seems that as long as we, like Milton, seek a separate transcendence from our fellows in our beliefs, those beliefs will be to some extent defined by pride. Pride seeks transcendence; while humility abases itself to a state of immanence. There may be no religious faith other than the Pauline one which accepts the full weight of life’s inherent problematics. Many outside of faith, similarly, seek transcendence - some in great power, though others through idealizing their ideas of sexuality and living those ideals through their acts. If you take your life without those transcendent ideals you’re on the right path, though it hurts like all get out to do that. Yet that’s what Christian existentialists like Kierkegaard and Jaspers tell us to do. I must learn ever anew from them. Milton lived in his poetic ideals as others among us live in their sexual ideals. And so life becomes for them a game to be won ever anew, until old age puts the kibosh to all that. Yet, those who seek in resignation to live life in forever experiencing its problematic aspects, will be forever renewed in its vigour. Any form of escape will prove to be spiritual suicide. The majestic, rumbling cadences of this great work inspire our awe, but the epic doesn't satisfy, because of this inherent duality of meaning and intent. For the real meaning of Losing Paradise is found in the transcendence of pride. So, to sum up: The epic battles are incredible, but they are filled with the "clamour of confused wrong." The poetry floors us, but the ego of its author turns us off. (And I apologize for my identical behaviour here.) The overall architecture is superb, but there is a crack in its cornerstone. Five stars for an otherwise incredible masterpiece of literature. A fractured masterpiece - to more objectively wary (and rightly so) modern eyes.
