A Divine Revelation of Hell is one of the most juvenile descriptions of Hell I have ever read. Her depiction of Heaven was similarly juvenile. Both false visits to the afterlife read more like B movie scripts than Scripture. And though she has access to what the Bible says about Hell, she still gets it wrong! Mary K. Baxter makes many claims about the importance of faith. However, rather than see faith Biblically as trust in Christ's substitutionary death, her version of faith is a magical belief that our thoughts, words, and prayers can make happen what we believe will happen. She has a belief that like Santa Claus needs children to believe in him to power his sleigh, Jesus needs our faith to allow Him to defeat our enemies. She shares a childish and unbiblical "prophecy" of the Tribulation and reign of the antichrist. Unfortunately she failed to read her Bible. Oh, she watched movies about such a time and their influence is clearly seen. But when she said that babies would be born from breeder mothers and "at a certain time" would be put into the "mind destroying machine" failed to read that the Tribulation only lasts seven years and the antichrist's numbering system for only three and a half years so after nine months gestation the antichrist is mind controlling two year olds?!! Read your Bible false teachers and you won't make such rookie mistakes! She reports that she walked with "Jesus" on a tour of Hell. Jesus wanted to use her to back up His claims that Hell is a real place. Apparently the Scriptures are insufficient. On her tour demons captured her and tortured her and Jesus was nowhere to be found. She feared demons so much that she feared to quote Scripture. When she returned home no one would believe her. They would not believe how SHE was tormented! Somehow I thought the point of the Gospel was believing that Christ was tortured for us and that the torment HE endured for us was payment for our sins so that we NEVER have to fear Hell. This lady is either lying or deceived! Avoid this heretical book!
