Warning for those wanting to read this, it is excruciating. Having said that, it is Kafka at his best. Protagonist K. enters a small village located under a large castle on a mountain, its winter, dark, cold, and forever snowing. K. enters an inn and announces he has been engaged by the Count of the Castle as a land surveyor. The initial suspicion and hostility of the locals is transformed into silent acquiescence as a call is made to check with the Central Office of the castle to check K’s. story. Needless to say, Central Office have never heard of K. Now we enter “Kafka-World.” It is a nightmare comprising of self-important, often invisible, administrators (senior and junior), inept assistants – such as secretaries and messengers, inefficient and ineffective departments a bloated self-serving bureaucracy and suspicious and unfriendly locals. All of this, snugly ensconced in a dark, cold, unfriendly environment. K. is buffeted between all the above, he is certainly determined (bahahaha – poor bloke) and he is obsessed about contacting a senior official called Klamm, this guy has all the answers apparently. K. is usually lead on – he gets many false promises if he’s lucky, lots of dead-ends. He’s also allocated two of the most useless assistants one could ever meet – both act like 4-year-olds and make his life worse. Funny enough - K. also ends up being a school janitor and ends up with a fiancée called Freida (Klamm's ex). There are too many other unhelpful & odd characters to mention here – but if you read this you will find the distractions and diversions annoyingly numerous. One can only feel for K. his pain, frustration and desire for help and friendship is palpable. One main, if not the main reason I read is to ”feel” . For an author to make one feel frustrated so completely, a bit angry, to feel bored more than once – and also to chuck in a couple of laughable scenes (more like chuckles really – or irritated chuckles), is no mean feat. Kafka achieves this absolutely and completely. The weight of the novel is considerable. So much so, that I was going to DNF on many occasions. But what compelled me to continue was twofold: 1. My man, Kafka spent a lot of time and effort creating this befuddling world, so I felt an obligation to spend a lot of time in it. 2. To get the whole “ Kafka Experience “one must suffer and gobble up every annoying word and situation. So, I did. Without giving the ending away, this story ends mid-paragraph. This was Kafka’s last work – so we can draw our own conclusions whether he died mid-sentence or not. But, in a nightmare story like this – perhaps there is no ending. I hated and loved this. 5-Stars Note for those of you who haven't read Kafka - I'm not sure this one is the best to start your bizarre journey. This short story is a good one of his A Country Doctor and will only take you half an hour: https://www.kafka-online.info/a-count...
