Alright, so here's the deal: I think the story was alright, but I disagree with the execution of the book. A story about terrorists taking over a bus of preschoolers, told in a non-sequential order with a fairly interesting cast of characters (spoiler alert: Raymond is the best character)? Good idea! Having literally every person of color that appears in the book be a terrorist? Less so: same goes to the author's apparent obsession with people peeing themselves, which happens several times in the book with diminishing returns each time. (Is this for realism's sake, or for thematic reasons? I thought so the first few times, but then it just kept happening and I got concerned for everyone's bladders in this book.) Overall, I don't think it was a terrible book; I certainly don't think it's aged very well, and a few scenes stand out as truly bizarre - why did Artkin dance around with a child's body at one point? Why did the government authorize a teenager to participate in a hostage crisis?- but overall it's an alright, very depressing book. I did enjoy the odd chapters, and the twists that come with those, if that's any help. I'm... honestly not sure who I'd recommend it to, due to the fact that I didn't enjoy it very much. I guess someone who really likes terrorism thrillers, but isn't concerned about the endings? Alternatively, a student who likes grim, "realistic" books. As for lesson plans, I think this book would be good for a class that addresses how Middle Eastern people are portrayed in fiction - every antagonist in this book is either Middle Eastern or black, and all of them are portrayed as terrorists out for blood (though I will admit, the book is somewhat more sympathetic towards them than it could be, portraying the character of Miro as a victim of the society he grew up in). This is a recurring stereotype in culture, and one that should probably be addressed in school. Content warnings: Sex: some nudity described, one character keeps fantasizing about another sexually Drugs: children are repeatedly drugged with narcotics Rock-and-roll: A lot of bodily fluids in this story, mostly pee. Enough to make me wonder why the author kept having characters pee themselves. Language: One swear word that I noticed. Violence: A lot of it, mostly towards children and minors.
