This is the first Koontz book I ever read. I read it a loooong time ago. Maybe 10 or 20 years ago. From what I read in other reviews, maybe it is like one of those favorite old movies that is not impervious to time...you watch it years later and the jokes are old, the characters are dorky...but I really liked this book. The first time I tried to read it, it scared me so much I had to put it down. I think it took me 3 tries to get through it. That said, the 3rd time I was like, "what was so scary that I couldn't keep reading?" Maybe it was the cruelty. As others mentioned, he talks from the dog's point of view at times. The dog perceives the world through smells. The first chapter I read from the dog's pov, I thought it was really annoying. but, it really is an interesting and insightful perspective, and I ended up enjoying it when it came in in the remainder of the book. There are a few different "victims" - hunted would be a better descriptor - and the antagonist terrorizes each of them in a unique way. He completely steals their peace. The key to his identity is found through the discovery of a relative who he is also terrorizing...I thought this was a really surprising twist in the plot. I think the ending was somewhat anti-climactic as this antagonist seems invincible and is so horrifying...and then they catch up to him...even though you want them to, you are a little unimpressed with who he turns out to be. Anyway, I thought this was great. Scary, suspenseful...I saw very mixed reviews. Some love it, some hate it. After this, I thought I discovered the best author ever, so I read a number of his books. Aside from False Memory (which I liked, but not as well as Dragon Tears), I do not remember much of their plots or characters. I think this is because I didn't feel most of them measured up, I began to tire of the "darkness" inherent in most of his novels (given the subject) and they started to feel formulaic....I felt I would know what the characters would do and how it would end. I think this is pretty typical with authors who write in one genre. It's human nature. I definitely felt that way about Stephen King. I think I prefer Koontz to King, though King did have some really stand-out books.
