There are several things that make this book stand out: its unique subject matter, its overall tone and the high quality of original research that obviously went into it. When Abortion was a Crime deals with the period of just over 100 years when abortion was prohibited by law in most circumstances in the United States. This is something that, surprisingly, has seldom been explored in detail, which is unfortunate given the continued and quixotic efforts of so many state legislatures to return the United States to that time. It is almost as if we are endlessly arguing about whether or not to ban alcohol without ever remembering what happened when we tried. This book goes a long way towards correcting that. Dr. Reagan approaches the subject with a very professional tone, which should be expected in a work of history but stands out given the politically charged subject matter. All too often, in publications such as The Huffington Post and Salon, the point of an article about abortion is to drum up outrage and, implicitly, money and votes, such that even those who are “pro-choice” must feel disturbingly like they are reading their own side’s shrill propaganda. When Abortion was a Crime avoids this trap, instead dispassionately documenting, in great detail, the abuses brought on by restrictive abortion laws prior to 1973. The author seems to feel that her readers are intelligent enough that she can let the facts speak for themselves, and they certainly do. Lastly, I would be in remiss if I failed to mention the work that Dr. Reagan has done in bringing to light primary sources such as court cases, witness testimonies and 19th century newspapers describing the ways in which abortion laws were enforced. This 400-page book contains nearly 150 pages of endnotes, many of which are fascinating in their own right and do a great deal to reinforce the text. The only weak spot in this book is in the epilogue. Having produced several hundred pages of excellent historical documentation of the era 1867-1973, the author seems compelled by her passion for the subject matter to discuss developments since Roe v. Wade. She is unable to do so thoroughly in the ten pages that she has given it. As much as one would like to give her the benefit of the doubt given her evident expertise, the epilogue lacks the thorough exposition and supporting detail that is due of a complex subject. It is a shame that she did not produce a second volume dealing with developments after 1973, which would have been necessary to do the subject justice. Ultimately, though, the failure to adequately examine restrictions and court cases subsequent to Roe v. Wade does not take away from the fundamental and inescapable conclusion of When Abortion was a Crime. Restrictive abortion laws prior to 1973, which banned the procedure in almost all circumstances, were a public policy disaster on par with Prohibition. The abuses that they inflicted on women, doctors, and, in some cases, even men were remarkably brutal and would simply not be accepted in the more free and civilized society of 21st Century America. As those who were adults during this period gradually die off, it is important that we retain this understanding, and Dr. Reagan’s book is an essential tool in doing so.
