A ‘CHANNELING’ ENCOUNTER WITH A 19TH CENTURY ‘SPIRIT SIDEKICK’ Authors Don and Linda Pendleton wrote in the Introduction to this 1990 book, “Do you often have the feeling that an unseen presence is guiding your thoughts or actions?... Do you feel that you have guardian angels, that prayers re frequently answered, or that you often receive information that is not available to you through any of the five senses? We are here to suggest to you that such feelings and experiences can be very real and entirely valid, and we hope to offer you understanding and encouragement that you may further a meaningful relationship with the wide universe of spirit… We hope to give you comfort in the knowledge that you are among a swelling majority of twentieth-century men and women who have a strong curiosity about their place and their role in this magical marvel called LIFE, who want to know where they came from and where they are going, and who want to learn how to make the most of what they’ve brought here with them.” (Pg. 13, 15-16) They recount, “We had been waiting two months for this appointment with spirit. We were four women and two men---ourselves the only married couple… Why were Linda and I there[?]… we had a professional interest. We are novelists… But that is not why we were REALLY there. We were there because we, too, wanted to encounter spirit one on one, and we’d decided that this would be the place to do that. We had heard Dr. Peebles [James Martin Peebles, the ‘Grand Spirit,’ was born in 1822 and lived almost a hundred years] twice on a Los Angeles radio show called ‘Open Mind’… where we were regularly treated to UFO contactees, crystal freaks, astrologers, psychics, and all the court jesters… But far and away the most interesting guest, to me, was Thomas Jacobsen and his spirit sidekick, Dr. Peebles. Thomas would go into trance… and bring forth Dr. Peebles… I wanted to check out the guy in person… That is why I was there. Linda was there because she already knew the truth about Dr. Peebles… Thomas Jacobsen met us at the door…” (Pg. 17-20) They recount, “Our initial meeting with Dr. Peebles…occurred on April 8, 1987… we did not directly encounter Dr. Peebles again until June 1, at which time we had intended to state our interests in writing about him and to request his permission active cooperation. But he already knew about it, and he had some ideas of his own to contribute. We set up a series of interviews and went to work. The result is what follows.” (Pg. 24-25) They say of Thomas Jacobson, “he bound himself as a student to a group seeking spiritual enlightenment via meditation and direct inspiration through trance states. His teacher was a man who claimed to be a trance channel for a discarnate entity… Thomas’s success as a channel did not come easily...” (Pg. 28) Jacobson recalled, “I wanted I tot be some other spirit, not Dr. Peebles, because William was already channeling Dr. Peebles… But over a period of about a year… I just quit fighting it… so I asked Dr. Peebles to fix it so I could just have one spirit coming through, and that’s the way it's been.” (Pg. 33) In a session with Jacobson/Peebles, Don says, “Yes, I understood that I was conversing with a being who could not be offended by impertinence or disbelief. This was almost like a conversation with God, and he was being so patient with me, so lovingly patient, allowing the dumb questions and treating them with respect the same as a sensitive father sitting down with his little boy… My biggest problem throughout has been to remain objective and to question realistically from a human intellectual point of view instead of continually nodding my head and saying, ‘I see.’ … It is, yest, somewhat like a dialogue with God, but Dr. Peebles would reprimand me gently for saying so.” (Pg. 45-46) He explains, “Skepticism is a natural and healthy exercise of human consciousness, but it can also mislead and defeat us when not exercised intelligently… Even in its purest form---as a means to evaluate knowledge---skepticism is mere negativity… It is not okay if the skeptical attitude is merely a mask worn by a closed mind trying to hide from the truth…” (Pg. 49) He observes, “So why did either of us need Dr. Peebles?... The answer, we think, is that Dr Peebles needed us. We have discovered the truth that one does not argue with the angels… we have even considered the possibility that … we have been nudged and tugger through all the pain and joy and confusion and ecstasy of these past few years to our recent confrontation with Thomas Jacobson and his spirit sidekick. Certainly our lives have not been the same since that electric moment four years earlier when our eyes first met as strangers across a crowded room.” (Pg. 86) He says, “I personally find it both illuminating and satisfying that there are also great parallels between the phenomenon that we now call ‘trance channeling’ and the phenomenon that parapsychologists such as Dr. X characterize as psychic abilities… So when I am in the presence of Dr. Peebles, what does it buy me to dismiss this phenomenon as intuition, or clairvoyance, or any other PURELY MENTAL faculty when we do not even know what mental is, or what clairvoyance or intuition are?” (Pg. 96) He asks, “If you were given a thirty-minute audience with God, what would you want to talk about?... What would you have Dr. Peebles say to you that would convince you that no one on Earth could have said it? And please remember that Dr. Peebles does not claim to be God, or even infallible. So let’s put the question to God Itself. If God Itself fails the test, then how can we hold a mere angel accountable to an even higher standard? What can you tell us, God, that we cannot tell ourselves? That would be my first question if I wanted to challenge Deity… God replies, ‘You live forever.’” (Pg. 123) Dr. Peebles asserts, “The Yeti is located in the Northwest United States, is located in the Pyrenees Mountains, in the central Alps, throughout Russia and Northern Europe.” (Pg. 186) Don writes, “The great religions of the world today can be seen as viable pools or takes through which the human search for God is finding satisfying expression. And, of course, the human landscape is littered with the dry beds of other religious notions that found themselves outside the flow toward God. The strongest, the most persistent, and the more profound teaching that we get from Dr. Peebles has to do with the value of the diversity of God’s expression: all is contained within God; therefore we encounter God (perhaps without recognition) in every activity, every locale, every thought and deed. GOD CANNOT BE AVOIDED because everything we encounter with the mind IS God… the religious instinct is no more than some dim recognition within ourselves that WE LIVE IN GOD coupled with the desire to express that recognition.” (Pg. 229) Dr. Peebles advises, “use your sexuality, instead of being afraid of your sexuality. That is a SPIRITUAL activity, to create greater intimacy between yourself and others. Do not let sexuality… as it has in the past, become a thorn in the side. Sexuality is a beautiful experience when accomplished with respect, a beatific and divine experience that inspires people to touch each other… So surrender to your sexuality.” (Pg. 301) They conclude, “We realize that we have barely scratched the surface of the phenomenon here---and indeed it has been our major intent to merely call attention to it and invite further interest… Thomas himself conducts intensive workshops in transformational spirituality and spiritual psychology and has dedicated his life to helping others find their own paths. If you cannot find a teacher or study group in your vicinity, you may contact Thomas directly at the address given on page 261. We do intend to spend more direct time with Spirit, to fill in some of the blanks that you may have noted herein, and to extend the depth of our understanding. We could not to contain it all within a single book. So, yes, this book is at its close … but the adventure is far from ended.” (Pg. 367-368) This book will be of some interest to those studying channeling, and related topics.
