Originally Reviewed For: Bodice Rippers, Femme Fatales and Fantasy Once again Rosanne Bittner has opened up her backlist and we are treated to a complete delight. Ms. Bittner's books exemplify what was great about the books of the 80's and early 90's. Wildest Dreams was initially released in 1994 and one again, I managed to miss it. Who knows why..but I can tell you it is something I regret. Fortunately for all of us, Ms. Bittner has re released it so we get a chance to read something special. Lettie McBride and her family left everything behind for a better life. Not that the life they left had been bad, they were prominent storekeepers, but when Lettie was raped and left with child, her world changed. Sixteen and treated like a pariah by society.. So her family pulled up stakes and set out for Denver and a new life. Luke Fontaine had demons of his own. He too was raised in luxury but he was not blessed with the loving family that Lettie was. Declared a Bastard he was disowned and forced to make his way in life. This left him with a burning desire to become something more. Setting out on the same wagon train as the McBride family, Luke soon realized that Lettie is the woman he wants by his side as he makes his way in the world. So, a young (very young) mother has to decide, leave her family and maybe a life of luxury or risk it all on a man who adores her but has little but promises to give her.. And the adventure truly begins, Wildest Dreams follows Lettie and Luke as they become one of the first families to settle in Montana, together they suffer triumphs and tragedies and through it all they realize that if they hold on to each other, there is nothing they can't do. This was one of those books that created awe.. I closed the final page with a sigh and wished for more. We didn't see a window into their lives we lived their lives with them. This was an epic saga.. While most books today are maybe movies this was a mini series, ongoing.. life and it's struggles.. and all the rewards that come from just living. A true work of art. Shauni This review is based on the ARC of Wildest Dreams, provided by netgalley.
