This book is incredibly important as the first comprehensive work on the subject of IBM and its unfortunate involvement in the Holocaust. In the introduction to the novel, Black warns us that, “Skipping around in this book will only lead to flawed and erroneous conclusions. So if you intend to skim, or rely on selected sections, please do not read the book at all.” (11) This is good advice in an ideal world. However, it would take a normal person such a very long time to read this, and that’s getting through all the dry parts, which constitute most of the middle of the book. You really have to care about what you’re reading to get through this book. It’s very rewarding, but just not for everyone. This book is dense and packed to the brim with details. It is extremely thorough, and at times comes across as having some unnecessary information. As Black extensively explains in the introduction, this book took an enormous effort to produce. After painstakingly recovering documents from around the world, he was left with an unbelievable amount of notes. My only criticism is that maybe he should have edited a little; some of the information that he gave was unnecessary in relation to the story of IBM and its relation to the Holocaust. TAt one point he goes on for four pages about someone's bonus not being given on time... On the other hand, this is the first comprehensive work of its kind on IBM and its role in the Holocaust, so perhaps my complaints are unwarranted. Still, to be more accessible to the general public I would have definitely done some editing. The goings-on of the business were necessary to include somewhat, but not so compelling to the extent that Black presented it. While I do have a greater understanding of how in-depth the Nazis went with finding out just who was Jewish, I can’t help but wonder why there wasn’t more of a silent retaliation. The Nazis researched some information thoroughly, for example, records of Jews who had converted to Christianity (They were not excluded from being targeted.) But other times, the censuses would simply ask questions about an individual’s grandparents for example. In the later years of the 30s, why didn’t people lie? “Census takers were cautioned to overcome any distrust by assuring families that the information would not be released to the financial authorities.” (170) Okay, but it was still released to the Nazis. That’s the main question that I’m left with after reading this book; before the deportations started, when there were definite signs of trouble and Anti-Semitism towards Jews, why didn’t more people lie? Another element of this book that really troubled me was the author’s often use of the New York Times as proof that America really knew and cared what was happening to the Jews in Europe. Through my own research and videos we’ve watched in class, this simply wasn’t the case. Besides the New York Times hardly ever having said information on the front page, Americans weren’t predominantly concerned with what was happening with the Jews; the issue was the war and the soldiers we were sending to fight in it. Furthermore, America was quite anti-Semitic at the time and if our citizens were given the full information, I wouldn’t have been as big of a priority as it would be today.
