This novel does exactly what it says on the tin . It's a set-piece entertainment which could so easily have been a play in two or three acts . It's full of clichés and dry humour which almost hides the tragic poignancy of control , abuse and loneliness that motivates the behaviour of the principal female characters . These days readers may baulk at the unlikable characters , at the obviously dated prejudices, pastimes and attitudes but it's worth getting past our own moral landscapes and the horrible behaviours in the first part simply to enjoy the deft skill with which Keane brings the tale to its climax. Our first pair of " Devoted Ladies " are living together in a asymmetric relationship in London . It's a life of debauchery and loose sexual morals lubricated by alcohol where no one is likeable and everyone bitches about everyone else. Dumb Jane is under the violent rule of Malevolent Jessica while gay playwright Aloof Sylvester observes and navigates , using the people he mixes with for his popular cheap novels and West End successes . Is Molly Keane writing herself into this story ! There's a crisis , an innocent and honest huntin , fishing, shootin bloke, George , fetches up at the right moment and we move to the decaying and depleted community of the Anglo Irish where appearances count for everything in a world where their power and wealth is sluicing down the plughole . Our second pair of Devoted Ladies is equally asymmetrical , with the poor deluded spinster Piggy held tight in the fantasy of her friendship with her neighbour , Joan , who is exploitative and two faced . Keane is an acute observer of both locations having been raised in the latter , then finding personal freedom and fame in the former, after her career as a writer , under the pseudonym M J Farrell, took off . It's no accident that we have no context , no sense of Ireland or London beyond the tight circle of privilege . The players are few , the settings almost clichéd ( London party , country house , picnic , the hunt ) but this allows the caricatures ( the dumb blond , the country squire , the ugly spinster , the bored wife , the gay playwright) to develop some nuance and interiority . it's unsaid that the substrate is the legacy of WW1 and Irish Independence . No available men allows same sex relationships to be normalised in the city but the isolated rural elites, under threat of extinction, turn to denial of reality and resort to the doctrines and habits of their ancestors . Will it all turn out ok in the end ? You'll simply have to read it to find out .
