EYE OF THE NEEDLE [1978] By KEN FOLLETT My Review 5.0 Stars Out Of 5.0 Stars It was not surprising that just between Amazon and Goodreads, this timeless debut novel by a young Ken Follet had amassed roughly 200,000 ratings. One must realize that this number is likely to be woefully low when one considers that the book was originally published by MacDonald & Jane's Publishers in 1978 under the title Storm Island. That same year the rights were acquired by the Penguin Group who published the novel under the title “Eye of The Needle.” I read the Reprint Kindle Edition dated July 7, 2015, but I make it a point of indicating the original release date in my reviews as I have done above. The title of this worldwide phenomenon by the 27-year-old Welshman was “EYE OF THE NEEDLE” when I read it for the first time. The title is derived from the code name of a master spy for Hitler, one nicknamed ‘die Nadel’ (the needle). Henry Faber had been given the nickname because of his kill method using a stiletto in a single move to pierce the heart of his target and silence him or her simultaneously. However, the main character in this spellbinding work of historical fiction set in 1940’s wartime felt as though the nickname was bad luck. It may have been just that when one reads the final pages of this thrilling, pulse-pounding wartime adventure. This novel was Follett's first successful, best-selling effort as a novelist, and one he had written over a period of a mere five weeks. It was therefore kismet that the finished product won the 1979 Edgar Award for Best Novel. Follet was destined to become a great author of outstanding abilities which found his novels instant bestsellers on the NYT Bestseller List and also with options for film adaptation in many cases. However, it was the novel he wrote at age 27 in an effort to win a cash price to get his car repaired that would be the start of it all. “Eye Of the Needle” became an international bestseller selling over 10 million copies. It was the nerve-wracking and breather thriller of a sociopathic spy and the unlikely nemesis that would bring him down and save the free world that made Follett both rich and famous across the globe. The teaser description for this masterpiece on Amazon is quite brief. The reader is told a bit more about the lethality, skills, and temperament of Hitler’s favorite and most reliable purveyor of information about the allies and strategies. “The Needle” [Henry Faber] is a German aristocrat who possesses if not a genius IQ extraordinary intelligence. Faber is not just smart, he “reads” people with uncanny accuracy, he is patient, methodical and lethal. ‘Die Nadel’ is a master spy in all facets of the word with violence as much a part of his birthright as his brains. The author does a wonderful job with fleshing out Faber’s British counterparts, namely a history professor named Godliman, and a widowed ex-policeman named Bloggs. The pair are brought on board by MI5 to catch this proverbial “needle” in a haystack. Dialogue is colorful between the two and the reader feels like they know these two guys, who have both suffered enough heartbreak between them to diminish most men but they are successful in turning their losses into flames of a tireless manhunt to save their homeland. Bloggs is the more colorful and forceful of the two and it is he who is there at the end of the story to marvel in its events. Basically, our tale takes place in 1940 when ‘die Nadel’ is both acting and dressing the part of a nondescript nobody, but collecting information on Allied troop movements. Faber is holed up in his small rental space radioing his collected findings on the Allied Troop movements to Berlin when his landlady literally uses her master key to his room and walks in unannounced in high hopes of seducing him. He is halfway through the transmission and fears that she has noticed the fact that he was deploying a transmitter. Would the love-starved widow have spotted the transmitter and extrapolated that her unassuming but hunky renter was a German spy? Faber is too meticulously mindful of such risks and dispatches her with his stiletto without further ado. He then resumes his transmission, the threat neutralized. It is fascinating how and under what circumstances that ‘die Nadel’ stumbles across the most vital information that was available. He recognized the ramifications of what he had discovered but his intelligence told him that only physical evidence would convince the Furor. It comes to pass that the Allies discover what pure golden spy intel that Faber possesses. It is in this fashion that Faber (‘Di Nadel’) becomes the target of the most desperate manhunt in the Allies history. There are few accolades not bandied about when readers start discussing “Eye of The Needle.” “One of the twelve best thrillers from the last fifty years” is a good one. I started thinking about this book when I was chatting back and forth with a fan of Follet’s present day, and she had not read his phenomenal book “Eye of The Needle.” I have not touched upon any information about the events or the participants of the end of the novel because that material although not a spoiler, I do not want a new reader to be thinking ahead or speculating. This is an absolutely riveting, pulse-pounding thriller of thrillers. Yes, it is a “spy thriller.” I for one am fascinated with the World War II period. Espionage was a go-to genre for me when I was younger, and I laugh now at the fact that I read all of the 007 Novels by the great Ian Fleming when I was still a young kid in my mid-teens. I later discovered Robert Ludlum and reread his famous Jason Bourne Trilogy when I bought my first Kindle and bought the digital copies. I know I went off a tangent, but I did have a point, and that is I believe that any lover of “thrillers” would love this one. The novel has a sympathetic well-drawn protagonist at the end whose life is pitted against the robotic nemesis and killing machine that Hitler dubbed “Di Nadel.” It is not one life but the fate of the Allies and all of Britain that is in the balance. A PHENOMENAL SUSPENSE THRILLER FROM THE ‘70s STILL HEART-STOPPING TODAY
