"Are you building more H-bombs but enjoying it less? Has thermonuclear war got you down?" "Our enemy, Stockstill thought. Who is our enemy... isn't it you, Mr. Tree? Isn't it you sitting here rattling off your paranoid delusions? How did you ever get the high post that you hold? Who is responsible for giving you power over the lives of others- and letting you keep that power even after the fiasco of 1972? You - and they - are surely our enemies." And who is Mr. Tree, really? Mr. Tree is Dr. Bluthgeld, aka Dr. Bloodmoney, a paranoid and demented megalomaniac who is hell-bent on destroying the world. He has been ranting to the psychologist Dr. Stockstill about his perceived 'enemies'. Let's not get into the plot because you'll want to read that for yourself. But, the book is a post-apocalyptic work of Science Fiction that includes some real characters, such as Richard Nixon as the FBI director. The book was written in 1965, but it is set in 1981 and covers about seven years. Allow me to explain Nixon's presence in the story. You need to remember that Nixon lost to Kennedy in 1960. He then lost the California gubernatorial race in 1962. I think he was miffed by that, and that's around the time he said, "You won't have old Dick Nixon to kick around anymore" or something like that. Well, he was not giving up that easy. He hovered in the background, throwing a lot of money around at GOP races across the country, basically buying the 1968 nomination. Meanwhile he fomented his 'Southern Strategy' of coded language, using words like "neighborhood schools" instead of "segregation" to stir up the Dixiecrats to change to the Republican party. The South was before that Democratic of course. The Civil Rights Act of 1965 had them pretty riled up. And, Nixon knew how to tap into that racism. This was the point where this book was published. Old "Dick Nixon" was this political ghost in the background that people knew and feared... some of them did. Some welcomed him with open arms, and he would later be president from 1969 to 1974, when he resigned. So, the book is somewhat satiric and takes a riff off Nixon's reputation as an authoritarian who liked domestic control. All this plays into the novel's themes of paranoia and the surveillance state. Dr. Bloodmoney is some Science guy who has no business in politics, but has been given a hand in the government and made some very bad choices that project Earth into an apocalypse. I got curious about Nixon's "Enemy List" while reading this fascinating book. His list included only about 20 names at first, like high-profile journalists. People he sought out for revenge. But, before long it stretched into the hundreds. Yes, its hard to tell the difference between Sci-fi and politics sometimes. Dr. Bloodmoney has such themes as paranoia, racism, mocking special needs/ handicaps and what makes a person with a disability 'unnatural.' But, the book is great. I finished this a couple of nights ago so late that I planned to review it the next day, and am just getting around to it. I've been reading several books back to back lately. This one though, kept me up until four in the morning. It is a great read, probably better even than the other PKD books I've read. I recommend this quick classic read highly.
