"… even where there is love there is misunderstanding. We try to speak to each other like through a glass, all of us." Either I'm getting increasingly sentimental with each passing year, or Winston Graham had special powers that shine through in his writing! Perhaps a little of both! I felt so emotional reading this book, and I might have to say this is my favorite in the series thus far. This is the sixth book in the spectacular Poldark series set in late 1700s Cornwall. Each installment has felt so fresh and alive, but you absolutely have to read these in order. I swear the characters will grow on you; some of them occupy a little piece of my heart as if they were real persons in my life. Others I would cringe to cross paths with, if ever we did happen to come face to face! I really had a difficult time letting go of this particular episode in the lives of these very human and complex souls. While Napoleon’s name is becoming more than just a whisper on the continent, the folks of Cornwall are becoming more and more on the alert and have made steps to ensure the security of their own independence. I like that Winston Graham does not create just a little insular world, but rather always keeps in the background the political and historical events of the times. It helps to keep things in perspective knowing that this was in fact a time of turmoil in Europe. Likewise, the characters have their own set of problems, both small and large. I thought Graham did an excellent job at examining the institution of marriage in The Four Swans . Trust, passion, infidelity, communication, the role of religion, and loyalty are all elements that are explored and tested. It forced me to stop and mull over my own relationship – what makes it last and how can I preserve this sacred bond? Many familiar faces appear once again in this book, and we have the pleasure of meeting some new ones as well. A few of the lesser characters are more fully developed, and I especially enjoyed getting to learn more about Sam Carne and Hugh Armitage. Of course, I always delight in Ross, Demelza, Caroline, Dwight and Drake. Elizabeth has shown some additional strength, in particular a degree of shrewdness I had not previously expected from her. George Warleggan continues on his rampage with his goal of always trying to one-up Ross; and my revulsion towards Ossie Whitworth is intensified even further. I think I went through the whole gamut of emotions in this book! I felt just a bit spent after reading, and am convinced that nothing else will manage to inspire such feeling in me – at least not until I pick up book 7! I adore this series and wouldn’t hesitate to recommend it to anyone that appreciates well-written and highly compelling historical fiction with brilliant character development. You might just fall under Mr. Graham’s spell as well! "Tenderness is not like money. But neither is trust... Neither is loyalty. You can give those away and they are gone forever... Though only a part of love, they are a vital part, gathered, stored, built up over the years, like something growing round love, protecting it, warming it, adding another strength to it and another savour. Give those away and they are gone forever…"
