Read several years ago. This is a very French, very Lancelot centric version of the story and the end of the Lancelot grail vulgate where Lancelot does Lancelot things and everyone talks about how cool Lancelot is at doing Lancelot things. As far as establishing the legend and Lancelot's place in it, this is very good. As far as everyone else, well... Gawain is cool so that when Lancelot beats him Lancelot looks even cooler, as if this were an anime or something, and Arthur does cool stuff once Lance is finally not the centre of attention, but before this he is effeminate and comically useless. I am of course ignoring every positive. To begin with, this is the first version to fuse the then (relatively) recent French innovations with the larger story and tragedy of king Arthur, especially after the Prose Merlin and other prequels were written. Before the Lance-grail, medieval romances were largely isolated from each other. The grail quest, Lancelot, a focus on knightly romances rather than the King himself, were not, as far as I'm aware, present in the previous English histories of kings in which Arthur's story was famously told. Maybe in Pagan Welsh versions, but these are lost to us and little can be said about them. Every major version of the death of Arthur after this one uses this version as a basis. The intrigue with Agravain and the killing of Gawain's brothers and the ensuing feud, the reveal of Lance's adultery, etc, as far as I know originate here. The stuff surrounding Mordred predate this, which is why it is a complete afterthought here, and included only out of obligation. It is also impressive that, as a literary cycle, different writers did so well collaborating on a single project. There are hiccups, but few. The Grail story Penguin also collects is in the same continuity. This is a direct sequel to it, but was likely written by a different author. Several different writers fused their energies for the noble and explicit purpose of simping for Lancelot. Only a sliver of this book is actually about Arthur and his death, and Mordred is barely a character. The larger portion is about Lancelot. Insofar as the story is about the tragedy of Arthur's death, the tragedy is actually that Arthur does not forgive Lancelot, and so Lancelot does not win Arthur's battle for him. It is not about Arthur, but Arthur not loving Lancelot enough. The Alliterative Morte Arthur is a good companion to this version, Simon Armitage has an interesting dual language translation, which I recommend, as it focuses on elements of the story that this one omits or overlooks. It's good poetry, only covers relevant subject matter, and is enjoyable to read. But this is fine for what it is.
