In the Caribbean, African religions have evolved and fused with Christianity in very fascinating and varied ways. I selected this book as a result of a recent foray into Caribbean studies. I was quite anxious to examine religious evolution in Jamaica; especially in light of my recent exposure to the syncretic religious fusion in Haitian Voodoo (as derived from French Catholicism and Africanism). As in Haiti, the African influence in Jamaica involves cultic rites and drumming, often culminating in possession by spirits. The formative primitive African religions often featured a state of possession achieved by participating in ritual sacrifice, alcohol consumption, drumming, and wild dancing. The indigenous peoples of Jamaica that were present at the time of Columbus’s visit in 1494 were known as Arawak Indians. They were totally extinct by the time the British conquered Jamaica in 1655. The history of Jamaica is one long tale of exploitation by a few rich British families. Under the British, thousands of West African slaves were brought to Jamaica to work plantations. The English planters adamantly refused to share their religion with the slave population, considering the high liturgy of the Church of England too sophisticated for people of such lesser breed. Over the 100+ years of British domination, little or no attempt was ever made to Christianize the slaves. Hopefully, English Christianity has since evolved to better recognize the equality of humanity. It was not until 1734-1783 that Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians began mission work in Jamaica. The African population loved the spirit-filled enthusiasm of the Baptists. This aided a syncretism between Christianity and the African religions. The spread of Christianity continued through the emancipation of the slaves in 1835. In 1860-61 revival swept over Jamaica; but the enthusiasm was so powerful that the Baptist missionaries were unable to cope with the demand, as thousands of former slaves flocked to the churches, amid much crying, singing, dancing, loud prayers, and yes, spirit possession. This wild exuberance eventually gained an uncontrolled and near blasphemous fanaticism through which the African religious dynamic reasserted itself. Services came to involve singing, drumming, dancing, preaching, communion, spirit possession, speaking in tongues, and prophecy. Spirit possession was apparently achieved when dancers attained altered states of consciousness and became mouthpieces for spirits. However, the Revivalists didn’t limit spirit possession to just the Holy Spirit of Acts, but invited myriad spirits into possession, including those of their ancestors, angels, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Michael, Gabriel, archangels, demons, and other spirits of unknown origin. Beginning in 1929, Pentecostal sects from the United States began missionary activities in Jamaica, introducing oils for anointing the sick, laying-on-of-hands, exorcisms, charismatic personalities, long dresses, hand clapping, and ritualistic ejaculations of “amens” and “hallelujahs”. This cauldron of charismatic Protestantism boiled fervently with the local Africanism to produce a primordial spiritual stew, from which arose the Rastafarian religious movement. Rastafarianism is the most recent religious expression in Jamaica and is essentially a reaction against missionary religious activity. Today, with a population of about 2 million, Jamaica is the third largest of the West Indian islands, after Cuba and Haiti. About 90% of the Jamaican population is of African origin. Jamaican slum conditions are considered the worst in the Caribbean except for Haiti. About half of the population earns $25 a week or less. The slums are comprised of a dreadful squalor of huts, assembled of card-board, timber scraps, metal scraps and anything else available. In contrast to the French Creole spoken by Haitians, the speech in Jamaica is a “creolized” form of English. Jamaica’s economy is basically agricultural, with production of sugar, bananas, rum, and marijuana. There are some supplements to the economy from mining, manufacturing, and tourism. The majority of the farmers work small plots of less than five acres, using primitive techniques. High unemployment has created much criminal activity. Like Haitian Voodoo, Jamaican Rastafarianism is a fusion of Christianity into a relatively bizarre form of racial rebellion, characterized by the strange hairstyle known as “dreadlocks”, the ritual use of “ganja” (marijuana), the contention that the Messiah is the late king of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie, formerly Ras Tafari), and the expected repatriation of all black people (Exodus) to Ethiopia as the promised land. More simply, Rastafarianism is an escape ideology fermented among those who have been incarcerated within impoverishment upon a remote island. These people have been given to labor for Jamaica’s white rulers for hundreds of years, receiving virtually nothing in return. Repatriation may be more broadly interpreted as the hope for liberation via achievement of economic and political power, thereby gaining the capability of moving about in the world. In fact, when Haile Selassie visited Jamaica in 1966 he remarked that Rastafarians must liberate themselves in Jamaica before repatriation can be realized. One gets the sense this liberation is as much psychological as physical. From the day of the first slave landing in Jamaica, the knowledge of forcible displacement has fostered sustained resentment against enforced exile. The fanaticism of Rastafarians stems from the knowledge they were once shackled slaves and that systems persist today which prevent them from blossoming into the full richness of their original heritage. Paradoxically, perhaps the true meaning of repatriation is to bring Africa into Jamaica? Another name frequently used in the Rastafarianism is “Jah”, which is a shortened version of Jehovah, but which refers to “Jah-Ras-Tafari”. Jah is heard often in the music of Rastafarianism which is known as Reggae and comes from Psalm 68:4: “ Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him. ” Rastafarians see the God of the whites as one of hate, blood, oppression, and war, i.e. the devil. Missionary preachers are seen as deceivers trying to sell a God that calls upon blacks to be humble and suffer shame in exchange for an imaginary heaven way off in the sky. For Rastafarians, such doctrine is a farce and life eternal is in the here and now, eventually to be enjoyed upon their repatriation to Ethiopia. We see in Rastafarianism the same tendency that we observe in Voodoo, which is to borrow certain components of Christianity and alter them drastically in response to social plight. Just as the British imagined a European Christ, so the emerging Rastafarians imagined a black Christ. I think it was Montesquieu who said: “ If triangles had a God, they’d give him three sides. ” It is quite arrogant that men must think of God as looking like themselves or, quite frankly, as looking anything like a man at all. As History will attest, no race in the world has exhibited the sense of justice, love, equity and charity necessary to make them satisfactorily congruent with their God. In the same way that Messianic Judaism arose in the 1960’s, as a syncretic blend of Christianity and Jewish practice, the Rastafarian’s see themselves as “Israel”, as Black Jews. This is no more farfetched than the white Messianic Jews seeing themselves as “Israel”, or as White Jews. Seemingly, everyone wants to be the chosen people. When one comes to study this sort of religious evolution, it is apparent that systems of belief derive as much from emotional arrogance as from logical truth. Mysticism and Christian theology can seemingly fuse into an infinite variety of radical manifestations, some of which befuddle the mind. Religious myths claim immunity from logic. Rastafarians believe God has revealed himself over the ages in various forms: as Moses, Elijah, Jesus and Haile Selassie, all seen as avatars of God, revealed in the shape and form of man. Rastafarians see blacks as original man, co-existing with the creation of the earth; but see white man as having existed for only about 6,000 years. Haitian Voodooists use alcohol to facilitate their frenzied spirit possession, but Rastafarians refrain from the use of alcohol. Instead, Rastafarians use pot (Ganja) which they consider to be a “holy herb”, and consume as a religious sacrament. Rastafarians point out that alcohol is manufactured, while Ganja is created. When ingested, Ganja heightens psycho-spiritual feelings. Following are some of the Biblical references the Rastafarians cite to support their use of Ganja : “ And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.” -Genesis 1:12 “Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;” –Genesis 3:18 Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. –Proverbs 15:17 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth; -Psalm 104:14 Apparently, the perception of forbidden fruit has not yet occurred to the Rastafarians. The most prominent public symbol of Rastafarians is their hairstyling which is known as “dreadlocks”. “Dread” means rebellion. The top selling record of Rastafarian singer Bob Marley is entitled “Natty Dread”. For hair they cite Liviticus 21:5 : “ They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh. ” For the Rastafarian, the unshaven man is the natural man, who typifies in his appearance the unencumbered life. Dreadlocks This form of hairstyling is intended to produce a contradiction and defiance to society, by which the Rastafarians latently ridicule society’s ambivalence and accentuate the characteristics of blackness. Dreadlocks are about “resolving to be black” and a conscious departure from participation in an alien culture. The etchings of Jamaican artist, Ras Daniel Heartman depict this: Baby with Dreads, by Ras Daniel Heartman Instead of the terms “me” and “you”, Rastafarians typically say “I” and “I”, even in conversation with people who are not in the cult. This signifies a third level of being in which divisions are broken down into oneness, signifying the sharing of one another’s plight. This attitude is reflected in Jamaican art: Self Portrait by Ras Daniel This self portrait seeming depicts the disrupted African fusing into a new character, after suffering the tainting of slavery, indoctrination by zealot missionaries, and abject poverty. The angry young man of the ghetto, spawned in poverty and filth, comes to maturity in alarm and envy to the imbalance of affluence and wealth. There remains a struggle against class bondage that persists when societies essentially mock justice by ignoring the poor. There is a broad gap between the ideal values upheld by society and the actual behavior of society which denies them. The other big expression of Rastafarianism is music, particularly reggae. It is not a music of adoration but of invocation. The author describes a concert of Bob Marley’s, the most prolific of the reggae singers: “ With raised hands, in true Rastafarian style, he (Marley) psyched the audience with his familiar yell, “Jah!” The audience responded, “Jah!” Then, reverently, he positioned himself in front of the drum and with bowed head and drooping locks, invoked the god of Rastafarianism, “Jah.” This ritual invocation by Bob Marley was a solemn Nyabingi chant depicting a traditional Rastafarian meeting. The music in this ritual performance was slow and included such lyrics as: ‘I’ll wipe my weary eyes, I’ll wipe my weary eyes, Dry up you’ tears to meet Ras Tafari, Dry up you’ tears and come.’ But most of the reggae songs involve caustic social lyrics that speak of the hungry man who is an angry man, of crying women, sorrows, troubles, weakness, sickness, police brutality, jails, ganja, etc.” –Leonard E. Barrett, Sr. Some argue that the real dominant force in Rastafarianism is use of the holy herb. The Rastafarian believes the herb assists him in seeing his true self, beyond the forces of European acculturation. The herb introduces levels of reality not ordinarily perceived. The following is a quote of a leading Rastafarian in reference to the herb, which could just as easily be the same verbiage the serpent uttered to Eve: “ Man basically is God but this insight can come to man only with the use of the herb. When you use the herb, you experience yourself as God. ” Religious evolution is nothing short of fascinating. The benefit of studying emergent religions like Rastafarianism or Haitian Voodoo is to gain a better understanding of the practitioners and particularly why they think as they do. Rastafarianism and Haitian Voodoo are clearly reactionary religions that have emerged due to the catalysts of slavery, forced geographic displacement, and, most importantly, the historic failure of conventional Christianity to accept Africans into their midst. The Anglican Church of Britain that was active in Jamaica during plantation times refused admission to blacks. The French Catholic Church acted in similar fashion in Haiti. And so these island religions have evolved in a reactionary fashion, giving us the benefit of observing religious change first hand. The result is to challenge us to see religious evolution in our own congregations, or the absence thereof. We have to ask ourselves: are our congregations today inclusive of all races and ethnic groups? And, if not, what divergent belief systems are encouraged by this absence? What divergent seeds may be sprouting today by the fertilizer of our insolence? I vividly remember the reggae fad at University, where we wealthy descendants of slave owners danced and celebrated in ignorance to the revolutionary expressions of reggae music, appreciating its passion, but with no clue to its true meaning or to the suffering of those impoverished in the Jamaican slums where it originated. The most popular Marley song in those days was Jammin’ and this video of Marley playing it live is most illustrative of the cultural expression of Jamaica and Rastafarianism. Rest in Peace Bob Marley
