Got this book on a whim on the cheap in a local book sale. Didn't knew it was a part of a series, and the 4th one in that which turns out it was among his well known books. But plowing through the whole thing, I can safely say that it can be read as a standalone. There are loose plot thread/context that you just don’t get an obvious answer to but none that I could say diminish the story at all. The novel follows a nameless Detective Sergeant after a long absent from field duty and was given the task to solve the murder of Dora Suarez, a call girl and her land lady. Derek Raymond is Raymond Chandler but bleaker. There's more to it than just the main character's cynicism or the rain-filled location and sketchy characters we met along the way. The man suffocates you with the moody atmosphere of the UK in the era through the description of the area and its people. An era so entrenched with Thatcherism; Where the police are part of the upper class citizen that crime such as that of the aforementioned Dora Suarez, a call girl, was something that they aren’t willing to be entangled with, thus the case was given to A14 - The Department of Unexplained death but really, this unit is the dumping ground for cases of the unsavory fringe of society. He produced a big 9mm Quickhammer automatic with the tired ease of a conjurer showing off to a few girls and shlacked one into the chamber. He told Roatta: ‘Now I want you nice and still while all this is going on, Felix, because you’re going to make a terrible lot of mess.’ To go along with UK from the 80s is the thinly veil of misogynistic that are perceive by both the killer and his obsession of her and that obsession was later on picked up by the nameless DS who’s anger was fueled by a mental image he created of her. Under the philosophical monologue and slang heavy snappy dialogue is a discussion of AIDS and the AIDS pandemic of the 80s that attached itself with the thinly veil of misogynistic tone of UK’s 80s society that are deeply divided by the societal class. I thought as I drove that even though I was too late to save her, if I could solve her death, I might make some contribution to the coming of a time when such a horror would no longer be possible, a time when society would no longer throw up monsters. This is noir, written beautifully bleak and nihilistic that stands in the middle of Raymond Chandler and James Ellory - not as eloquent nor is it as truncated but a perfect marriage in the middle. It examine the horror under the surface of society, and a condemnation of the society which permits that horror.
