So. This was the third book I read to understand the Abortion Discourse(TM) from the Supreme Court Leak. I actually cited it in one of my projects, and I thought it was also just a good place to start. As a cis woman, an MPH candidate, and a Leftist, let's get started. Dr. Reagan holds numerous degrees including a PhD in American History (which is INSANE). The last third of the book is notes and sources, both primary and secondary. She's forced to make inferences from limited data, including medical records, and apply the same patterns to the population at large. Despite this, she constructs a thorough review of the history of illegal abortion in the United States. And boy, does it twist your stomach. Starting as an open secret and becoming one of the legitimizing forces for a paternalistic and rapidly centralizing medical profession, abortion is swiftly taken from a necessary and broadly accepted phenomenon (socially) to a place of controversy, police raids, and state mandated reproduction. While people in the United States grossly did not believe that life began until "quickening," a paternalistic, preachy medical profession sought to distinguish themselves from the poor, immigrant, female workforce that currently served the needs of women. Most people were ignorant of birth control practices, and women were forced to submit to the sexual whims of their husbands. Childbearing, as a result, was part and parcel to being married. Of course, if unprotected sex is just.. a continuous thing, women will constantly be pregnant. This presents a few problems. 1) The economics of providing for numerous children 2) The logistics of doing housekeeping and taking care of numerous children 3) The logistics of doing all of the above while pregnant 4) The overall risk of pregnancy, in and of itself Abortion served as birth control at this time. While rudimentary forms like diaphragms did exist, it was yet another chore for women to put up with, as it did take some preplanning and finagling. Please look up a picture of a diaphragm if you're short on sympathy for these women. In any case, as medicine ran the purity campaign to establish themselves as morally superior, they expose their thinking. They exposed their belief in eugenics, their suspicion of women and their terror of their independence (sexual and otherwise), and their disregard and hatred for people of color and the poor. Multiple allusions are made by doctors throughout the book of the absolute necessity of abortion, both from doctors and the public, but the bans continued to be perpetuated. From Dr. Rudolph Holmes in 1908: The public does not want, the profession does not want, the women in particular to not want any aggressive campaign against abortion. Moreover, the pronatalist sentiment wove in and out of American culture. Abortion stoked the fear white people have of "race suicide," and where Depression-era women garnered more sympathy from physicians, in the 40s and 50s, crackdowns led to an explosion in birthrates. Sterilizations and birth control was pushed on Black women and poor women, oftentimes without their consent. Dr. Reagan states: In calling for an end to Aid to Families with Dependent Children, or for mandatory sterilization or contraception for poor Black women, conservatives attempt to stop one group of women (stereotyped as poor Black women) from bearing children. In restricting abortion use, they attempt to force a different group (middle-class white women) to bear children. She also sheds a little light on why women are routinely not taken seriously by male doctors. One of the indications for therapeutic abortion was vomiting, and since women could not access abortion without a reason such as this from the allopathic doctors that forced midwives out of the abortion business, they learned to imitate the symptoms of excessive vomiting. Thirty years later, when physical symptoms were easier to treat, they turned to psychiatrists, alleging suicide ideation and attempts. These, again, required intense scrutiny, and fell into disbelief as women tried to help each other by disclosing what worked to get an abortion through dreaded abortion committees. The draconian crackdowns of the 40s and 50s also led to a deep distrust of women, as the state had a vested interest in enforcing the continuation of a pregnancy. While allowing women to die from septic abortions in a hospital, police would extract "dying declarations" from women, many of whom they deliberately withheld care from unless they disclosed the name of their abortionist. A patient could turn and name you during a raid in an instant, and therefore some doctors resorted to blindfolds and driving women around to disorient them. Combine that with the understanding that these doctors had a "fatherly" view of the women coming to them in desperation, and that they believed that they alone could discern what was best for them, along with the fact that studies conducted often left women out entirely on account of their hormones... yeah. Another interesting theme the book tackled was the impact of McCarthyism and the inherent suspicion of any values that didn't cooperate with compulsory heterosexuality. The repression of abortion in this period was not new, not normal, and should be incorporated into our understanding of the multifaceted and dar-reaching effects of McCarthyism. The state's surveillance of abortion in this period is another aspect of the political and cultural attack on critical thought and behavior. McCarthyism was devoted not only to eradicating the Communist Party, but to destroying the labor, peace, and interracial movements. As part of the fervent anticommunism of the postwar period, police and government agents investigated and harassed thousands of people for their political views and frightened many more, while the majority leaned to conform and keep quiet. Deviation from standard gender and sexual behavior came under attack along with political deviance. State authorities labeled gays and lesbians "perverts and national security risks," and police raided their bars. Abortion symbolized subversiveness, as did these other ideas and activities. In fact, abortion was linked to communism at this time, and red-baiting entered the medical abortion discourse. The attack on abortion and women who sought to control their own reproduction and lives was on the dark side of the er'a pronatalist ideology. Another arm of state violence being.. medicine. In the name of protecting people during the red scare, the government was more than happy to terrorize all number of people they saw as noncomformist. They turned doctors into policemen when they forced them to withhold care and question women and interview them to make sure their cases could pass committee, and they turned policemen into voyeurs and tyrants who were able to raid abortion clinics, arrest women in the midst of an operation, and read through their private medical documents. Meanwhile, the effects of this violence was obvious. Maternal mortality skyrocketed. The septic abortion wards were full. Hundreds of women were seen for complications associated with an untrained abortionist - an opportunist, usually - causing any number of diseases. By the early sixties, abortion complications accounted for 42.1%, and Abortion was institutionalized in hospitals in two interrelated structures: the therapeutic abortion committee and the septic abortion ward. Private rooms belonged to a few privileged white women of the middle class; the wards were shared by low-income women of all races, together with some middle-class women who had illegal abortions... The denial of female autonomy lay at the foundation of the medical system's response to reproduction in general and hospital abortion policy in particular. The discriminatory abortion system was built into the hospital structure. Dr. Reagan creates an excellent dichotomy here of the committee and the septic abortion ward. In their hubris, paternalism, and sexism, doctors fail to understand that the septic abortion ward is a direct consequence of the belief that they should have more control over their patients' bodies than they themselves. The discriminatory abortion system was built into medicine itself: it started with running out the midwives that threatened their practice, it continued with outlawing them and outlawing abortion, and it was perpetuated by a system that continuously looked over their shoulders for three specific procedures: c-sections, abortions, and sterilizations. All of these reveal the attitude of medicine towards women: Women cannot be trusted to make moral decisions about children and family, but must be overseen and regulated by men; procreation is a state mandate not a choice; women's lives, sexuality, and bodies are not their own. They did not see it that way - the class of doctors used in the Doe v. Bolton case argued more on behalf of the doctor's right to practice medicine autonomously. In fact, even Roe v. Wade utterly ignores the discriminatory impact of abortion care as it is now - SCOTUS is utterly unable to recognize the impact of economic equity in this case. In so doing, they perpetuate the idea of procreation as a state mandate and not a choice. However, the passing of Roe v. Wade did improve public health: overall maternal mortality dropped dramatically. In New York City, maternal mortality fell 45% the year after the state legalized abortion. In 1971, New York City experienced its lowest maternal mortality rate on record... as a public health measure, the legalization of abortion represented an improvement in maternal mortality that ranks with the invention of antisepsis and antibiotics. It also improved patient's rights. A woman's right to an abortion strengthened her right to not have a c-section or a sterilization without her consent. It strengthened the right of a person to not have a treatment just because it was medically indicated, and strengthened the right to euthanasia and rejecting medical advice and treatment. But the warning she provided at the end was.. pretty appropriate for the times. Dr. Reagan warned about the surveillance women faced in Romania, in the way that their periods were tracked and they had to submit to mandatory prenatal appointments. She warned that there would be an enmeshment of the state and the medical profession again, and that the raids would begin again. The maternal mortality rate would skyrocket once more, and the septic abortion wards would open once again. Medical mistreatment of women would become routine once again. Making abortion hard to obtain will not return the United States to an imagined time of virginal brides and stable families; it will return us to a time of crowded septic abortion wards, avoidable deaths, and the routinization of punitive treatment of women by state authorities and their surrogates. Real reproductive freedom for women requires that all women, regardless of race, class, age, sexual orientation, or marital status, be able to avoid unwanted childbearing through the use of contraception and abortion and be able to bear children without being stigmatized, impoverished, or compelled to give up their education, employment, or children. We do not have real reproductive freedom. We have not, ever, in the United States. There's a lot of work to be done.
