She caught her reflection in the mirror, and it was a stranger she saw there. The shadowy light played around narrowed eyes that were murky instead of golden, it etched provocative hollows under her cheekbones and she felt herself possessed by this foreign face. She pulled in the air and pursed her lips letting it escape slowly, so that the flame did not die a merciful death, but flickered and begged, sparking up, then failing until finally it went out altogether, leaving the room in darkness. Well, that was a surprise. Leisure rippers are generally scraping the barrel o' awfulness, but this one hooked me. A brief summary (which doubles as a squick list): Our heroine, Zulu, is 1/8th black, which means that under regional law she counts as a slave despite her exterior appearance (NB: the setting is pre-Civil War 1830s). Zulu is understandably resentful of this, particularly when she compares herself to her bratty, brainless mistress Rosalie, & her dream is to run away to NoLa & either break the law by becoming a "pass for white" or flaunt social niceties by joining other mixed-blood beauties to become a rich guy's placee . She schemes, manipulates, & maneuvers both other people & herself, making enemies & tossing aside collateral damage in the process, before finally achieving placee status...but (surprise!) still isn't satisfied, because her true goal is having the power to make others suffer as she suffered. Zulu refuses to admit this even to herself, & despite falling in love with nice-guy Jules (another "pass for white") she continues with her wicked plotting to become a plantation mistress. Naturally, everything comes back to bite her in the ass. :P Zulu is definitely an anti-heroine. She has exactly zero maternal instinct (+ very little compassion, period) & is cast in the same mold as Scarlett O'Hara or Beatrice Lacey -- that is, women whose predicaments are sympathetic but whose methods induce frequent cringing and/or WTFlolz -- but there are also moments when she's unfairly labeled as heartless. Personally, I love this type of MC; it's always refreshing when escapism fic acknowledges that material necessity drove many females of the past to make difficult (or even unpalatable) decisions, because continual "Love Conquers All!!" bunnies & rainbows is truly obnoxious reading diet. (This means YOU, current HR industry. *gag*) But I'm also aware that many readers don't care for this type, esp in our current PC-romance era, so I wanted to clarify where Zulu falls on the scale of kind, gentle, & morally upright heroines -- she'd eat them for lunch, then squirt extra mustard over a second helping. The prose is...not awesome, but neither is it terrible. Some scenes are nicely descriptive with good flow; others lurch & stagger on odd-numbered feet. This author -- whoever they were -- also has a tendency to advance scenes between paragraphs, but neglects to use a space between for clarity. I got used to the rhythm of these rapid switches, but never cared for it -- such sloppy formatting needed a firm editorial hand to force-feed line breaks. The ending is by far the biggest flaw; it's sudden & murky, therefore completely unsatisfying. But even with the flaws, I quite enjoyed this one. It's intense, whackadoodle, & OTT with a ruthless heroine & weird gothic touches...the sort of ripper I love best. :D
