If you want to learn more about "The World of Bob Dylan's Basement Tapes" as the cover of the 2011 edition says, do not buy this book. However, if you want to learn more about the music that influenced Dylan and The Band at Big Pink, and in my mind, many of the songs that Dylan selected for his Theme Time Radio Hour series, this Greil Marcus book is a must read. Yes, it does cover many of the songs Dylan and The Band recorded during the Summer of 1967, but the book really focuses on Harry Smith's 1952 six album set entitled the "Anthology of American Folk Music." Most of the music found on Smith's anthology are old 78s primarily of southern artists that paved the way for future blues and folk artists. One can't wonder how big on an influence Smith's anthology was on the American folk music revival of the early Sixties. No doubt it had an influence on Dylan and probably other artists like Joan Baez and Dave Van Ronk to name a few. Besides spending a large chapter delving into Smith's anthology (it is still available, now on CD), Marcus reminds us of Virginian Dock Boggs. Early in his career, he only recorded twelve sides. Later, Mike Seeger of The New Lost City Ramblers recorded more of Boggs' unique style of singing and banjo playing. The best part of the book are the Works Cited and the extensive Discography sections at the end. Will I read the book again? Probably. Now that I have Harry Smith's American folk music anthology set in my music collection, I want to review that chapter in more depth. In the last few pages, Marcus makes an interesting observation regarding Dylan. Marcus writes: "Few performers have mad their way onto the stage of the twentieth century with a greater collection of masks than Bob Dylan. From the balladeer who first presented himself not as the son of a respectable middle-class Jewish family from northern Minnesota but as a vagabond runaway who had no idea if his parents were dead or alive, to the dandy who when controversy over his turn to the pop arena erupted declared that his investment in folk music had been a con from the start, he was, it was sometimes said, a different person every time you saw him. As an artist he was funny, outrageous, prophetic, denunciatory, appalled, unpredictable; inside any of those qualities you could hear wariness, slyness, thinking, a will to stay a step aheah, in control." Masks indeed. It seems his Spring 1966 tour of the UK not only unnerved Dylan, but unmasked him as well. As Marcus points out, listen to Dylan's performance of "Just Like Tom Thumb's Blues" in Liverpool on May 14, 1966. Marcus believes it was this tour that sent Dylan into seclusion to work with The Band and record hundreds of hours of tapes. Yes. Dylan is a man of many masks. Think of his film "Masked and Annonymos." Think of the white face "masks" he wore during The Rolling Thunder Review. The list of masks could go on and on. It makes me wonder how well Dylan would fair in Octavio Paz's "The Labyrinth of Solitude." Only the late Paz and Dylan himself can answer that question. For the rest of us, we'll just have to wonder.
