[Note: Spoilers ahead!] After the First Death is certainly a grim read, and I'm not sure why that surprised me. I don't know WHY I assumed that a book about terrorists and hostage situations would be happier. It was a powerful read, but it was ultimately too disturbing for me to finish. In the novel, terrorists from an unnamed country hijack a school bus in order to further the liberation of their homeland. Things get complicated when the bus driver (who was supposed to be killed within minutes of the hijacking) is an 18-year-old girl. And when the military intervenes, things get scarier yet. The novel's story is mainly told from the viewpoints of three teenagers involved in this terrifying situation: Miro, one of the terrorists; Katie, the bus driver; and Ben, the son of a military general who is chosen to act as a liaison in the negotiations between the government and the terrorists. The novel is grim and graphic and sometimes gut-wrenching: much of the action takes place on the school bus, which becomes hot and smelly and eerie, filled with moaning drugged children and the terrified Katie. After getting 3/4 of the way through the novel, I decided that I couldn't handle it anymore (or that even if I could handle it, I still shouldn't keep reading it). So I stopped. Truth be told, Robert Cormier is actually a really skilled writer. He describes characters very realistically, making me care about them (especially the little children and the 18-year-old, Katie, who are taken hostage by terrorists in the novel). The book was actually very gripping and character-driven: there is relatively little action in the novel, in fact, but you're kept moving along by its excellent writing. But while I know that the overall premise of the novel is a "good" point (i.e. "terrorism = EVIL, and also sometimes the 'good guys' who are supposed to protect us can do pretty bad things too"), I'd argue that Cormier is not using his powers in a good way. The reason the novel disturbed me so profoundly was in fact because it was so well-written. It might seem pretty silly for me to have stopped the book with only 59 pages left, but I don't need to see any more. The book has done its work for me; I've seen enough. I understand that not everyone will have the same reaction I did to After the First Death . I have noted some of the good in the novel, and the most impressive thing for me was the heroism of Katie--she is a realistic and frightened young woman who does the best she can and is a true and brave hero. But for me, personally, having read as much of the book as I did, I feel a little bit like Marlow at the end of Heart of Darkness : this book was just "too dark [for me] — too dark altogether." I don't really feel that this is a work meant for young adults, though it's often classified as YA fiction; I would only recommend it to adults, and perhaps to high-school-age teens. If there were separate ratings for "how much I liked a book" and for "quality of writing in the book," I would give the book a low "like" factor (as I have here), but a high "writing quality" factor.
