What a Song Can Do is most definitely a well-put together book filled with twelve different perspectives on how music really can change the lives of so many people on this earth, and how music lies within every breathing moment of the lives of an enormous percentage of people. I loved reading the different mini stories that different "authors" in What a Song Can Do told because in each "mini-story", the different authors shared in diverse ways their story of how music has influenced their life. Readers can learn a multitude of life lessons and develop an appreciation for music and people around them through the stories in this book by looking at others situations (dealing with music) and seeing them in a different fashion. What a Song Can Do certainly has the capability to change the lives of every reader that picks up this book, because of the greatness of the power of music it expresses through words to make our everyday lives enjoyable. Jennifer Armstrong truly has a talent for writing, arranging, and editing books, including What a Song Can Do and many others. This book is written very well in that each mini-story flowed right to the next in an upbeat rhythm, no matter the mood of the story just read or the story the reader is beginning to start. What I found to be extremely creative and empowering to the reader is that you can actually feel as if you were involved within one of the many great stories within this brilliant collection of stories. Jennifer Armstrong has a unique writing style that she takes advantage of to communicate powerful words. An interesting fact that readers will find is that no matter how much talent you have naturally or developed, everyone can still keep music in their lives. Music is an internationally known language and brings us all together, and Jennifer Armstrong used that idea and creatively constructed this wonderful piece of “artwork”. Jennifer Armstrong "composed" these 12 mini-stories into one book sending an overall message that I honestly believe affects everyone's life, most definitely in a positive way: you can discover a completely new life and perspective when you enter the musical world for the first time, and repeatedly. What can a song do? Read this wonderful piece of musically inspired and themed book to find out how music can really change a person’s life.
