Part of me desperately wants to rate this book four stars because the story -- though actually simple and couched in riddles -- is inspired by, and fueled by, Russian folklore, which is different enough to be delicious. In fact, if this YA novel had been "properly written," it would have been a five-star read, hands down! But, but, but... The narrative style Cherryh uses is probably (to her, at least: and she'd know) reminiscent of Russian prose. It doesn't work very well in English -- it might be effective in a short story, but when you take something that would interesting in five thousand words and prolong it twenty-odd times that distance, it becomes quite wearisome. I've read Cherryh before, so I know she can "write properly," and what she's doing here is deliberate -- Sentences running up to, at worst, a third of a hardcover book page (no exaggeration), and sentence structure that's verbose, rambling, repetitive and, worse, vague. Way too often, you have no real idea what someone has just said, or thought, which makes the narrative line as confusing as the dialog is aggravating. Fact: straighten out the narrative line, bash it and the dialog into conciseness (I didn't say brevity; just clarity, for the reader's sake), and this book would be 25% shorter. It would have benefited from the firm hand of an editor with the reader's best interests at heart. The story is actually very simple; the plot twists are good; the teenage characters are okay; the Russian source material is terrific ... and the character of Azdra'ik, the Goblin, is the best thing about the book. He is fantastic -- I could happily have ditched all three of the children and read about him, the old wizard and the ghost! THAT would have been my story of choice to come out of this story idea! However, you have to pick your way through this book: it's a buffet table of ideas and tidbits. And then one gets to the ending ... and Cherryh literally abandons Azdra'ik with about 40pp to go before the end, after he's been the one that gave the whole thing direction and purpose. The finale is, sadly, so far underwritten, it needed more to tie itself off satisfyingly. As if is, we'll just have to "make the rest up" in our imaginations. I know what I like to imagine! So -- three stars, and a "doah" ... and a recommendation, with appended warning: you will have to be patient and as forgiving as a saint with this one. And take a very, very deep breath before starting each sentence, because they will turn you purple, never mind blue.
