I thought that “Tracker” was an okay book. Overall, it was a good book. It just had parts that did not make much sense to me. In the plot there were a lot of interesting things that happened to the main character, John. John’s parents died when he was a baby, and he lived with his grandparents. John’s grandfather was diagnosed with cancer and was going to die. John could not understand how that could happen to someone as kind and caring as his grandpa. In John’s family they were all big hunters. When deer hunting season came along, John’s grandpa told John he had to hunt by himself. John was okay with that, but one night he was doing his farm chores and saw a doe. This doe was different than others in the sense that it didn't run away right away. It just stared at John, and John stared back. The next morning John woke up very early to go deer hunting. When he got out to his land he started to walk and he heard a noise. It was a deer that jumped up when he walked by. It was winter at the time, so it was easy to track. John tracked it until he finally saw it, but it ran away before he could get a shot. He could tell it was the same doe he saw the other night. John continued to track it until he saw it again. That time the deer was surprised, so John could have shot it. But, he just couldn't kill it. He continued to track it, but he left his gun in a tree because he knew he couldn't kill it. He tracked it for two and a half days strait because he wanted to touch it. He felt that if he touched it he would cheat death, and his grandpa wouldn't die. He finally caught up to it. He touched it because it was so tired, and so was he from running two and a half days strait. Then he went back to his farm and told his grandpa the story. His grandpa was very proud of him for touching a live deer. He said that was something he would take with him. I would recommend this book to middle and high school age males that like hunting. I would recommend it to them because the main character is a male who hunts, but shows that hunting is about more than just killing.
