This was pretty interesting and well written. The 3rd edition, updated in 2014 includes material on the 2008 mortgage driven crisis and even current "state of the economy" in 2014. Shiller speaks very lightly: he doesn't say "The economy is going to go bust." He says: his CAPE ratio for the markets (a 10-year average PE) has only been higher at 2 times in history: 1929 and 2000. And that was 2014. That's scary but you just can't predict the future. We could have a booming economy and stock market for another 10 years, followed not by a bubble bursting, but by a slow deflation of sorts where average returns on stocks are low or negative. But we could also have a bubble burst. Interesting notes include that bubbles like 2000 often are based on stories or reasoning that "The economy has changed!" Sure the internet was new and was going to make some companies more efficient and open opportunities for new business, but for many companies the effect of the internet would be small. It wasn't going to make every company in the S&P more profitable by huge amounts. There is some good discussion of "efficient markets" and what makes markets act inefficient. The book talks about bubbles in real estate, bonds and stocks. Interestingly Shiller claims that real estate does not outperform stocks in the long run, and long term real estate prices in most places (that aren't running out of space) are driven mostly by construction costs, which have been going down over the years. And also interestingly, there is a claim that stocks do not outperform bonds over the long term, which is contrary to many things I've read, although I didn't see much data to support that claim. (I admit I was skimming when I read this section.) Interesting book, but as you might guess there is little hard science on how to predict the exact time (within years) of a bubble, and not much to do about it (stay in stocks, but choose stocks with low CAPE). Still I'm worried enough to be thinking about how to prepare.
