How to woo a woman you like and win her love. In my opinion. When you meet her at a party, try to be introduced to her, be nice, tell her she's beautiful and her eyes are like stars, dance with her, then the day after sends her roses, call her, asks her to dine with you. Be nice and charming, buy her silly little presents, make her laugh, try to know what she likes and kiss her first gently, then with passion. After some time, it depends on the woman, take her in your greek island and tell her you're in love with her and asks her to marry you. Success is almost guaranteed. In MR hero's opinion. When you see the woman you want to marry, go to the same parties as her but always with a different gorgeous woman. Watch her from a distance, sometimes smirking and always with a bored, letcherous glance. Never try to talk to her. When you find a stranger woman in your bedroom, in the dark, even if you are in love with your heroine, try to jump her without finess and when you find out she's your heroine don't even apologize. Then blackmail her into marriage to help her father paying his debt, her very sick father, without telling her you're helping him because you're in love with her. Tell her almost fiance that you are her lover, so he will dump her. Leave her alone with a nasty ow who obviously tells the poor young heroine that the hero only wants to marry her for her money and makes nasty remarks about the affair she has with the hero. Don't be charming or nice to her. Aaand when she's hurt and disturbed enough that she wants to leave you, even if she's pregnant, kiss ow when the heroine can see you, so the heroine is really upset and decides she will leave you and she doesn't even care any more if you won't pay her father debts. Then, when she's leaving, get angry because, after all he's done, she still hasn't understood how crazy is he about her since the first time he saw her. I don't know if I need therapy or he needs to be put under restraint. Whatever. It was nice, in a MR kind of crazy nice. Unsure if the hero was celibate or not after meeting her, but even if he was, the part where he almost had sex with the heroine thinking she was another woman is not a score on his part.
