After reading Bob Spitz' biography, I wanted to work my way through some of Julia's non-Mastering-the-Art-of-French-Cooking cookbooks to get a feel for how much Julia made it on to the pages, especially since the biography mentioned how delightful all of Julia's little anecdotes are. This is her fifth book, and it's interesting. Not great, but it has its moments. Most of these meals I don't think I'd ever make in total. What we eat in our family isn't as meat-centric as all of these meals are, and to be honest, her veggie dishes don't look that appetizing. Broccoli with Brown Butter and Lemon. Butter Lettuce Salad. Brussels Sprouts Tossed in Butter. But I get it. People don't look to Julia Child for vegetables. So what will I make? I'm intrigued by her Fast French Puff Pastry, so I will give that a try soon. And the Choulibiac (a giant fish and mushroom concoction baked in a choux pastry crust) seems like something I'll try for a special occasion. And her discussions about seafood, tomatoes, and rice were very informative. I am curious about her giant chunks of meat. She clearly knows her stuff, and clearly has fun interacting with old-timey butchers and getting the best cuts of the best stuff. We try to eat responsible meat, which is expensive, and some of Julia's dishes would be very expensive (e.g. rib roast, butterflied leg of lamb). I think that my path to Julia Child is a path through sauces and pastries. Eggs Benedict. Her fast puff pastry. Perhaps I'll start with her Le Gateau Victoire au Chocolate, Mousseline: "Here is a very tender, moist, and delicate, and very chocolatey, dessert confection that is more like a cheesecake or custard than a cake, yet it is a cake, almost...Its components sound like custards makings, its airiness suggests a mousse, and yet, it is a cake: a cake with no butter, no flour at all, a simple method, and an incredibly sparse list of ingredients. Sparse but sumptuous: it includes on whole pound of chocolate." [Make sure to read that in her warbling voice] Two additional gems: "Cooking, I do strongly feel, expresses love more by fastidious everyday care than by festival bursts of effort." "It therefore follows, with cast-iron logic, that I am now doing funny things with chickens." P.S. How can an Aspic be anything other than an unpleasant experience?
