The demand for abortion has always existed and has never waned, but has experienced varying degrees of criminality, legality, and stigma. Reagan's book is testament to the hard truth that abortion has and always will be needed and is a fundamental reproductive right. One of the few books chronicling the long period of illegal abortion in the United States, this book is a well-researched, vital resource for understanding the public and private history of abortion. Using information from doctors, medical associations, legal records, hospital records, and whenever possible, women themselves, Reagan pieces together a landscape of access or lack thereof combined with cultural context and public opinion. Unfortunately, the century before Roe v. Wade doesn't sound all that unfamiliar given the current political climate surrounding abortion. Then, as now, public discourse often centered around a white patriarchy, bogged down in social constricts and dogma, making decisions for women across the country, despite a huge rate of abortion deaths, entire wards dedicated to women healing from illegal abortions, and the clear demand for abortion and obvious reality that women would go to any length necessary to control their reproduction. However, the author does not gloss over the often unspoken reality of compassionate personal relationships between doctor and patient, with many physicians behaving sympathetically toward their abortion-seeking patients and doing what they could to help at personal risk. The attention paid to midwives, who often served immigrant women of their own ethnicity, is particularly interesting, both in its study of their vilification and of the much needed services they provided to their communities. As now, media at all times throughout the century highlighted only the negative outcomes of abortion care, and the fact that for many decades the only archived information about abortion comes from legal proceedings against women, midwives, and physicians, is telling. As midwives and doulas are again organizing on the grassroots level to provide abortion care for women, their stories from the past can provide lessons for our current struggle for access. Glaringly absent until the final chapters, by the author's own admission, are stories from women of color, and less glaring, low-income women, seeking abortion care. This spotlights the inequality of medical care and concern towards these women still prevalent today, as lack of access as well as lack of attention are indicative of the attitudes of, again, a white patriarchal system combined with white upper and middle class women's groups. To be fair, many of these women's groups sought to correct their attitudes. The lessons of the early women's liberation movement, where women of color increasingly refused to be invisible and demanded attention on their own terms, feel familiar, and it is a mistake to think that we don't still have far to go on that front. While the book ends on a somewhat positive tone, focusing on the legalization of abortion with Roe v. Wade, it seems fitting to end this review with a quote from the epilogue that asks us to look backward and fight against the misguided efforts of the anti-choice to return us to the time when abortion was a crime: "If abortion is made illegal, some women will die; many more will be injured. The old abortion wards will have to be reopened, a public health disaster recreated. Making abortion hard to obtain will not return the United States to an imagined time of virginal brides and stable families; it will return us to the time of crowded septic abortion wards, avoidable deaths, and the routinization of punitive treatment of women by state authorities and their surrogates."
