So I'll get to the best things about this Travis McGee novel first. It has a great villain, Paul Dissat. Dissat is one of those sociopath psychotics that MacDonald created so well. Dissat even scares McGee. Dissat has a sister named Lisa who is a touch of psycho herself. There is also a good long con in the book featuring an old jealous enemy of McGee's named Harry Broll. Harry's wife, Mary, was an old friend of McGee's who ended up marrying Harry some years back, god knows why. Harry is one of those obnoxious blowhards who bully their way through relationships and business dealings in the same manner. Why anyone would actually marry a guy like Harry is the biggest mystery in the whole book. Anyway, after discovering Harry in yet another affair, this time with Lisa Dissat, Mary leaves Harry for some alone time. Four months later, Mary is still gone. Missing. Harry confronts McGee with accusations of harboring Mary. He waves a gun around and threatens McGee to reveal where Mary is or get plugged full of holes. McGee manages to disarm him after dodging a couple of wild bullets and convinces Harry that he has no clue of Mary's whereabouts. Well my friends, it's really no spoiler to suggest that Mary is likely dead somewhere. McGee decides to find out. Then follows over 200 pages of McGee and his pal Meyer doing doing equal amounts of sleuthing and pontificating the worlds problems circa 1971. This is the not so great part of the novel. The action gets slowed. I've read a ton of MacDonald's McGee novels, including this one, back when I was in high school. I liked the pontificating stuff then. Now I'm a little more interested in getting to the kicking ass and taking names stuff. And then there is the attitudes toward women in the book. I realize that this is a book of its time, 1971, but yeah, the misogyny is not really so subtle. Women are either secretaries, stewardesses, waitresses or housewives. The good ones are all "bright girls" and the bad ones are jaded materialist tramps. All of them are expected to get out of the way and let the Men do the Man-shit. I'm sure my mom was called a "bright girl" plenty back when she was working full time while I was a latch-key kid. There are one or two knocks against the women's liberation movement and a few times the word faggot is thrown around as an insult and some racist attitudes as well. Yeah...I get it. Product of its time. But I don't know if I can recommend these McGee books to anyone under 30 and not get blasted for it. It's too bad, because the stories are terrific.
