This epic-like Japanese novel is, of course, quite lengthy (54 Chapters, 1120 pages) and thus reading it would take your time and concentration. I thought I would never finish reading it but, after my visit to Japan for a week last April, I decided to resume reading it mixed with boredom and enjoyment. This novel written by a court lady in the 11th century has been depicted on various, innumerable noble characters with illustrious noble titles unfamiliar to, I think, most of its readers outside Japan. Therefore, we should read its chronology (pp. 1125-1133) before/while reading each Chapter because it'd help to guide us on what happens, who're the key characters, what and why they do, what're the consequences, etc. As far as I know, only this edition translated by Royall Tyler offers this useful guide to its readers. This considerate approach, I hope, should lessen our boredom. Surprisingly, I've never read any war scene or military campaign since it might not be her genre/expertise so we're always immersed in dream-like romance episodes related to various couples tinged by eventual psychological dilemma due to love or suffering. There are lots of Japanese-style word plays which we may read casually or skip some and I'm quite sure those readers who know Japanese may find them more enjoyable and understandable. In brief, the whole plot of the novel essentially focused on various life cycles of those key characters, that is, from birth to death and along the way all dignitaries suffer their aging as well as illness in which all mortals simply can't escape from the ultimate cycle. Nearing the end of this novel, I think Ukifune's decision to renounce the world by being a Buddhist nun is wistfully touching, remarkable and wise. However, her fate is similar to the young lady named Satoko Ayakura in the last chapter of "The Decay of the Angel," Book 4 of "The Sea of Fertility" by Fukio Mishima. I wonder if he's conceived the idea of such an end from this legendary novel. In essence, this famous Japanese 'Tale' is not a classic best-seller or page-turner, rather it's a literary treasure penned by such a formidable scholar named Lady Murasaki Shikibu as her masterpiece for those interested in Japanese court/culture/ways of life who may try reading it and enjoy some unthinkable, romantic atmosphere 10 centuries ago in ancient Japan. This paragraph suggests a tip of thought and action to some friends reluctant to read it or having started it but stopped somewhere: I think, first of all, we should be determined and constructive in terms of this a bit formidable literary mission, have no fear, just keep going, stay focused from what we're reading, find out some readable sentences, paragraphs, episodes, etc. and take notes as part of active reading. Then, I'd like to recommend my friends to read "The World of the Shining Prince: Court Life in Ancient Japan" (Kodansha 1994) by Dr Ivan Morris, one of the great Japanese scholars in the 20th century since this authoritative book would provide you with some backgrounds essential to our familiarity for better understanding and thus its more readability. Please allow me to confirm why we should read this key work by citing the following excerpt : The World of the Shining Prince, ..., has been a standard in cultural studies for nearly thirty years. Using as a frame of reference The Tale of Genji and other major literary works from Japan's Heian period, Morris recreates an era when women set the cultural tone. Focusing on the world of the emperor's court -- ... -- he describes the politics, society, religious life, and superstitions of the times, providing detailed portrayals of the daily life of courtiers, the cult of beauty they espoused and the intricate relations between the men and women of their milieu. (back cover)
