The blurb for this title from Pauline Ash had me intrigued: 'As Sister Tutor surveyed the newest bunch of recruits to the Preliminary Training School, she decided that one of them at least, Saskia Lawrence - Sandy to her friends - was no ordinary little student nurse. And how right she was!' Was, I conjectured, the heroine, in actual fact, a heiress wanting to throw off her gilded shackles? No, that was a fellow PTS nurse Or was she truly a covert undercover reporter masquerading as a student nurse? No, that was another PTS nurse Or was she ('simply') nursing a broken heart and a family tragedy? No, that was yet another PTS nurse Incorrect on the above hypotheses, and reluctantly abandoning a fanciful notion that eighteen year-old Saskia/ Sandy was a 'fifth columnist', I learned she was something - to my mind - even more mystifying a so -called 'honeypot' who has been banished in disgrace to a provincial hospital because her red hair and lively interest in life are alleged to have 'enticed' her older sister's fiancee . Arriving at Swale Hospital to begin her PTS, conscious of the strictures of her family, Sandy has resolved to steer clear of males. This, however, proves largely impossible - she's too much of an extrovert to turn herself in a nun-like 'lady with a lamp'. Before long, Sandy finds herself becoming cosy with the most respected surgeon at the Hospital - Sir Jerram Pinkersgill (n.b. all Ash's heroes have ludicrous names - I'm hopeful she did this to rile the M&B editorial department). Despite the heroine receiving flattering attentions from a charming, younger local GP, as well as a good looking, and even younger, 'rugger' playing houseman, she decides they all pale beside the sophisticated and august charm of Sir Jerram. This is despite the fact the surgeon smokes a foul smelling pipe, is described as being 'a pleasantly ugly specimen' and is twice the heroine's age (more, in fact, as he's 39 y.o. going on 40) . Aside from featuring a young and beautiful heroine and an older, stooping eccentric hero, the novel incorporates other standard Pauline Ash themes - an orphanage patronised by the hero, an older secondary character who knows who is really attracted to who, limited nursing details, an absence of 'punishing kisses' and a fictional industrial town within commuting distance of London as a backdrop. Despite the editorial slickness, there's a pervasive feeling about 'Student Nurse At Swale' that suggests the author isn't especially interested in her characters. The stereotypes in the novel are pretty lazy (e.g. unwittingly flirtatious pretty red-head nurse pairs up with dour, bachelor senior surgeon) and, unlike in her other titles such as Doctor Arnold's Ambition or Bequest for Nurse Barbara , Pauline Ash doesn't really make an effort to move the story much beyond the very superficial. Personally, I found the age gap gulf between the protagonists off-putting, particularly as the heroine was only just turning eighteen when she began her nursing training. I'm rating the book a two-star vintage romance read and strongly suggest selecting either another Pauline Ash title, or a non-Harlequin novel published under the authors real name; Queena Tilbury .
