I don't know... a book is written marvelous, all the adventures, story of Quinn, action, not a single boring sentence...but I simply didn't like how Quinn's life turned on. And Lestat's... but I don't like Quinn with Mona and Lestat with Rowan (which will happen in last book). I will never accept these relationships. Besides... Lestat TWICE said HE LOVES QUINN. And Quinn like a puppy runs to that Mona. Who needs mortal family when you are a vampire? Just go, hunt, visit countries, have money, do whatever you wish, but that silly boy sits with mortals. More pathetic than Louis. Oh well. It is a book. It is supposed to make you feel something and get an opinion on it. I know because I'm a writer myself and I know I make same dramas, same revenges, same relationships that my readers gonna hate and love. But this is life, I know nobody would read a book where everybody would be happy and live forever same as every day. So in the story there must be different characters, different life stories, different things to make a book colorful and splendid. Well, if I read this book in A MONTH, it means it was good. Usually I read such thick books for half year because of so many pages. But this one I just "ate". It simply had the magic inside to call me home from work and make me read it. It had magic to make me live without food for hours because I simply couldn't put it down. Who needs food when you have more secrets to reveal? I think I need more of such books to help me lose more weight. So in conclusion, I was amazed by this book. I think it was best of all I read from this serie. It had enough action and secrets not to feel bored. It was enough interesting for me. I think it is first time in my life that I sit now and look on this closed book and think: "God, why you had to end so fast? Why you couldn't last forever?". And I am always glad to finish a book and take a new, but this one.... It has magic inside that you cannot stop reading it. I really wouldn't mind if "Blackwood Farm" would be 700 pages more longer. I always get bored of books which have more than 400 pages, but not this one. No. I will miss it dearly... Oh well. I better should start "Blood Canticle". Maybe it will great too.
