“My father died when I was four, so my brother and I had to learn to fend for ourselves from a young age,” Stephanie admitted. Brock stared at her breasts. “You’re such a sexy little girl, Stephanie!” That’s not quite a direct quotation, but you get the idea. Half this book is just Stephanie trying to have some semblance of a conversation with Brock, only to be met with these inane, horny responses. Brock is a real fascinating character. He’s a pubescent boy in a grown man’s body. A very manly, virile body, might I add. Janet Dailey loves to remind the reader of that every few paragraphs, just in case they forget over the course of 30 seconds. Very considerate of her. Brock drives for like 18 hours in the middle of a raging snowstorm, desperate for a chance to convince Stephanie to forsake her almighty virginity and sleep with him. Someone needs to tell him about masturbation. There’s also this bit where Stephanie explains to Brock that she goes to church on Sunday or something, and Brock just goes like “God, Stephanie, you’re such a virgin. I bet you want me to come to church with you. And then I’ll just be sitting in the pew, lusting after you. You’re such a hypocrite.” Perpetual arousal, a lack of competence, and anger issues. Yeah, he’s definitely 14. Because this book was published in 1980, I (mistakenly) expected it to be modest about sexual matters. Very funny in hindsight. I want to ask, “Who published this?” but I know it was Harlequin. Can’t believe it took me 12 years to read something from the publishing house whose books my mom edits. Gotta say, I didn’t like this too much. I do respect her job a lot more now, though. Sometimes I think “Wow, the 80s were so cool,” and then I remember it was considered hot for male love interests to call female protagonists “my delectable little morsel”— this is a direct quotation. I also remember that people liked Sixteen Candles back then. Man, that movie sucks. Someone should write a book where an 80s male love interest travels to the future, tries to woo a modern-day gal, and immediately gets shut down. “My delectable little morsel,” crooned the virile Brock Manlyman. “I’m calling the police!” shrieked Stormi. This review is turning out to be longer than the actual book. I should’ve written my extended essay on it. I can just see myself writing “80s Disillusionment” in the table of contents. Maybe I would’ve actually got an A. I will say, this book isn’t downright lousy. It’s rather short and digestible, so the agony of reading it doesn’t last too long. But if short and digestible is what you’re looking for, I would recommend turning to the far superior Junie B. Jones franchise. Now those were good books!
