"She liked books more than anything else, and was, in fact, always inventing stories of beautiful things and telling them to herself." This book tells the story of a seven year old girl, Sara, whose father got posted in a faraway place and she had to stay in a seminary. And this is the best description of Sara so far as the story goes at the beginning of the book: "Her young mother had died, and as the child had been treated like a favorite doll or a very spoiled pet monkey or lap dog ever since the first hour of her life, she was a very appalling little creature." But what's more important about her character is how she tells stories and being there for those who need some kindness and a pair of listening ears. Other characters include Miss Minchin (strict without much purpose I feel, very dislikeable) and her other staffs, Ermangarde ("fat", "not clever" *me: I just can't ugh...), Lavinia (almost a bully and a bully), Lottie (with the "small, fat legs"), Becky (the young, "ugly", stunted maid), Miss Amelia (the one with "fat" hands), Ram Das (the man next door) but try to know who are these characters when you read the book: Emily, Mr and Mrs Melchisedec. *Child labour, starvation, child abuse and neglect "“I can’t bear this,” said the poor child, trembling. “I know I shall die. I’m cold; I’m wet; I’m starving to death. I’ve walked a thousand miles today, and they have done nothing but scold me from morning until night. And because I could not find that last thing the cook sent me for, they would not give me any supper." I really do not like the usage of derogatory words like ugly, fat over and over again in books especially in books that are considered classics and meant for the youngsters. I liked this book and enjoyed it thoroughly but I wasn't ready for the stereotypes it has regarding gender and culture. To be honest I was bored in between as there was an unending fuss on the main character. And then the book took a turn and it got pretty serious. That's when I started enjoying the book for the story it has. The book deals with loneliness (and grief) in great detail from the perspective of a child. Sara even made friends with animals and birds to overcome such times. The best part though is the writing. It made the book so easy to get into and get through with it until the end. It tells how company and imagination comfort during such difficult times. And also, there are a lot of times Sara stood up for herself and spoke her mind. It's liberating! *Quite relatable: "People who are fond of books know the feeling of irritation which sweeps over them at such a moment. The temptation to be unreasonable and snappish is one not easy to manage." "Her imagination was beginning to work for her. It had not worked for her at all since her troubles had come upon her. She had felt as if it had been stunned." “It’s a lonely place,” she said. “Sometimes it’s the loneliest place in the world.” "Give her books, and she would devour them and end by knowing them by heart." “I am growing quite fond of him. I should not like him to be disturbed. I have adopted him for a friend. You can do that with people you never speak to at all. You can just watch them, and think about them and be sorry for them, until they seem almost like relations." (This sounds so much like me fangirling over my K-pop idols. Creepy me!) “I don’t want you to give me anything,” said Sara. “I want your books—I want them!” And her eyes grew big, and her chest heaved. *Lines to reflect upon: "If Nature has made you for a giver, your hands are born open, and so is your heart; and though there may be times when your hands are empty, your heart is always full, and you can give things out of that—warm things, kind things, sweet things—help and comfort and laughter—and sometimes gay, kind laughter is the best help of all." “Adversity tries people, and mine has tried you and proved how nice you are.” “EVERYTHING’S a story. You are a story—I am a story." "When people are insulting you, there is nothing so good for them as not to say a word—just to look at them and THINK." "When you will not fly into a passion people know you are stronger than they are, because you are strong enough to hold in your rage, and they are not, and they say stupid things they wish they hadn’t said afterward. There’s nothing so strong as rage, except what makes you hold it in—that’s stronger. It’s a good thing not to answer your enemies." "While the thought held possession of her, she could not be made rude and malicious by the rudeness and malice of those about her." “Perhaps you can FEEL if you can’t hear,” was her fancy. “Perhaps kind thoughts reach people somehow, even through windows and doors and walls. Perhaps you feel a little warm and comforted, and don’t know why, when I am standing here in the cold and hoping you will get well and happy again." (***The iconic lines***) “Whatever comes,” she said, “cannot alter one thing. If I am a princess in rags and tatters, I can be a princess inside. It would be easy to be a princess if I were dressed in cloth of gold, but it is a great deal more of a triumph to be one all the time when no one knows it." “Perhaps,” she said, “to be able to learn things quickly isn’t everything. To be kind is worth a great deal to other people. *This part broke my heart: “You are nothing but a DOLL!” she cried. “Nothing but a doll—doll—doll! You care for nothing. You are stuffed with sawdust. You never had a heart. Nothing could ever make you feel. You are a DOLL!” The anguish. The frustration. No child should feel this way. The story ends well. Believe in yourself. Believe in the magic. Believe someone cares for you. Kindness matters. And Miss Minchin, go to H. I really dislike such heartless, abusive, shallow characters. Well, being yourself and being kind. That's how you conquer everything you want.
