UPDATE Because of the COVID-19 outbreak, a group of friends read this outstanding and terrifying work of nonfiction in March of 2020. Of course, I re-read it with them! It is obviously far more meaningful now in 2020 than it ever was before, but it will also hit you with how much governmental response to the risk of contagious illnesses has NOT changed since this real world incident occurred. Read this for the crystalline caves, mummified baby elephants if nothing else. Richard Preston is one of the few writers of nonfiction that tell their factual stories as if they were fairy tales. Dark ones. This guy could give Eric Larson a run for his money, he is that good. _________________________ If you have not watched the new National Geographic Channel mini series with Julianne Margueles (and the actors who played "Davos" from Game of Thrones plus "Stan" from The Americans), you have GOT to see it. The series is based off of just one section of this outstanding book. I read this terrifying and mesmerizing work of nonfiction the same year it was published and have never seen outbreaks of the flu the same way. The book is a collection of close calls with horrendous hemorrhagic fevers that have wiped out thousands overseas and come close to screaming through suburban USA. When the huge outbreak of Ebola hit various countries in western African in 2014, you'll remember that a man flew here without any signs of illness but became sick in Dallas. He died in hospital of Ebola, and two nurses were infected from caring for him. More infected health care workers flew home to the US, and most were saved. At least one worker, exposed but supposedly not ill, refused to be kept in quarantine. Having read this 20 years prior, I was FREAKED out. Ebola Zaire liquefies your entire body - you secrete blood from your orifices, vomit up blackened blood until you dry heave. The pain is like breaking bones. Pregnant women suddenly discharge liquefied babies. The muscles of your face dissolve so your skin just hangs like a mask. Your brain cells hemorrhage so you are no longer you - your brain stem keeps you alive, but you are in effect a zombie heaving up blood and stomach lining, sloughing off your intestines in your bloody mess of stool. This is real! Preston is a terrific writer who takes factual information and swirls it into the mind of the reader like a drop of infected blood, hot and loaded with virus, plopping into the bloodstream. From stories of giant caves where elephants chew on salt deposits amongst glittering crystals to a hospital where an upper story patient becomes ill from the second hand cigarette smoke puffed out of the room below, blowing up the exterior wall, your mind will boggle. Preston (his brother is that famous writer) also wrote a similar booked called The Demon in the Freezer which floored me. It came out right before 9/11 and was way more scary than terrorists flying planes into buildings. In the hands of maniacs, viruses are far more lethal than just about anything you can think of. Do yourself a sober and scary favor. Check out the National Geographic Channel's series. Better yet, get this highly readable and addictive book. It delivers way more than the series, but will change you forever.
