Thank God, this is fiction, at least in our dimension! WELCOME TO 1962 It is impossible that ours is the only world; there must be world after world unseen by us, in some region or dimension that we simply do not perceive. This book is a frightening glimpse of how our world could been if the Axis Powers would have won the World War II. The Nazi Germany and the Imperial Japan won and they divided the planet between them. Even the United States is now divided with the East Coast dominated by Nazis and the West Coast under Japanese control having a “neutral zone” in the middle of the country. And the most frightening of all is that now there is a “Cold War” between Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan. Where the Nazis have now Nuclear Technology and Hidrogen Bombs at their disposal. Now rockets is the normal way to travel between countries in a matter of less than an hour. And Earth has become “too small” for the Nazis, where now they are using Space Rocket Technology to colonize the Moon, Mars and Venus. Slavery is back. Racial persecution is enforced. Extermination Camps are still active and spreading around the Nazi Occupied Territories and now not only Jews are targets but also Africans, Afro-Americans, Indians… for starters. And all because the death of one man. An important man. No one can do what you were meant to do. If certain person is no longer around, a void is created… …and darkness can take control. This is the testimony that a person can change the world. For good or for evil. THE LESSER OF TWO EVILS One cannot judge by book being best seller. We all know that. Many best sellers are terrible trash. It’s interesting how this “experiment” of a world where the Axis Powers won the WWII, it’s clear that while living in Nazi Occupied Nations is a very horrific scenario, the book establishes that being a citizen in the Imperial Japan Occupied Countries isn’t so bad. Don’t get wrong, if you are not Japanese, you will be a second-class citizen, but you will be treated fair enough, if you don’t make troubles that is, and curiously if your skin color is white enough. Maybe you think that it’s the same, but when you read how are things in each side of the Axis Powers, having only those two options, it’s clear that you will try to live in the Japanese side. Of course, you will need to consult the I Ching since now this book is the usual way to take important decisions in the everyday life of people in the Imperial Japanese controlled lands. ECCLESIASTES 12:5 Amazing, the power of fiction, even cheap popular fiction, to evoke. The only “hope” in this glum world, the only “fresh air” to “breath” is in the form of a novel, “The Grasshopper Lies Heavy”, a piece of fiction with the “absurd” idea of that the Axis Power could lose the WWII. A very cool thing about the “winning” scenario proposed in that novel, “The Grasshopper Lies Heavy”, is that while it’s obvious that Philip K. Dick, the author, had access to all the details of how the WWII happened, and he could take the easy path and just telling what really happened (at least in our dimension) but instead, he did consentious thought to show a valid way that Allied Forces could still win the WWII but not just like it happened. BRAVE BUT… Truth,… -- …As terrible as death. But harder to find. The book, The Man in the High Castle , is a brilliant work studying how our world could be a lot different if the “other side” of the conflict in WWII would win it. However, except some brief moments, the most of the narrative lacks of excitement scenes, the relevancy of the main characters is too limited to their close surroundings, and where they haven’t any control over the global events decided by the global leaders that are re-shaping even more the current political scenario. Also, the book lacks of a proper ending and/or an adequate finale. Maybe it isn’t necessary, but it’s odd (at least to me) to show such worldwide scenario without any appreciable intention to try to shaken the status quo. Still, it’s a evocative reading and a mindblowing concept.
