This novel arrived on my shelf (I can’t remember why now) too late, decades too late. A big black-hole slab of white middle class American male self-loathing… mmmm, who would not want to slurp that up? The two targets of this book : office life in a big company and family life somewhere in the suburbs. Like I say, the white middle class. Groan. After reading David Foster Wallace’s brilliant hot mess The Pale King , and Sinclair Lewis’s heartfelt poignant Babbitt and Joyce Carol Oates’ blistering riveting What I Lived For , not to mention all those movies like American Beauty, Office Space, The Hudsucker Proxy, Boiler Room, Glengarry Glen Ross and so on (and let’s throw American Psycho and Richard Yates' Revolutionary Road in here) not to mention the well-known tv show Mad Men not to mention Updike Cheever O’Hara Roth and Bellow I had to conclude that Something Happened was for me a day late and a dollar short. Sure, the self-loathingness is off the scale, vicious corporate backstabbing never more perfectly portrayed and the bitter mutual hatred that seethes within a little nuclear (named after the bomb) family rarely summed up so well. But you have had ALL of this before. All of it. Well, I should say I have. So eventually, after discerning that there was not one single atom of daylight, not one single chink of grace or lightness or humour in the unending vile revelations of our man Bob Slocum, bosses’-ass-kisser, own-children-disliker and typist almost-raper I said Goodbye Bob, I hope you have a stroke that paralyses the right half of your body and you linger like that for 15 years. (I think it’s okay to wish pain and suffering to fictional people. I hope so, I do it all the time.) I see that many fine upstanding reviewers give out 5 stars to Something Happened . And these reviews are well worth reading too. I can only assume that these readers have a higher tolerance of unrelenting misery and ceaseless bashing of the same targets than do I. Maybe when they come to read The Pale King, Babbitt and What I Lived For they will begin their reviews in the following way : This novel arrived on my shelf too late, decades too late. A big black hole slab of white middle class American male self-loathing etc.
