Can you Forgive Her? is the story of a young woman who is engaged to be married to a very respectable gentleman. She has some doubts and starts to wonder if she should have been with the less than respectable paramour of her younger days. Along with a few other intermingling story lines, 800 pages later the little love story is wrapped up and the reader is asked to answer the titular question. Before you dismiss the plot as drivel that no one would be interested in reading 800 pages think that Proust can be summed up in a similarly pithy manner. the story of a mama's boy who has his heartbroken by a lesbian. . I'm going to come back to the book and write about a lot of other things, too. This review will be about a lot of things. Q1: Why did I decide to try reading Trollope? I blame Jacques Roubaud and his descriptions of the joys he gets from reading Trollope. I'm fairly certain there was a passage in The Great Fire of London that said something like, even when he was bored with what Trollope was writing about, the style he wrote in never ceased to give him pleasure. I think this is a fair description for my own feelings towards this book. It's possible that after I read The Great Fire of London I came across another writer I enjoyed also praising Trollope and with those two praises I felt it necessary to pick up some very inexpensive mass-market editions of his books when I was home recently. I can't remember who this second author is though. I might be mis-remembering more than one thing in this paragraph. P1: There is no book that is universally loved. and it follows: P2: Every book has detractors with P2(e): There being some books that are either so mediocre and/or unread / never seen that it would be hard to find anyone that has any passionate feelings about them (obviously). For example, as of 12:34 pm EST on Saturday August 25, 2012 two thousand three hundred and seventy eight people have rated Hamlet by William Shakespeare with one star here on goodreads. T.S. Eliot called the play an, "artistic failure". Some people feel the same way about Eliot's poetry. What does it mean when we don't like a book? Is this a binary situation where either me as the reader is infallible, which leads to the possible conclusion that anyone who doesn't agree with me is flawed in someway ie., stupid, ideologically tainted, a fool; or I have failed as a reader if there are others who love the book and I hated it. Is every failing as a reader his or her own fault if it can be established that the book lives up to a minimum level of coherence and skill? Is the person who doesn't enjoy the current best-selling thriller that tons of people are enjoying correct in saying, this is stupid, all those people are dupes. They are just engaging is some collective psychosis? Or is it more proper to say I failed to find anything entertaining in this book. Or I wanted this book to be more about something it wasn't. I failed in selecting a book that matched my desires to the thing that would satisfy those desires. In light of the millions of books available to read could I have made a better choice? An example. If I read Fifty Shades of Grey I'm sure I wouldn't like it. There is nothing about that book that signals to me that this is a book I would have an interest in reading. I could read it and then write a scathing review about how stupid it is, how poorly written certain passages are, how everyone is just buying into some stupid trend but the truth is that I'm not the audience for the book, it's not going to speak to me. The fact that so many people have found the book to have person resonance to them means that it is succeeding as a book, as something that speaks to people, that communicates. If I choose to read it the failing would be mine, not the book. The book never made any promises to me that it would be something for me. But what about Hamlet and T.S. Eliot? I don't know. If I was going to guess I'd think that Eliot wanted something out of the play that wasn't there. Should what we want in a work of art be there? It's a little disturbing to me that I seem to be advocating here that every time you don't like a book it is your own fault. What I am assuming is that I'm talking about books of a certain level, even if that level is as low as say something like a James Patterson novel. What about lesser works by great writers? Or the books by literary giants that you know were written either on their sharp decline or were just cobbled together to make some cash and even the writer would say that it is a piece of junk? I don't have any answers. I only have some half-baked thoughts and questions. But should all those people who hold Hamlet up as one of the pinnacles of Western Literature suddenly say, I guess we were wrong, Eliot found it was a failure. I don't know how you would establish the 'minimum baseline' that would be necessary to say that the failing is mine as the reader. Because there are really crappy books out there. There are failures. More likely, if we aren't digging into the ditches of self-published muck we are reading books that can be successful as a book, maybe just not to us. But failings on our part aren't necessarily bad things. Maybe we just don't fall for the big twist because we're sophisticated enough in our cultural consumption that we caught all the signs and saw it coming, this could be argued either way, maybe it was a crappy story, or maybe we failed because we gave it too much attention. I have no answers. I'm just trying to work out in my head why some books work and some don't work for me, and why those same books don't work the same way for other people. And really fucking annoyed (even though I'm sure I'm guilty of it, too) at the idea that people who don't agree with ones opinion of a book should be insulted. I'm sure that the millions of people throughout the last four hundred and something years that have loved Hamlet were all just stupid dupes by Eliot. And yeah, I'll give that he's probably much smarter than I'll ever be. What this has to do with this book? I wouldn't have liked this book if I read it say fifteen years ago. I really liked it now though. I could enjoy the wit and the slow pacing. I could find the text a pleasure to read even if the messages / or plot weren't exactly anything that I'm necessarily interested in. When I was in my early twenties, I would have probably been annoyed at this book. I would have found the capitalism in it off-putting. The pragmatic way of looking at love and marriage I would have been up in arms about, but what about true love freed from the shackles of economic tyranny? What do I care about the dealings of mid-19th century English Parliamentary intrigues when across the channel there had been barricades and the sounds of revolution were in the air? Where is Marx in all of this? Up Bakunin and destruction being a creative act! I would have thought this is the kind of reactionary Victorian rubbish that we need to move beyond. This book would have been a painful chore for me to get through because I would have been wanting the book to be something it wasn't (not that I would have been explicitly expecting the book to be anything, but I would have been wanting to be reading a book that dealt with different topics, or that handled the themes in the book in a different manner). Books are wonderfully open artifacts that the reader can open up (as in the text, but obviously the book would have had to been opened literally to do this) and make all kinds of dialogues with, many of which the author probably never would have imagined possible, but a book is also a static object that can only come to the reader as it is. With enough Derrida maybe any text can be made to say anything you want, but for mere-mortals we will run into limits of what a book can do, even in the most difficult and open book ever written (taking into account 'mis-readings' it's possible to say that a book could be almost anything, someone with a strong enough aversion to cognitive dissonance could theoretically make every book fit their own personal desires, although it then can be argued if they are reading the book, or just reading themselves with the book as a prop, a further question can be asked about a person who reads in this way is if they just want themselves to be the hero, the protagonist, the anti-hero, the villain (or whatever role they see themselves occupying in life) in every book they read, and when they can't fit themselves in, can't identify closely enough with anyone in the book they feel the book is a total failure. If this is something, which it might not be, is this alien (to me) egoism towards books sort of paradoxically also a renunciation of the the self as an autonomous being? Huh? Well, first because they look to other things are only relating to themselves, and see their own self as a stand in for the universal, and because they negate the autonomy of others, say the author of a book, be declaring a failure anything that doesn't speak to them personally, doesn't answer their questions, doesn't live up to their expectations. Unless one takes a solipistic view of the world, the demanding of the other to comply with ones own wishes and desires this denies the other the right to be an individual that has it's own autonomy. Fuzzy thinking? I've got tons of it, this sort of worked in my head, but I think I just fucked it up really good here). Am I trying to say that I'm a more mature reader now than I was then? That I'm smarter? No. My expectations have just changed. Sometimes I think about how I rate books, or more specifically the enjoyment I feel from books. I see that I rate most of what I read with three or four stars. Or to put it another way, I enjoy most of the books I read. I worry that I'm just easily amused sometimes. I really enjoyed reading this summer's must-read thriller Gone Girl , I thought it was well-paced, and it kept me engaged throughout the book. It didn't make me think about any of the big important questions of life, but I wasn't expecting it to. I read it to be entertained, and it succeeded. Was it a better book than George Saunders new collection of stories? Probably not, writing wise Saunders is probably better. The stories in Saunders collection were more what my personal liking were (I'd wouldn't necessarily say a story about a missing wife is one of the things I go looking for in a story, on the other hand Saunders writes about the sorts of things I generally would think I'm looking for in a story). My expectations were dashed by Saunders though, I wanted more than was in the book. I rated it accordingly, I know people who are going to like it a lot more than I did, and I feel kind of envious that they will have a better experience than I did. But that is going off topic a bit. I don't think I'm a good reviewer of 'popular fiction' the sorts of books that fall into my all-time favorites are generally not plot-driven. They aren't the sort of books that have blurbs that say, "a real-page turner", or "call in sick tomorrow because you're going to be up all night reading to the final twist". Instead when I do read these books I usually have one of two reactions. My critical faculties usually drop when I read a book like this and unless the writing is awful I'm usually fairly entertained. It's sort of the same way that I watch movies these days. I see them so infrequently that I'm easily caught up in the whole 'spectacle' of them. Blow some shit up and I'm kind of happy these days in the three or four times a year that I sit down and watch a movie. But am I really this easily amused? Or after about twenty years of being a fairly serious reader who took literature classes, worked in a library for a couple of years, interned for almost a year with a publisher and then worked for the past eleven years in one of the biggest fiction sections in the country (I'm not trying to brag, I'm just trying to get the idea that I've spent a lot of time around books in the past two decades) I've just gotten fairly good at picking out what books to read? I wouldn't have picked out this book though. If it hadn't been for Roubaud I would haven't have read Trollope (I was going to say ever, but that is stupid to say, who knows what would have happened, what I would have read that would have pointed me towards him, which is something you never really do know once you start reading, and especially when you happen to pick up a book by someone who really loves reading and gives you names and titles and pointers towards other writers you might have never thought of or heard of. This is one of my favorite things to find in a book, it is the same geeky great feeling I used to have as a teenager reading through linear notes for records/cassettes/cds and reading interviews with musicians, when other bands would get mentioned. Some band I never heard of was thanked or mentioned as an influence, and sometimes that would lead to a new favorite or sometimes it would lead to a band I'd be mystified about why they were thought highly of, but it is one of the pre-internet ways that my musical repertoire grew). When I was twenty four I believed I had read all the novels that mattered. I thought literature was dead. I figured there were maybe a few odds and ends of authors I'd already read that I should still read, but mostly I figured I'd seen it all. I was wrong. Should you read Trollope? I have no idea. I'm not going to try to sell him on you. If you want to be sold on him and you have the inclination to read Roubaud's labyrinthine prose then I'd recommend letting him sell you on it. I really enjoyed my week I spent with Trollope, and I'm planning on spending more time with him in the near future. Is this the review you meant to write? Isn't this just another of your long-winded why I read reviews? No. I meant for this to be more involved with other topics. I meant to do more propositions. I wrote those a couple of weeks ago, everything after them I wrote today. I wanted to write about love: conditional, unconditional, passion and pragmatic. I wanted to create a Roubaud-esque review where I swung the topics around, weaved in and out of them and maybe answered nothing but constructed something nevertheless. Then this was going to be the last review I ever wrote for this site (or second to last depending on if I had written this before or after the one other review that I feel obliged to still write, which I haven't written yet). It wasn't going to be stated that it was the last review, it wasn't going to be a grand fuck-you or anything. I just planned on not writing anymore, or if I did write reviews not send them to the feed, just let them be reminders to me of what I thought at particular times, sometimes about the book I just read and sometimes about other things. Instead I'll probably keep writing these things, which are more of a public diary than reviews anyway. But yeah, this is just yet another of my why I read / why I rate books like I do / why I write reviews sort of review. One day maybe I'll figure out the answers to these questions and then I can get to the serious business of writing book reports.
