Ursula Le Guin was one smart cookie when she introduced the world to A Wizard of Earthsea in 1968: she made her hero a man. But, after the first book was successful and the series clearly had a following, she was one smart cookie again: she made her hero a woman. When you're a young reader, this is a bit jarring. If you're anything like I was when I first read this novel at the age of fourteen, you're so lovesick for the original hero, Ged, that you start the second book thinking: WHERE THE HELL IS HE, AND WHO'S THIS DANG TENAR? My daughter, the audience for the story this time around, is almost fourteen herself and I saw, right away, that the same thing was happening to her. Within the first ten pages of this read aloud, she had already asked three times, “Where's Ged?” It's hard not to have it bad for Ged, and as soon as he finally enters the story (not a spoiler alert; they're together on the cover), my daughter almost sighed with relief, that things were back to normal. So, yes, to Ged. Hell, yes, to Ged. But, yes, also, to meeting Tenar and learning the beginning of her story. Tenar is taken, as a young girl, from her family's home. Her birth happens to coincide with the death of the High Priestess's, so her family has no choice but to relinquish her to serve this religious order. In this kingdom, those in power support a long-held belief that the High Priestess is reborn, over and over again, in the baby that is born the closest to the time of her death, to serve the Godking, and guard over the Tombs of Atuan. This young girl, Tenar, loses her family, her identity and her name as she is conscripted into a unique type of service: she becomes a girl priestess, who has power over the literal darkness of the tombs, while serving the male patriarchy of the Godking, who rules from the literal mountaintop. Once her name is taken from her, she is given no name, other than Arha , which translates to mean “one who is eaten” or “one who is devoured.” And she is this Arha until the arrival of Ged. . . When things become very confusing. I must stop at this point, as it is never my desire to tell the plot of a story nor give spoiler alerts, but I related, so deeply, to this woman, Tenar, who has been trained her whole life to do one thing, then disrupted from that thing, then left to her own devices in a desert: There was a dread in her now that grew and grew. All that lay ahead of her was unknown. She knew nothing but the desert and the Tombs. What good was that? She knew the turnings of a ruined maze, she knew the dances danced before a fallen altar. She knew nothing of forests, or cities, or the hearts of men . To be reborn one must die, Tenar. As inspiring and heart-breaking as Ged's journey is, I can not help but marvel, yet again, at Ms. Le Guin's cunning approach to unraveling multiple archetypes throughout this series (which just gets better and stronger with each installment). At the novel's end, I checked in with my daughter, to see if Tenar's story had been enough for her. As I closed the cover, I asked, as always, how many stars? She rolled her eyes. “Duh. Five” "You were never meant for cruelty and darkness; you were made to hold light. . ."
