5 stars. This is a beautiful and masterly book. Like all of Scott’s works, I loved it for the characters. Fergus is my favourite <33 then it’s Evan, Edward, and Callum. <3 There was less action in this book than in Scott’s other books—it was quieter in feeling, even if the circumstances were active. There was one long drinking scene, and after that several mentions of drinking/whiskey and some swearing (“good God/heavens” & “devil/deil” and the like, with one or two “d—d,” if I remember correctly). There was also a kiss or two mentioned. It was very humorous in places, but altogether it felt more like a quiet read than most of Scott’s novels. The characters, though, are marvellous. ^_^ Fergus—I love Fergus. And that ending was perfect. *Due to circumstances, I put this book down at the 53% mark and picked it up again over a week later, so I may have forgotten some content. This review is subject to revision.* A Favourite Quote: “[I have thrown] the force of my narrative upon the characters and passions of the actors;—those passions common to men in all stages of society, and which have alike agitated the human heart, whether it throbbed under the steel corslet of the fifteenth century, the brocaded coat of the eighteenth, or the blue frock and white dimity waistcoat of the present day.... It is from the great book of Nature, the same through a thousand editions, whether of black-letter, or wire-wove and hot-pressed, that I have venturously essayed to read a chapter to the public.” A Favourite Humorous Quote: “[N]o one knew better than Fergus that there must be some decent pretext for a mortal duel. For instance, you may challenge a man for treading on your corn in a crowd, or for pushing you up to the wall, or for taking your seat in the theatre; but the modern code of honour will not permit you to found a quarrel upon your right of compelling a man to continue addresses to a female relative which the fair lady has already refused. So that Fergus was compelled to stomach this supposed affront[.]”
