I’ve been reading Dick’s novels in chronological order and I’m almost finished with the 1950s. But I needed a break from novels so I switched over to short stories. I decided to start with The Eye of the Sibyl and Other Classic Stories , the last of the five volumes of Dick’s collected short stories. I exceeded the 20,000 character limit ~ Oops! ~ so this review will be continued in the comment section. The first story is “ The Black Box .” I’m especially interested in Dick’s religious themes, so a story that quotes the Bhagavad Gita and references Basho is sure to get my attention. Telepathy is also a common theme in Dick’s stories and “The Black Box” is no exception. But as important as telepathy is to this story, empathy is even more important. In Dick’s own note on the story, he relates “The Black Box” to Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? I haven’t read that one yet, but of course I’m familiar with Ridley Scott’s “Blade Runner” and the empathy test that distinguishes humans from replicants. Telepathy allows one to read another’s thoughts, even subconscious thoughts. But empathy allows one to feel what another feels. The government utilizes telepathy, but bans empathy. Why? I suppose it’s because the telepath knows what another person thinks, but doesn’t think what that person thinks. The empath doesn’t just know what another person feels. The empath actually feels what that other person feels. This makes all the difference. Like some of Dick’s 1950s novels, “The Black Box” features a messiah-figure ~ this time an alien messiah-figure. People use empathy boxes to feel what he feels as he marches toward his death. This is clearly reminiscent of the Via Dolorosa ~ the path of Christ. One might ask why people want to suffer along with the alien messiah? But the real question this story raises is a political one: Why does the government want to ban this? What about empathy is politically subversive? Dick’s story reminds us that Christianity ~ a religion wherein devotees suffer along with their suffering messiah ~ was once a politically subversive religion. ★★★★★ The second story, “ The War With The Fnools ,” is a humorous piece described by Dick as a “low-budget invasion.” It is about aliens who try to take over Earth. They assume human guise, though they stand only two feet tall. The absurdity is that they don’t realize how different they look by being only two feet tall. Fortunately for the people of Earth, the tiny invaders have never experienced cigarettes, booze, and sex. ★★★☆☆ The third story, “ Precious Artifact ,” involves an engineer facing the aftermath of a war. Like so many of Dick’s stories, there are layers of illusion. Extra star for the kitten. ★★★★☆ The fourth story, “ Retreat Syndrome ,” reminded me a bit of the 1990 film Total Recall . (I have not yet read “We Can Remember It for You Wholesale,” so I can’t compare it to the short story which inspired the film.) Like Total Recall , the main character of “Retreat Syndrome” has a false memory and must figure out what is real and what is not. However, the similarity ends there. In “Retreat Syndrome,” John Cupertino distinctly recalls murdering his wife even though she is alive. This thought is frequently described as an idée fixe , an obsession or “fixed idea” which is so resistant to change that even meeting and talking to his wife cannot alter it. But there’s more going on than this. Throughout this story, Cupertino has experiences where everything seems unreal, insubstantial, and shadow-like. Yet when he finally discovers the truth, he is unable to accept it. Dick’s speculations about Cupertino’s illusory world are the highlight of this story. “ He wanted, he realized, to hang onto the delusional system; he did not wish to see it decompose around him. A person was his world; without it he did not exist ” (81). The world of shadows that Cupertino inhabits recalls Plato’s world of shadows. In “The Allegory of the Cave,” Plato imagines men held prisoner in a cave. They spend their days watching the shadows reflected on the cave walls. It is all they have ever known, so they mistake it for the real world. When one prisoner is freed and sees the real world for the first time, he returns to the cave and informs his fellow prisoners, but they want nothing to do with reality. To them, the shadows are real and they will not give them up. Dick suggests a reason why Plato’s prisoners might be unwilling to abandon their illusory world: self-preservation. So it is with Cupertino. He hangs on to his delusional system, even though it condemns him to repeat his actions over and over again ad infinitum . The story isn’t perfect, for it is not clear how Cupertino’s existence or identity is threatened by the collapse of his illusion. The reality of his life is worse than the illusion he inhabits, but it is not substantially different. However, the story does explore mental illness, a frequent theme in Dick’s stories. It shows how the illusion is stronger than reality, so strong that it persists even after the truth has been discovered. ★★★★★ I skipped the fifth and sixth stories, “ A Terran Odyssey ” and “ Your Appointment Will Be Yesterday ,” because I haven’t yet read the novels they are excerpted from and I don’t want any spoilers. (“A Terran Odyssey” is from Dr. Bloodmoney and “Your Appointment Will Be Yesterday” is from Counter-Clock World ). The seventh story, “ Holy Quarrel ,” is another story with a religious theme. The premise is intriguing: the Genux-B computer decides that Sousa, a penny-candy salesman, is Satan and must be destroyed. To accomplish this, Genux-B is preparing to destroy all of Northern California. The best part of this story is the characters’ attempts to reason with the artificial intelligence. After failing to trick Genux-B into believing that Sousa doesn’t really exist, one of the FBI men cites St. Anselms’ ontological argument for the existence of God (147-148). As with so many of Dick’s stories, there’s a lot going on. There is the dilemma of a super computer which is either malfunctioning or functioning exactly as it should. If it is malfunctioning, it will destroy Northern California for nothing. If it is functioning exactly as it should, the men ignore it at their peril. Then there is the question of whether Sousa is actually Satan or the computer is experiencing a religious delusion. And there is the mystery of the gum balls which may or may not be alien life. The different strands of the story all come together at the end with a bit of Dick’s unique brand of absurdity. ★★★★★ “ A Game of Unchance ” is the eighth story in this collection and so far it is the one that least held my interest, but it did invite a comparison with Ray Bradbury. This is the story of a colony on Mars facing danger from a traveling carnival. But Dick’s Martian setting and sinister carnival are nothing like Bradbury’s. Instead of Bradbury’s iconic small town setting, Dick presents a struggling settlement of farmers and mechanics. Instead of Bradbury’s supernatural battle between good and evil, Dick presents an extraterrestrial plot of economic and military sabotage. The conclusion of the story reminded me of the conclusion of “Retreat Syndrome.” In both stories, the characters do not learn from experience, so they repeat their mistakes over and over. I wonder if this is something that Dick observed in himself. Or perhaps he simply identified it as a flaw in human nature. Either way, I am curious to see if Dick uses this again. ★★★☆☆ The ninth story,“ Not by it’s Cover ,” is a clever theological story. What do Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura , the Bible , Tom Paine’s Age of Reason , the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas, the Encyclopedia Briannica , and James Hilton’s Lost Horizon all have in common? They have all had their text altered by the living hide of an immortal Martian animal. Well, not quite all. The text of the Summa Theologica was not altered. It merely had a Biblical line inserted over and over again. And the Bible had a line repeatedly capitalized. In a note to the story written by Dick ten years after publication he expresses his desire for the Bible to be true. ★★★★☆ The tenth story, “ Return Match ,” involves an alien pinball machine. A rather pedestrian story compared with the others. ★★★☆☆ “ Faith of Our Fathers ” is the eleventh story and it’s the highlight of this collection. In a world dominated by Communism, the protagonist, Chien, wakes up from the hallucination that everyone is under. The beginning of this story reminded me of my favorite sci fi movie, “They Live” (1988). “ Put the glasses on! ” Except that here it’s not sunglasses; it’s an anti-hallucinogen. And what does Chien see when the veil is lifted from his eyes? God of course! The theological foundation of “Faith of Our Fathers” reminds me a little of Clark Ashton Smith’s short story “Schizoid Creator.” In both stories, God is presented as both good and evil. But naturally Dick’s story goes deeper than Smith’s does, with Dick positing, not only that God is both good and evil, but that good and evil are really the same thing. “ ’Did it ever occur to you,’ Chien said, ‘that good and evil are names for the same thing? That God could be both good and evil at the same time‘ ” (221)? Dick’s God is more horrifying that Smith’s even though Smith’s story could more accurately be called a horror story. That’s because Dick’s story is philosophical and Smith’s is not. God in “Faith of Our Fathers” is not a split personality. He is fully conscious of being both creator and destroyer. Dick’s God feeds off of the life that he creates. He creates in order to consume. When Chien sees God, he immediately tries to commit suicide, but God prevents him from killing himself. God’s speech to Chien is a parody of God’s answer to Job. In the Bible, God, speaking of Leviathan, says to Job: “ The flakes of his flesh are joined together.... Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire. He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment ” (Job 41: 23, 30-31). Dick’s God says to Chien: “ Sharp stones are under me; I spread sharp pointed things upon the mire. I make the hiding places, the deep places, boil like a pot; to me the sea is like a lot of ointment. The flakes of my flesh are joined to everything ” (218). I don’t think I’ll ever look at The Book of Job the same way again. Even though God’s answer to Job is veiled in mystery, it still offers the reassuring message that evil is something God merely permits, not something that God causes and certainly not something that God is. But Dick’s God is evil. Not evil the way Satan is evil. That, at least, is comprehensible. Dick’s God is evil and because he is God and he is evil, evil is good. And that’s neither comprehensible nor bearable. Hence Chien’s reflexive suicide attempt. ★★★★★ The twelfth story, “ The Story to End All Stories for Harlan Ellison’s Anthology Dangerous Visions ,” is a bizarre single paragraph story that followed “Faith of Our Fathers” in Dangerous Visions . All I can say is: Yikes! ★★★☆☆ The thirteenth story is “ The Electric Ant .” Like so many of the PKD novels and stories I’ve read so far, “The Electric Ant” questions the nature of reality. At the beginning of the story, Poole discovers that he is a robot and decides to experiment with his reality tape. He punches new holes in the tape and covers up others to see how these changes will affect his reality. But then he gets a bigger idea: “ Here I have an opportunity to experience everything. Simultaneously. To know the universe and its entirety, to be momentarily in contact with all reality ” (236). “ What I want, he realized, is ultimate and absolute reality ”(236). This reminded me of something in Aldous Huxley’s The Doors of Perception . It’s the idea, borrowed from the philosopher Henri Bergson, that the brain acts as a filter. Huxley calls it a “reducing valve.” It filters out most of what we could perceive and reduces our perceptions to only what is useful for survival. If it were not for this “reducing valve,” we would perceive everything everywhere in the universe. Huxley wants to expand consciousness by allowing more perceptions to by-pass the “reducing valve.” Hence his experiment with Mescaline. Huxley concedes that it is impossible to completely by-pass the “reducing valve” and in “The Electric Ant,” Poole also admits that this is impossible—for a human. But Poole is not human. As an Electric Ant, he is both less than and more than human. Less than human because for him reality is nothing but hole punches on a reality tape. And more than human because he has the ability to experience all of reality, which no human can do. Yet there’s even more to the story than this. In addition to the possibility of experiencing “ ultimate and absolute reality ,” there’s the question of what that reality is. For Poole, it is a tape inside the mechanism of his chest. But what is reality to everyone else? The answer is a typically Dickian paradox. ★★★★★ The previously unpublished “ Cadbury, The Beaver Who Lacked ” is the fourteenth story and it’s unlike anything else I’ve read by PKD. It begins as a talking animal story, but it goes on to become something else entirely. I suppose it says something about Dick’s relationships with women, but all in all it doesn’t seem worth analyzing. I’ll give it three stars for being a curiosity and for having a rabbit psychiatrist. ★★★☆☆ I have mixed feelings about the fifteenth story, “ A Little Something for Us Tempunauts .” As the word Tempunauts implies, it is a story about time travellers. It centers on the phenomenon of a time loop, but it is really more about the choice Doug has to make between maintaining the time loop or trying to break it. Doug suffers from cyclothymia ~ which I had to look up since I had never heard of it before. Cyclothymia is a mild, but chronic, form of bipolar disorder. This mental disorder ultimately determines the decision he makes. The ending is melancoly and surprising. I felt this was a three star story, but the ending elevates it to four stars. ★★★★☆ The sixteenth story, “ The Pre-Persons ,” is the reason I bought this volume. I heard about the hate mail Dick received from fellow science fiction writer Joanna Russ and I wanted to see what all the fuss was about. I am separating my comments on Dick’s stance on abortion from my comments on the quality of this short story. Otherwise, rating this story would be nothing more than a political statement: If you’re pro-choice, it’s a one-star story. If you’re pro-life, it’s a five-star story. I think the story begins with a good premise and has the potential to be a good piece of philosophical science fiction. Dick takes one argument against abortion and builds a story around it. The argument concerns personhood: When does a human being become a person? The pro-life answer to this question is: conception. This answer has the virtue of being absolute. The moment the egg is fertilized by the sperm, a new human being exists. The criterion for personhood is membership in the human species. The pro-choice answer is not absolute. Since membership in the human species is not the sole criterion for personhood, something else must be added. But what? And when does this something else manifest? At twelve weeks gestation? Eighteen weeks? Twenty-four weeks? The moment of birth? Each answer takes some milestone in fetal development and posits it as the moment the fetus becomes a person. And whatever answer is given, the pro-life rebuttal will be that it is an arbitrary criterion. The premise of Dick’s story is that a human being becomes a person at twelve years of age. What he has done is to extend the pro-choice argument to the point of absurdity to see what the results will be. This is what good science fiction so often does. It is the way science fiction engages in social criticism. And the age of personhood in this story is less absurd than it might first seem to be. While Dick’s extension of abortion to a time after birth seems unfair to abortion advocates who reject infanticide, one argument for infanticide is based on the argument for abortion. Philosopher Peter Singer argues that the infant, like the fetus, lacks the defining human traits of rationality and self-awareness ( Practical Ethics , 1979). The criterion for personhood in Dick’s story ~ the ability to do algebra ~ seems less absurd in light of Singer’s cognitive criteria. So Dick is off to an interesting start. But it doesn’t last. The challenge to the status quo comes from a man who claims that he isn’t a person because he can’t do algebra, so he should be aborted just like any unwanted child under the age of twelve. However, the implication in the beginning of the story is that the age of twelve was chosen because it’s the general age at which a child becomes capable of doing algebra, not that doing algebra itself is required. (After all, one boy under the age of twelve was already doing algebra, but that didn’t make him a person.) This is not merely a bit of sloppy writing. This is Dick needing a mouthpiece in the story to express his position on abortion. In short, “The Pre-Persons” is a propaganda piece that doesn’t work very well as a story. Dick makes impassioned arguments against killing the helpless rather than challenging the cognitive criteria of personhood that allowed his futuristic society to abort children under twelve. This story could have been both better fiction and better propaganda. But this flaw pales in comparison to another flaw. After all, to be passionately opposed to the killing of the helpless is laudable. While some might argue that it is misapplied in the case of abortion, the sentiment itself is laudable. But the other flaw in this story is the opposite of laudable: Dick’s portrayal of the only woman in the story is downright misogynistic. Cynthia is a “ castrating ” wife and a “ kindermorder ” (286). Everything about her is cold and cruel. Is this really Dick’s idea of women who have abortions? I think it is. He even uses the stereotype of women having abortions for frivolous reasons. Cynthia wants to get pregnant just so she can have an abortion. “ ’Let’s have an abortion!’ Cynthia declared excitedly.... ‘Wouldn’t that be neat? Doesn’t that turn you on?’ ” (285). Cynthia and her husband then discuss how she would get to take the embryo home in a glow-in-the-dark glass bottle ~ “ in any color you want! ” (285). When I first read about Joanna Russ offering to beat Dick up over this story, I was ready to take Dick’s side. I don’t agree with his position on abortion, but I do believe in his right to express his opinion through his fiction. And I still feel that way. But after reading his caricature of women who choose abortion as cold castrating females who murder their children for frivolous amusement, I think I might just like to take a swing at him myself. ★★☆☆☆ Continued in the comment section . . .
