"You can stand there and tell me that I'm falling in love with a lot of fake female flesh lathered over a scrawny and repulsive Medlin body? Hah!" Two vaguely humanoid alien races--the Darruui and the Medlin-- send undercover operatives disguised as humans to Earth to persuade us to enter a galactic conflict. This pulp adventure story focuses on two agents who would normally be arch-enemies but find themselves strongly attracted to each other in their new human bodies. The author weaves a compelling, at times oddly personal melodrama amidst what would normally be a rather trite sci-fi backdrop. There is an interesting twist involving the future of human evolution. The Medlin are protecting a group of mutants and their children in the belief that Earth is about to give rise to a new super-race of telepaths. The Darruui are not a fan of this strategy: "Supermen represent super-dangers. The universe was a precarious enough place as it was, without standing by complacently while new races came into being. Those that existed now were well enough balanced, strength for strength, in an uneasy but oddly comforting stalemate. Only madmen would allow for an X factor to enter the situation -- and only very deranged madmen indeed would actually help bring the X factor about." This plot point provides the protagonists with higher stakes than a simple tale of star-crossed love. However, it was hardly innovative even in 1958. It had been used by Arthur C. Clarke in Childhood's End and Isaac Asimov in Foundation and Empire, and maybe Heinlein as well. This novel was published in 1963. It is an expansion of a 1958 short story (the original story is still currently in print in the collection Hunt the Space-Witch!) The author's changes are minimal, mostly just expanding passages for the purposes of characterization. Examples include the Darruui agent Abner Harris née Aar Khiilom reminiscing about the vineyards and wine festivals back on his home world (Chapter 5) and his telepathic connection to the Medlin provocateur Beth Baldwin (Chapter 9). There is also an extended finale that emphasizes the bittersweet choice Abner is forced to make. The author's lively introduction, originally written for a 1976 reissue edition, provides some commentary and context about the writing process. Show more
