There is so much action going on in every page, perhaps so much that it becomes a problem. You only get vague impressions of the historical figures Tacitus describes. I wish he did a physiognomic analysis of those involved, describing their facial features, coloring, height, constitution, BMI, and paired this with their personality. Instead, the 3-4 emperors he describes all seem the same with minor differences in their virtues and vices, which don’t really show in the story. Except for Galba—he’s fat—or maybe it was Otho? I don’t remember or care enough to review the text. I didn’t finish this book and can only imagine coming back to it if I overcame my indifference toward the topic or if there were money/success tied to completing it. Otherwise, it wasn’t particularly entertaining. The best parts were the ethnographic/sociological details and lore behind various locations and people. For example, Tacitus notes that there was a man in Gaul who claimed to be a living god and amassed an army of 8,000 men, who were later defeated. He was tortured to death after the lions refused to eat him. I didn’t realize there were other messiah/god claimants around the time of Jesus in other parts of the Roman Empire, and that they had a major impact. He explains the origin story of strange temples on distant islands, the lineages of their priests, the abstract statues found therein, the doctrines and superstitions of “druidism,” and the abridged speeches of emperors. These were the best parts. If the entire book had consisted of these sections, I would have finished it. I find descriptions of troop movements uninteresting, and much of the book consists of this and political maneuvering in Rome. His description of the Senate during this time and the concentration of power in the emperor was interesting. I didn’t realize the Senate played such an important role in the Empire. It seems that all of the emperors and important leaders were at least partly descended from the senatorial class. I would recommend if you’re going through a phase of life where you’re thinking about the Roman Empire and care about its history. This book would probably leave a good impression if you’re so inclined.
