It has been 15 years since the Deportation of 1755. Pelagie, a widowed, aging woman buys herself a cart and some oxen, and with a small band of friends and family, leaves Southern British American and heads for the only true home: Acadie. Along her decade-long excursion she will find fellow travelers, long lost Acadians, a slave, and maybe even true love. Life, death, and love, all things find themselves on the cart and in the heart of Pelagie's people. If you have no idea what the year 1755 means to you, or are confused about both the Deportation and who these Acadian people are, this book probably isn't for you. Not until you've done some research anyway. For me, while this book was technically a required reading, it hit me a bit close to home, because even though I'm not Acadian (got them Quebecker French blood in my veins apparently), that history, that Acadian presence has been something I've known about through my friends, my neighbors, and my hometown. And even though I'll never ever be apart of that culture, Pelagi felt meaningful to me as a person of French decent, as a person who practices (40% of the time anyway) French culture, and as a New Brunswickan, especially one raised in a town where French were the majority. The disappointing aspect about my crazy love for this book is that I didn't read it in the original language. *Sigh* Pelagie is the story about the aftermath of British Deportation of the Acadian people living in the Maritimes, as well as a story about their culture. Well along with that narrative stuff about Pelagie and her gang. And while the story primarily focuses on Pelagie and her cart, those other things about the Acadians' history and culture somehow remain tied to what's happening character-wise, plot-wise, and narrative-wise. I guess the best way to explain this is through the most interesting aspect of the narrative style itself. So, throughout Pelagie , there's actually three different narratives going one. You have Pelagie and her gang, the decedents of those people telling the story, and you have Maillet herself scolding everyone and making it all just absolutely hilarious. And these bouts of interchanging narratives don't have breaking points or different fonts or ANYTHING to help you out. Instead like a good folk tale, everything is jumbled together until you're able to immerse yourself fully into the story, and then: Like clockwork everything makes sense. And it's wonderful that sense of connection to the story, that push that makes you almost part of the story, that allows you to breathe, smell and taste the cart, the road, and the dirt under your characters' feet. You feel almost Acadian, almost a part of the cart if that makes any sense. Ha, that probably made no sense, but I think what I'm getting at is that like the intertwining narratives in this novel, the thematic purposes of it are intertwined as well in showing you (crash-course-like) the many aspects of the Acadians-historically, culturally and as a people in general. Maillet wants not only to show the world the Deportation's effects on the Acadian people, but to also show them the essential culture part of the people and how they differ, and how they matter so that they become more to us than numbers in a history book. In terms of general reviewy stuff, Pelagie features a nicely rounded cast of hilarious, stern and vibrantly diverse characters that grow, die and come to life throughout the piece. Pelagie herself is, perhaps, one of the most compelling characters in this novel, because not only is she the main character, but she is also the strongest and most determined of them all; she keeps the cart together, even when she's dying inside, and remains the Acadians' leader through the death, the hunger, and the sickness that surround them. The plot is very much a moving, fluid being that floats through time easily as it shows us instances and moments of the ten year journey, but at the same time leaves us without that nagging did-I-miss-anything sense when the pages move from 1774 to 1775. The narration, as previously discussed, remains the only real obstacle when reading this novel, something easily overcome once you allow yourself to get into the piece. The language is perhaps where Maillet's narration becomes the most convoluted, though this could be a consequence of the translation, and the narration style Maillet continues to strive for. Nevertheless, it still remains folksy, and almost beautiful. All in all, Pelagie is a novel for all people, those who know about Acadie, and those who don't (though I recommend a little research). It's is both a shared experience for those who understand, and a learning one for those who're new. The novel, however, no matter what the audience, doesn't fail to get that singular point across in showing us the undeniable, uncrushable human will.
