Goodreads messed this one up when they listed it. This review is for Sweet Mountain Magic and not Shameless , which I need to add to my ever-growing TBR list. Yes, I did notify the Librarians Group at Goodreads. Anyway, this was one of those O.M.G. books. So much happened and so much was going on that I did not want to put it down for even a minute, even after surviving a life-threatening illness that required emergency surgery. I can deal only so much of the inanity of television, so when my son put the Kindle app on my phone and I was able to pick up where I left off, it was sheer euphoria! I don't like reading on my phone, but hey, it was better than nothing and since I had to leave my Kindle behind, I was ever so grateful. Okay on with the story...this crazy good story. Sage McKenzie is a mountain man/trapper on his way to Fort Bridger to meet up with the guys and restock his supplies when he sees smoke coming through the trees. Of course, he's going to check it out and after hiding from a group of Indians who were muttering "crazy woman" as they passed him, he definitely had to see what was going on and heads out when it's safe. He finds a robbed and burned wagon with a dead man stuck beneath it and a catatonic woman. She's young, beautiful, but she doesn't speak and doesn't seem to see anything. She's dressed in an Indian tunic with unfamiliar designs on it. This piques his interest and no matter what he says or what he does, he can't get a response from her. Like I said, she's catatonic. He won't leave her behind. She is defenseless, after all. He decides to take her to the fort with the hopes that somebody there might know her or at least be able to identify what the peculiar design is. It might give him a hint as to where she came from. That would be a start at getting her back to her people. Now, don't go judging or hating on Sage McKenzie. He is a decent human being and more of a man than most of the other males in the book, except for maybe his best friend, the Ute Indian by the name of Red Dog. Sage did try to hold back, but when she put the moves on him, he finally capitulated and felt like the scum of creation afterward. He knew nothing about her and with her inability to even tell him her name or even utter a word made it even worse. He had to get rid of her. He was a wandering man and with the trapping industry drying up, he doesn't have the time or the resources for a wife and a family. He doesn't know what he's going to do and even though he has entertained the idea of having a family, it won't be with this woman. I can't say too much about her without blowing the lid off the story, so I'm going to leave out her part of this. Suffice it to say, she is loyal, resourceful, determined, and more than anything she is a survivor. I adored her, even when I disagreed with her decisions. This was a passionate love story with so much emotion packed into it. There were more than a few times when I cried like a baby. I cried for them and I cried with them. I so wanted for these two to get their happily ever after and I wasn't sure I was going to get it with all that happened. The story was compelling with great characters, a solid plot, adventure, plenty of angst, a bit of an age gap, close proximity, forced separation--it had it all, earning it a beaming five stars.
