I was recommended this book by a friend. The book Nervous is about a girl named Jonquinette Pierce who has never had a boyfriend. The weekdays belong to Jonquinette and the weekends belong to, Jude. Jude emerged in second grade when Jonquinette kept getting picked on by other girls. Jude is the type that doesn't care what she do. Jude would use violence and, Jonquinette wouldn't know anything about it. When Jonquinette is seeking psychiatric help, Jude fears it might be the end for her. Later, in the book Jonquinette meets a man who she is really having feelings for. His name is Mason. They first meet when he moved into her apartment building. Never having a boyfriend Jonquinette never really knew what so say when Mason always would flirt with her. Se opened up a little bit and they were starting to talk (date). But, one day Mason came up to visit and check on Jonquinette because he had heard she was sick and Jude had taken over. Mason not knowing about Jonquinette problem didn't know what to do or think. Jude wanting to ruin their relationship had told Mason everything "Jude" had did. The next day Jonquinette noticed Mason didn't speak to her nd knew something was wrong. He had told Jon everything that had hape that night between him and Jude. Jonquinette had explained her prolblem to him and being that he was really in love with her he told her that he was with her the whole way. Jonquinette's psychiatrist said that it would have been best if her parents were to attend her meetings with her. So Jon got in touch with her father who had left them about six years ago because some woman had came to her parent's house saying that she was pregnant with Jon's father baby. Which, was a lie the whole thing was Jude's plan. Being that Jon's father and mother were starting to spend more time with each other they had decided to get re-married. Of course Jude thought it was stupid while, Jon thought it was a great idea. One day at one of their family meetings the truth was coming out from everybody, everyone had someting hidden from the rest. That day Jonquinette also found out that the reason she has that dsorder was because...
