the dreamiest of rape-romances. is it even rape when the sex lacks brutality, when the rapist pauses after realizing his victim is a virgin, apologizes, then continues... a rape that is 'a wondrous fearsome thing shared in panting ardor, fused, clinging bodies, wrenching effort'... when this sort of rape is often described as a ravishing? the answer is yes, of course. still rape. okay that said, a synopsis: an Eastern-European prince is in pursuit of a girl who may hold the key to his brother's assassination; he mistakenly captures her lookalike cousin and proceeds to have his way with her. romance ensues. Jennifer Blake has skills beyond most of the authors I've read in this wonderfully trashy genre. her prose is more puce than purple. her characters have unexpected dimensions (except for a harridan of a guardian and a vile bandit); she seems invested in giving nearly everyone interesting or intriguing personality traits. her angry, passionate, exceedingly macho Prince Rolfe uses the most poetic of language when talking to the at-first unwilling object of his affection, Angeline. such flowery pronouncements! she makes Angeline kind and compassionate, a woman of graceful bearing and careful words, neither a passive victim nor a lusty adventuress, but rather a quietly self-possessed sort who could have stepped from the pages of a Georgette Heyer romance. unlike many of her sister authors, Blake is decidedly not trashy. there were frustrations. I kept hoping that Angeline would literally use the word "rapist" - that she would throw that word at Rolfe, if only to bring home the gravity of his actions, which no amount of pretty words can erase. his vaguely apologetic air towards her post-rape - while still keeping her captive - was no excuse for not using her voice. I was annoyed that a bunch of Europeans could just come to America on a mission, kidnap a couple of women, and not suffer any prosecution for their crimes. there is the tired trope of a hero being so uncommunicative on the important topic of Will He Marry Her or Will He Leave Her In Disgrace that the reader has to deal with page upon page of the heroine refusing marital offers while waiting for some direct communication from him about his future plans and her place in them. I hate that trope. and damn, the author really goes out of her way to punish Angeline's cousin for essentially acting like a spoiled, selfish teenage girl who is unfortunately in way over her head. complaints aside, this was a treat. tableaux and atmosphere like a Caravaggio painting, and all the potential violence that implies. the relationships between Rolfe and his royal guard were fascinating and their martial rituals were fun. these lads also have unusual interrogation techniques: a caressing quill for one captive, a slow stripping for another - but never a hand or even a voice raised in anger against a lady. the surprise villain was indeed a surprise and I admired the petty vengefulness of a discarded Indian mistress. the well-paced narrative moves from tense psychodrama in the hunting lodge where Angeline is kept captive to thrilling adventures in the wilderness where she joins the prince's cause to intrigue and romance in New Orleans where she wonders what in the world she's going to do with her life post-prince. when the author isn't indulging her fondness for the overwrought prose (which I love) that is typical of the genre - and despite the elaborate and high-flown language coming out of her hero's mouth whenever he addresses the apple of his eye - Blake often has an elegant and rather restrained style of writing. because this is a romance novel, we also have jolly times in a bumpy stagecoach and rapture on a staircase, which both sound very uncomfortable to me but these two are like rabbits when the mood strikes them. most of all, I really appreciated Angeline, a genuinely decent and loyal character with a bad but relatable case of Hamlet-like indecision. she's now one of my favorite heroines in a novel of this sort - rather similar to Anna Champion in my favorite bodice-ripper, Lemonade . 3.5 stars
