At what age does a child learn what is real? How long does the blurring between fantasy and reality persist, for a young child? And when harsh reality kicks in with a vengeance, isn’t a little bit of magic lost forever? The loss of childhood innocence is always poignant. Adults sometimes continue to live in our imaginations and dreams through stories, so we may manage to hang on to a little bit of this magic through our adulthood. The Velveteen Rabbit (or How Toys Become Real) , is a much-loved classic book from 1922. The story speaks to children, especially the shy introverts or dreamers, who love the magic of it all. For adults, it may lift us back into the dreamy world of childhood, when anything is possible, and nothing is set in stone. It deals both with what is “real”, and also explores the world of the imagination, and possibilities beyond the literal truth. In some ways, it encourages the child to think about the bigger questions of life and the universe. And, as with all good fantasy, it poses the question, “What if?” The author Margery Williams Bianco drew from her own experience to write The Velveteen Rabbit . She had been born in London, but her father died when she was seven years old, and the family went to America to live just two years later. She actually became a professional writer at 19, but she only started writing for children much later, when her own children had grown up. After her early emigration to the United States, Margery lived in a rural Pennsylvania farming community. At nineteen she returned to London, to try to sell some of her work. Some of it was published, but none was very successful. While visiting her publisher, Margery Williams met Francesco Bianco, an Italian living in London, who was employed as the manager of one of the book departments. The two were married, and had two children. Margery Williams Bianco had strong memories of her own early childhood, and of her father, a deeply loving and caring parent, who had encouraged both her and her older sister to read and use their imaginations. She recalled the way her father described characters from various books to capture her imagination, and tempt her with their amazing worlds within. Her strong desire to read soon developed into a need to write for herself, and she now realised these were both instilled in her at an early age by her father. Margery Williams Bianco found that all the memories of the toys which had been such an important part of her life surged to the fore. At the age of 41, she wrote her first children’s novel The Velveteen Rabbit , realising that children’s lives are enriched by toys whose personalities they have created while playing with them. The story tells of a stuffed rabbit, splendidly sewn from velveteen. A small boy finds him in his Christmas stocking and is enchanted with his new present, playing with nothing else for about two hours. But then the velveteen rabbit is forgotten, and put away to live in the toy cupboard, or abandoned on the nursery floor. The velveteen rabbit is quite shy though, and doesn’t really mind. But because the rabbit is made of velveteen, some of the other toys snub him. They are modern and mechanical, and they think a toy rabbit made of velveteen is very old-fashioned. Even Timothy, a jointed wooden lion, looks down on him. However, there is a wise old toy in the nursery, a Skin Horse, who is kind to him. The velveteen rabbit is curious about what it means to be real, and whether these more expensive toys are more real than him. But the Skin Horse insists: “Real isn’t how you are made … When a child loves you for a long, long time, not just to play with, but REALLY loves you, then you become Real.” The velveteen rabbit is very much in awe of this idea. He wants to know if it would hurt, or take very long to happen, but doubts whether it would happen to him for a long time. “When you are real, you don’t mind being hurt,” said the wise Skin Horse. One night, when Nana is bustling around tidying the nursery, she cannot find the boy’s favourite toy, a china dog, for him to take to bed with him. So she gives him the velveteen rabbit to sleep with, instead. The velveteen rabbit loves this time when he can snuggle down with the little boy, and grows to feel special. The little boy tells him about the tunnels that the real rabbits live in, and makes tunnels for him under the bedclothes. The velveteen rabbit is very happy. He has become the little boy’s favourite toy. “Spring came, and wherever the boy went, the rabbit went too.” He did not notice that his coat was getting shabby and worn away in places. Then the big moment came. Nana was sent out to look for the rabbit, who had accidentally been left outside after a picnic, and she was cross at all the fuss being made for a toy. But the little boy insisted the velveteen rabbit was not just a toy: “He’s REAL” . When the rabbit heard this he was so proud, and felt so much love himself for the little boy, that he felt his heart would burst. Time passed. In the summer, he came across some wild rabbits. He was fascinated by them, but realised that they could do much more than he could. They could run, and jump, and hop, and even dance! The velveteen rabbit tried to cover up the fact that he had no hind legs, but eventually the wild rabbits realised that he could not hop as they did, and he didn’t smell right at all. They decided that he was not a real rabbit, and ran away. The velveteen rabbit was so very sad. After all, he knew he was real! The velveteen rabbit becomes older and even shabbier, but he is happy, because the boy still loves him. That is, until one day the boy becomes ill with scarlet fever, and the doctor says that the boy should be taken to the seaside to recover. But what of the velveteen rabbit? The doctor says he would be a mass of germs, and instructs Nana to put him outside and left out in the garden for the gardener to burn. Overnight, the velveteen rabbit sadly reflects on his life. What is the use of being real, if it all ends like this? He cries, a real tear falling from his velvet nose, onto the ground. Then there is more magic. A beautiful flower appears where the tear fell, and a fairy steps out of the flower, to comfort the velveteen rabbit. She explains that she is the Nursery Magic Fairy, who takes care of all the playthings that the boy has loved, and turns them into “Real”. And then she says another marvellous thing. Because the velveteen rabbit has become Real to the boy who truly loves him, she will make him become Real to everyone. The fairy takes the rabbit to the forest, where the wild rabbits live, and gives the velveteen rabbit a kiss. Instantly he is changed into a real rabbit, although it takes a long time for him to realise this. “He actually had hind legs! He gave one leap, and the joy of using those hind legs was so great, that he went springing about the turf. He was a Real Rabbit at last!“ The next spring, when he is playing in the forest, the boy spots the rabbits, and especially notices one, who looked exactly like the velveteen rabbit who had got lost when he had scarlet fever. But he was not to know that this really was his own toy rabbit, whom he had helped to become Real. This is a magical, wondrous story. What is it that makes something real in our minds? For an adult, many things are intangible, yet they are powerfully real. So it is for children. A velveteen rabbit is an object which can be touched, and seen, and played with. It is real in a physical sense. But also, it behaves as if it is real. The toy rabbit can breathe, he can cry, and he has emotions. He can become real in a different sense, when he is loved enough. But the story has a third level of reality in the story, when the toy becomes a flesh and blood rabbit . “The mechanical toys, like the model train, were very stuck-up and boasted that they were real. But the Rabbit could not claim to be a model of anything, for he didn’t know that real rabbits existed…” This is a particularly nice picture edition of the story, from 2002. It is simply but elegantly told, and beautifully illustrated with naturalistic soft watercolours, by the award-winning duo, Steve Johnson and Lou Fancher. Steve Johnson is the illustrator, and Lou Fancher has adapted Margery Williams Bianco’s story for very young children, including much of her original text. There have been many adaptations of this favourite book, both in print, and on film and stage. It remains her most popular work. Margery Williams Bianco’s writing is unique, combining the innocence, playfulness and imaginative ability of children, with her trademark undercurrents of sentimentality and sadness. Invariably her books end on an inspirational uplifting note. Perhaps it is this which made her so immediately successful. Although for the remaining two decades of her life, she wrote many more books and short stories for children, all with similar themes, there are undercurrents of sadness. The stories are poignant, and a little melancholy, with themes of loss and death present in all her children’s books. Most of them display her preoccupation with toys coming to life and the ability of inanimate objects and animals to express human emotions and feelings. Margery Bianco Williams always maintained that we grow and learn greater humanity through pain and adversity. The Velveteen Rabbit also has this at its core. Yet it is perfectly balanced. All such stories acquire a sort of magic through the child’s own experience, and their subsequent nostalgia. There is sadness in The Velveteen Rabbit , but in the end the reader ends feeling optimistic and uplifted.
