Instead of discerning a plot or even a unifying theme, a reader of this book needs to ask: What problem(s) is the author exploring? This is a book of questions, not answers, and Oe returns to the same questions multiple times. Each time, he revisits a new memory and must revise his conclusion. Oe uses the language and imaginative path of fiction to restructure the material that he has collected from his life. Every memory fits into a map of unfamiliar territory. The narrative is in first person giving the book the feel of a memoir. It's almost impossible to shake the conviction that this is a memoir, despite certain anomalies. His wife is depicted as a brooding wraith-like presence, and his two other children appear merely as supporting characters. Once again, his handicapped son figures as a main character. Here, the son is called Eeyore. It's a name that invites affection and suggests a timeless innocence. Eeyore's first utterance in the book reflects his anxiety about emotional connection. Oe had been away on an extended trip. Eeyore's mother reassured him that Oe would return soon. Eeyore's reaction was startling: “'Is that right? Is he coming back on Sunday? Even if he is, right now he's dead. Papa is really dead!'” (Location 271). Oe is reminded that he is in fact aging, and has never finished the project he started ten years ago. His goal was to create a lexicon that would convey his emotional understanding of life. Oe falls asleep pondering the sense of disconnection his prolonged absence had created. “...my son was stroking my bare foot that protruded from the blanket with the fingers of his cupped right hand, gently, as if it were constructed of something soft and fragile. And he was whispering words of concern in a soft, calm voice...'Foot, are you all right? Good foot, nice foot! Gout, are you all right? Nice foot! Nice foot!'” (Location 232). It's a re-enactment of a much younger Eeyore when the author had been suffering from gout. He reassures Eeyore that his foot is OK. That reassurance seems to re-establish their connection in Eeyore's mind. So, without even trying, he has given Eeyore a definition of “foot.” By the end of the book, Oe will have expanded that definition, conceptualizing “foot” as the peripheral conduit for an apprehensive Eeyore to re-establish connection with his father. Oe is forced to recognize an evolving Eeyore. He struggles to connect with this new persona. There were presentiments of this problem much earlier, when Eeyore had his first epileptic seizure. His seemingly catatonic state was more distressing than the other physical symptoms. Eeyore, himself, seemed to associate the seizures with death. Oe had always seen himself as his son's protector. Now he must consider how Eeyore can function in the world independently. Eeyore's equivalence of death and abandonment would be a legacy of unbearable bleakness, and Oe struggles to formulate a “definition” of death. Oe turns to the apocalyptic poems of William Blake for inspiration. I should add here that I find Blake's poetry turgid and incomprehensible. However, Oe has been drawn to Blake's writings and illustrations since he was a youth. In “The Four Zoas” Blake introduces a complex mythology recounting the fragmentation of the Universal Man. There were four warring attributes: Urizen (Wisdom), Luvah (Passion), Los (Inspired Vision), and Tharmos (Senses). Oe wrestles with how these attributes are expressed in Eeyore. He becomes disturbed by Eeyore's claim that he never dreams. In his own life, dreams are an essential component, clarifying and enriching his life as an artist. He describes two dreams that merge Blake's imagery with Eeyore. Will Eeyore ever dream of him? Oe imagines that if Eeyore could dream, that would be a way for them to connect. Eeyore assuages those anxieties. Perhaps he really doesn't dream, but he knows what dreams are. If he has a bad dream, he will know enough to comfort himself, just as he comforts Oe one night when they are alone at the mountain cabin. Oe concludes this chapter with hope for the future. Oe distills Blake's mythology into archetypes which he reincarnates through his own memories and an imaginary Eeyore's evolving personality. His examination includes innocence, isolation, rage, freedom and fear. Each distillation involves a painful cycle of memory, reconstruction, and finally hope. It's impossible for me to review this book. I can only provide my limited interpretation. Whereas the passages referring to Blake were cryptic, I found his parallel story of Eeyore's growth moving. Oe brings his novel to a dramatic high point in his final chapter. Eeyore moves out of the house to spend his required term in the school dormitory. His return home is in a sense a reincarnation. He no longer views himself as “Eeyore.” The family must now address him by his adult name, Hikari. Oe's reaction is one of hope expressed in his quote taken from the prologue to Blake's poem, “Milton.” John Nathan has provided not only an excellent translation, but an informative Afterword for this book. NOTES: I read parts of BLAKE'S POETRY AND DESIGNS, edi. Mary Lynn Johnson and John E. Grant, NY: Norton, 1979 in tandem with this book. The critical essays at the end were helpful, and I was also able to locate most of the quotes in Oe's book in the context of the poems, and editorial notes. Interview with Oe http://www.theparisreview.org/intervi...
