If I could give it a negative I would. This book is full of historically incorrect information; there are no dates or actual references from credible books. She gleams over the inquisition, the burning times and the modern reconstruction of Wicca. This book has the distinct feel like the Author has made up what she believes and thrown into a book, without any research. This is clearly her opinion and what she practises and I can only hope that anyone reading this will use their brain and read other material and make an intelligent decision. Below are some examples from the book of the information that is incredibly questionable. There is at least one piece of dodgy information on every page. Page 5 "The ancient Greeks and Romans believed that the Wiccans were capable of many different things" Find me a history book that says anything about Wiccans, Wicca and Wiccan are modern terms and using the words interchangeably for historical reference is poor writing. Page 5 & 6 "The thing most dreaded among the Greeks and Romans during this period was the threat of the evil eye. They accused only the Wiccans of having this power. The evil eye is an intense look or state. It is meant for on e purpose; a warning. The warning is forbearance to refrain from action. Yes the evil eye still exists! The Author then goes on for another page about the subject. Page 8 "The Black Witch Black Witches are not associated with either Gray or White Witches, or even the Wiccan religion. This is usually due to their affiliation with Satan or other dark forces." Page 12 "The Book of Shadows must have solid black covers and unlined white paper" Really! Well I know a few Witches and Covens who would have something to say about that. Page 14 "As long as the person is not married, the field is open for magick" I can not personally believe that this was allowed to be in print, there are a lot of people who are not married and have children and very happy lives. Relationships are sacred things and by saying something as blatant as that in a book like this is a disgrace. Page 111 "4th Chakra - Pink" Most Eastern philosophy states that the chakra is green, pink is the secondary. Page 173 "How does one become an Angel? And if out soul reincarnated, then how do you explain Angels? I believe every soul has a destination. It can rest and learn in either Heaven or hell, or even become a ghost on an earthly plane, but all souls have a destination. I believe some souls are older than others. The older, the wiser and the more pure of heart the soul is, the more likely the candidate is to become an Angel." Rest in hell, ok then, Souls becoming Angels? There are a lot of theories about Angels and their origins, I think her explanation is was to simplistic. Page 173 "not all Witches believe there is a heaven or hell. I believe in both and that there is a ruler in hell, known as Satan. The Dark Forces are mere followers of evil" And that quote takes the cake. To sum it all up, this book is childish, uneducated, shallow, simple, un-researched and a waste of money. Books that are actually worth reading and buying are: Wicca by Vivienne Crowley, Wicca by Scott Cunningham and The Idiots Guide to Wicca and Witchcraft by Zimmerman.
