This is the second book I've read by this Nobel winning author Asturias (The President being the first). It was written in 1963 and relates in essence the mixing of indigenous native religion in Guatemala (Mayan) with the colonial orthodox Christianity. It has no years quoted and few references as to the actual placement in history of the tale; though there are telegraphs and x-rays so perhaps as early as 1910s but I assumed it was 1960s. The dating of the tale is academic as it soon becomes apparent to the reader that this is surreal stuff - a mixture of Marquez, Breton and Bulgakov all on speed. It also becomes apparent that this is no easy read. The underlying story I think is that Celestino Yumi (Mr Fly - because he first attracts attention because he does in deed walk around with an open trouser fly), he's a woodcutter and is having an affair with the Mulatta; and his wife Catarina doesn't like this. They have fights and tragedy and displacement(earthquake/volcano) and to make amends the husband and wife travel ultimately arriving in Terrapaulita which has an aged Priest and his sexton. Hoping to advance they train as local witch-doctors?. There are many illusions to local pagan devils, the threesome's errant behaviour and the Christian pressures to conform. There is also an old lady Huasanga, a group of savages and later a replacement Priest. This is really to understate the complexity of the story as an indication: Yumi is actually tricked by Tazol (the corn devil) into gaining riches by selling his wife (now called Ninilojita) - he misses her so gets her back but now as a dwarf (now called Girona but with a living tattoo of Tazol on her back); they get trapped on a mountain along with some savages (looking like wild boars, the pair each now given a new names) by a person turned to stone by another devil (who walks up the slopes and rolls down as a stone) ultimately escaping; but the wife having gained some sorcery becomes pregnant by Tazol through her navel and has a son Tazolita; and then turns Yumi into a dwarf instead. Huasanga steals Catarina's womb. But later the mulatta turns Yumi into a giant but all three get embroiled in the smuggling of holy water (in coconuts) into the bedevilled Terrapaulita. A fight ensues between them, the local main devil Chastoc and the Christian devil but everyone leaves the town ... Ultimately the mulatta as a 10 thousand legged spider fights Yumi (as a hedgehog) to rest power from the new Priest who needed to sleep with a virgin to lose his small-pox scars. Here are some quotes: "Dust and silence. Moon, dust, and silence. Moon, dust, heat, and silence. The breath of oven fire, the red satiety of fires which stained the horizon garnet. The heat was increasing. The leaves began to be singed. The immobility of the trees was tragic, their impossibility of escape and fleeing from the flames. The Mulatta was coming back." "Why didn't you let that devilish vision be undone? Now, now it already has the flesh of words." "By Weeping weepingweeping Water Hair, rain which weeps for men who die, which weeps, rather, for the one, the only one, the eternal male who is repeated in all the corpses that she accompanies to the graveyard, proud of the pricks of her tears as they wet her body and converge towards the mortuary fuzz of her pubis of an orphan, a widow, an abandoned woman;" "Sweeping up reality is daring, but sweeping up what remains in dreams is madness" "If all the dead began to walk...the earth would be full of steps" This is a really intriguing book and style which is not unlike Spanish author Cela. The story is there but it is extremely diluted by the sheer imagery, detail and illusions; and so is quite a challenging read and follow (particularly as most characters have at least 4 or 5 names and can get them even before you are later told who they are). If you like magical realism and/or expect a standard Latin American novel then be careful as this is really magical surrealism in extreme.
