By examining other people’s lives and deaths I am half consciously showing myself how to approach my own. - Derek Raymond Extremely harrowing read. Possibly the best in the five-entry “Factory Series". For all that's righteous - please read this novel. But read the 1st 3 entries in the “The Factory” series first. Having been called back to A14 by the Deputy Commander known only as “the voice” but never actually seen by the DS in the entire series, the always nameless Detective Sergeant finds himself dropped in the middle of what will become the most heinous case in his entire career. This case –what starts out as the investigation into a double homicide- is deemed unsolvable by Serious Crimes so the Unsolved Crimes Department, or A14, is handed the case. Due to the complicated nature of the murders the Detective Sergeant having been suspended for over a year following a violent incident of insubordination that occurs in the previous novel has been brought back to A14 and given this particular case to solve. The crimes described in this book are horrifyingly depraved. It is the blackest, most hopeless case the Unnamed Detective Sergeant has yet been assigned. As in the previous entries much space is given over to the Detective Sergeant to ruminate, to ponder the end of all in this world that is righteous and just. It is a grim black masterpiece of horror and terror. I wondered (and still wonder) how much the views expressed by the unnamed Detective Sergeant were in reality the author Derek Raymond’s own. Did society in reality disgust him as much as it disgusted his unnamed Detective Sergeant? Had Derek Raymond/Robin Cook finally become so filled with hatred of the mid-to-late 1980s reign of Margaret Thatcher in Great Britain that he purged the poisonous despair from his own heart into his art? In the writing of The Factory Series was Derek Raymond performing a sort of modern day exorcism in an attempt to return to Great Britain the glory of the self-less British people of the 1930s & 1940s who so valiantly fought to prevail against the mass destruction of the aerial assaults and murder of civilians that occurred during the Nazi blitz? Those special and in many cases the unlikeliest of heroes who risked their lives and lost them by selflessly throwing themselves into gas-filled collapsed buildings in frantic searches for strangers still trapped beneath the brick and mortar and steel and concrete in order to save lives and in so doing claimed small victories? Maybe I’ve lost my way in this series. Maybe it’s really just a superb five-novel crime-thriller series. Whatever the case, this just happens to be the finest novel Derek Raymond ever wrote. It was a long time before I could make myself look closely into [Dora's] ruined face with the terrible hacks, gashes, bruising and broken bone on its bad side. I wouldn’t do it until I was alone, and yet to be alone with her was really worse to begin with, because I was afraid that I might get so far out of touch by looking at her that I might never get back; I was as frightened to look at her as I would be to drown. And yet I found, far from being afraid when I did look into her face, that I was in tears. The good side of it, except for one smear of blood down her cheek, was intact. The axe had struck her across, and then down the face, the bad side. Her eyes were not damaged; they were black, ironic and three-quarters open – blind almonds turned in towards a high ceiling with the sly pointlessness of the dead. (Page 43) To work in A14 is to see everything that no one ever sees: the violence, misery and despair, the immeasurable distance in the mind of a human being that knows nothing but suffering between its dreams and its death. Every death I have ever seen in my work – in bars, at the edge of motorways, in filthy rooms, suicides, people who have thrown themselves from high buildings, under cars, buses, or the underground, are all for me casualties on a single front. Each to me, even some killers, have been men or women deprived of any reason for going on – children even, sometimes –and one bright desperate day they awake and say to themselves, “I’ll end it”, and they write themselves off in one single stroke of negative, savage joy, since, there was nobody to meet them at the station. Then afterwards, the ravens, the vultures and the vampires that had been into them come to us to claim or complain over their now irrecoverable debt in the bloody, silent field, while the government, trailing the press after it like a shabby skirt stalks off to dine, wonders if it is still popular. But for me the front is the street, and I am forced to see it every day. I see it, eat it, sleep and dream the street, am the street. I groan in its violent dreams, see it under the rain, and in the sun, the hurrying people on it, killers as well as victims, flying past absorbed as if they were praying. The way I am, I sense tears as well as hear them. Dead people are very clean, too clean. They have been purged, white and even as the light on snow, but why? Where’s the justice in it? That’s what I want to know. (Page 129-130) Like Socrates, I think that all men must be just towards their own code if they are going to be at all, because in the end one code is all the codes, given that one is a just man. (Pages 132-133) By examining other people’s lives and deaths I am half consciously showing myself how to approach my own. Strip horror; face it naked. Don’t hide or run, and then the good will come, even if it has to go through hell to find you. “There ought to be a law that made murder impossible”, I said. “but there isn’t, so I’m filling the gap until there is”. (Page 170) If you want to deal with evil, you must live with it and know it. In my work you have no chance at all of beating what you don’t know, whose language you can’t speak; the margin is very tight, and the risk of being corrupted accordingly very near. I loved Dora, not only because I found her beautiful for me, but also because I felt so ashamed that we should have allowed her to fall so far. …For the span of my own lifetime I would always arrive too late, but I felt I must try to look forward to a day when that would all be altered, so that we would no longer only be able to obtain justice for people after they were dead. I know that if it were for me ever to command anything, I would have a centre where people frightened for their lives could come and be seriously listened to, their fears sifted, analysed and acted upon, and not just be told to fuck off and stop wasting police time. (Pages 192-193)
