It would take a very bold, impertinent, critic to say that any of Iris Murdoch’s mature novels was ‘best’. Nonetheless, I’ll risk that audacity and give first place to The Black Prince and The Sea, the Sea, closely followed by this one. Murdoch is not just a superlative master of English prose but of Englishness, and how is that to be summarised – hearts of oak with shiftily variable foliage? Deceit and ambiguity are built into the language, and here at its most subtle joy and grief, love and hatred, tragedy and comedy, are barely inseparable. That I think is the point of Murdoch, perhaps the most serious and intelligent woman of the twentieth century, but it’s not an easy one to understand as witnessed by quite a few other reviews here, which badly miss the comic aspect in the desire to interpret it as literal. The tale is trivial enough, a very young man under the weight of self-imposed guilt – a curiously Anglo-Saxon emotional state presupposing an imagined sense of blame without the intention of doing anything about it except making a show of self-laceration – goes in search of his artist-father (though the artistry is not much in evidence) to a remote madhouse in the possession of a trio of very strange women, two of them his half-sisters, in the drably-flat perpetually clouded landscape of East Anglia. Not too much literary detective work is necessary to see that all this is loosely based on the legend of Augustus John, who scattered progeny and discarded but adoring women all over the place, and who in Murdoch’s youth was a powerful legend indeed for aspiring bohemians. Are the mysterious women saints or monsters? They revere and are in fear of their distant lord and master, who they never see, without really liking him, and their existences are those of obsessive neurotics endlessly cleaning and carrying their domestic objects up and down flights of stairs and concocting ghastly meals. They both welcome and (unconsciously?) desire their revenge on the guilt-stricken hero as a male. What seriously disturbs this pattern convenient to all the participants is the intrusion on his part of an unconnected young woman with whom he supposes he is ‘in love’. In fact, she is quite ordinary and rather stupid, such is the magic enchantment of infatuation, another important recurring theme in Murdoch’s novels. The authoress is at this stage faced with the impossible question of how to conclude what in literature has to appear to be a complete picture, easy enough for a painter or composer, never so in a novel. She takes the usual or perhaps only way out in English, which can hardly ever escapes a moralising undertone, a sort of vague spiritual redemption (or ‘catharsis’ in the language of psychoanalysis, of which Murdoch disapproved), reducing the father to a senile old man, conventionally convincing and satisfying enough if not necessarily true. A masterly exercise in truly unique and original style, enormous sophistication and a profound knowledge of the infinite vagaries of the human heart, where something that verges on being ludicrous takes on the force of a myth sufficient to dispel incredulity and in which story-telling, poetry, farce, philosophy or even ‘religion’ all merge.
