A historical fantasy that lyrically portrays the land of Provence with such vividness and beauty while de-romanising the Middle Ages, the Crusades, Arthurian legends, and more. A Song for Arbonne is my first Guy Gavriel Kay novel and certainly won’t be my last. A friend of mine has been consistently recommending GGK for the past two years, and I always avoid it for no reason beyond "I didn’t feel like it". Well, now I feel like it, and what a wonderful book to start my journey. The general setting is that it takes place in a fictionalised France, more specifically inspired by the Albigensian Crusade. So, the religious discourse between Rian and Corannos is rooted in truth. The book is a must read for fans of historical fiction. The reason why this is fantasy is that this is a secondary world, it’s almost like Earth, but there are differences. He twists a lot of historical characters, events, etc. to make a compelling narrative and hit home with his themes. When reading the book, you can’t help but comment on the lyrical prose, it’s so beautiful, enchanting, and meticulously crafted. This quote sums it up beautifully: And so saw, by a trick, an angle, a flaring of torchlight far down the dark river, how the arrow-white-feathered, she would remember, white as innocence, as winter in midsummer, as death-fell from the summit of its long, high arc to take the coran in the shoulder, driving him, slack and helpless, from the rope into the river and laughter turned to screaming in the night. A less talented author could write "She saw how the arrow fell" and be done with it. Yet these modifiers add depth through foreshadowing, mystery, and horror. Firstly, it begins with mystery, then deliberately contrasts the arrow with the colour white, white we view as purity; however, it’s directly followed by "white as winter in midsummer." So, this is an unnatural white, white meaning winter, the reason why it states "death fell" is because it’s amidst midsummer, where life begins anew. So, life is gone; death has arisen. The quotes afterwards are the cherry on top, describing the vividness of the scene and an event that will never be forgotten. There’s more that can be said, but it’s a work of genius. This is one moment of half a dozen in the book. So yes, GGK is a wonderful writer who achieves a lot with very little. The first chapter is a brilliant example. Firstly, we begin with a minor time-skip, it’s a sort of fish-out-of-water situation, but Blaise is decently acquainted with Arbonne. We are observing this culture from a biased perspective, and our views will slowly change as Blaise begins to mingle with this culture. Anyways, GGK tells us the core themes-ideas it will explore: music, love, leadership, politics, free will, fate, religion, culture, equality, providence, sin, and more. I love the infiltration to Rian Island, firstly, it tells us we will shift perspectives occasionally (and done seamlessly), but more importantly, it’s the atmosphere. Rian Island feels enchanting, beautiful, and otherworldly, and it’s so evocative, like stepping into a fantasy island. Especially in contrast to other places in the book, like Gorhaut. Plus, the given chapter states: “You are standing at the very heart of our strength here on this island. We grow weaker and weaker the further we are from here, or from the other isle in the lake inland. Rian has no limits, but her mortal servants do. I do. And the goddess cannot be compelled, ever.” It symbolises a nation almost at its end. If something is not done, the magic of Rian will die. Love and Sexuality are at the core of the novel, which is obvious from the relationship between Gorhaut and Arbonne. How it explores love is something you can discover on your own, but I very much enjoyed how GGK handled that subject throughout the whole book, from the prologue to the very end. GGK wanted to show the fundamental human desire for dominance through religion, politics, and sex and how they're interlinked. GGK doesn’t only show the beauty of the Middle-Ages as I said prior, it de-romanises it through its inherent misogyny. It’s all beautifully explored, this is partly attributed to GGK's brilliant use of dialogue and internal monologue. It felt so authentic for the time it was portraying, yet it doesn’t sacrifice readability. Another roundabout way of saying it in an unflattering light is that it’s not "old-timey," which never bothers me, but it should be noted. He makes those epic moments just brilliant to behold, he fuses that with intricate politics inspired by that era, and it just becomes a captivating read. For a book fundamentally about Love, Religion and taking place in fictionalised Provence in the Middle Ages, depicting music is a must. GGK delivers in all spades, it genuinely gave me memories of Tolkien, which is a hell of a compliment. Middle-Earth was created by the Music of the Ainur, it was fundamental to Tolkien's secondary world and how everything ties back to it. GGK doesn’t go to such an extent, but music does play a vital role. From its obvious association with love, political propaganda, which reinforces some of its other themes, to religion and so forth and being a universal language. In one section of the novel, which is one of my favourite parts, he depicts the warmth of the tavern beautifully, cultures intermixing, and despite people's differences, music affects everyone profoundly the same. Which is true to life, those arts being universal regardless of ideologies being different. The character work was brilliant. My favourites would have to be Blaise, Ariane, Rosala, Urté de Miraval, Beatritz, Lisseut, Bertran, and maybe even Ranald. That’s a lot of characters, and I almost listed out most of the main characters in the book, which is a testament to GGK's ability as a writer. Almost every character is three-dimensional and fun to read. The exception, I would say, is Ademar and the High Elder. However, it feels more like an intentional choice than a fatal flaw. The antagonist works from an Arthurian legend perspective. I have a feeling that was the intention, because of how it relates to the religious discourse that took place in France. In Conclusion, A Song for Arbonne was able to compact all the positives of historical fantasy into one book. Stunning prose, historically and thematically rich, brilliant characters and conveying action, moments of reflection, and music all brilliantly. It’s a rich standalone historical fantasy book that’s absolutely worth reading, and highly recommend it! This certainly won't be my last GGK novel. 9/10
