Mr. Fox steals food nightly from one of the three disgusting and gluttonous farmers who have more then they need. The farmers get mad and set out to kill Mr. Fox. They have a hard time catching him, they destroy the earth trying to get him out of his hole, they waste many man-hours by making their workers surround the woods with weapons and ultimately Mr. Fox with the help of other underground animals find another way into the farms and go about their stealing in peace while the farmers sit endlessly waiting to kill the fox and any other animals that pop up from the ground. This book teaches you that stealing is ok, as long as it is done against evil and wicked people. That's a fine message and one that kids probably won't be exposed to for the first time by reading this book. Basically Robin Hood is that message too, although this seems a little bit more anarchic in it's presentation, maybe it's the drawings, or all the fun the fox has in stealing that makes it seem like a revolution going on that you can dance to. But is it ok to tell kids that stealing is alright? Yes it is. Children will be taught eventually in school that stealing is perfectly fine, but they will be taught it under the more civilized and devastating guise of capitalism, the rights of corporations over people and the other legalized theft that our society holds up as the makings of success. But am I saying that kids should go out and steal? No they shouldn't. First because most of them are really bad at it and if you are bad at stealing you will get caught, or at least noticed and that's not a good thing. Second because stealing for the sake of stealing isn't good. Stealing can be political and it can be used as a very very weak brick against the wall of capitalism (but really it's more like throwing a feather into a tornado, it's not going to do shit), but it can also just be selfish and unnecessary. I was going to write more, but I'm running out of time before I goto work and see if I can spy any shoplifters, who I will try to have get caught because a) they make my life more difficult, in that I need to then remember what books have numbers off so they can be ordered manually, and a.2) mean that it gives reason for me to get yelled at by some idiot who can't understand just because the computer says we have something doesn't mean we really do (we don't have computers that know when someone has stolen something without our noticing it). And b) because the publishing industry has enough problems right now with money, and it's not as if books aren't available for free at libraries. Go there and get the book for free and read it, B&N might be an big corporation, but as Ralph Nader said, (not an exact quote) "they sell books, and books are a good thing". So if you're going to go steal, go to some Wal-Mart or something, but watch out they have a wall of video screens in the back room with a small army watching them, just waiting to see you pocket some of their items.
