3.75 The Prodigy, also known as Beneath The Wheel, is a book that scrutinises youth, the construction of the Self, and the challenges of life which may result in mental health issues, ergo, the book goes beyond a mere exploration or critique of the education system. Hesse’s prose is rich, lyric, and evocative even though the plot does not have a convincing denouement. The first chapters of the The Prodigy are strong; I especially enjoyed chapters two, three, and four, they felt real and they were elegantly and effectively written and also transmit great sentiment; alas, after Hans leaves the seminar and goes back to his town the story fails to keep me engaged for it feels somehow flat. I am of the opinion that there should have been two more chapters at the seminar for, besides Hans, our protagonist, there was not enough character development. Heilner, for instance, could have been a great character , yet he is not layered. I suspect that Hermann Heilner was meant to represent the rebellious kid we often find at schools, but, is that all there should be? What else is there about Heilner that makes him an individual so unique as to be admired and deeply esteemed by Hans? Hans neglects his own need for space and his scholarly ambitions partly due to his relationship with Heilner, which he places above all; yet, Heilner, does not reciprocate to the same extent. What does having Heilner in his life reveal to Hans that makes his focus change so abruptly? I found Hans’s change in attitude a bit abrupt and inconsistent with his character. This theme needed further exploration. We are told that Heilner is a genius but we never really know why. The children at the seminar were there because they had brilliant minds, however, the writing never offers a proof of it besides stating that the seminar was a school for privileged intellects. Further, based on the way the story unfolds in the seminar this could have been any other school in Germany; yet, the seminar was not meant to be ‘any school’ but an elite institution; and therein lies the issue with the narrative. We don’t see, as readers, what is so special about the seminar that confers it it’s great status. In the The Prodigy, we know most characters superficially; some of them were too stereotypical. I prefer more nuanced characters and I did not find them in this book. I did adore Hans though and I would have liked to learn of these two characters: Flaig and Lucius. After chapter five ends, the prose continues to be delightfully descriptive, yet that alone was not enough to keep me as invested as I was in previous chapters. The Prodigy has much potential, nonetheless, most of what happens after chapter five was unconvincing and falls flat. In fact, I would have preferred for the book to finish by the end of chapter 5 (which would have made it a novella), rather than to have all the chapters it did and have that contrived and tedious last chapter. The denouement was disappointing not because of the final event but because of how we got ‘there’. The problem I see is that, Hesse seems to have lost inspiration precisely at the stage in which the story should have peaked; ergo, the story never fully blossoms. The book has some elements that hint that, by the time Hesse wrote this book, he had a rather manichaean view of the education system. Overall, this is a good book but not a ‘must-read’. If you like Hermann Hesse then I do recommend The Prodigy but keep in mind that Hesse’s Narcissus and Goldman is a superior book, thus more memorable. Do not expect The Prodigy to achieve Narcissus and Goldman’s status.
