“The Redneck Manifesto” is a flawed classic; a case of a brilliant idea running out ahead of a book weighed down by the author’s own frenetic style and tackled at the five yard line by error. It’s a book everyone should read, and no one should get their hopes up about. Goad’s aim is to make a case for the “redneck”, by which he means poor and working class whites. While the book’s title might suggest to some that it is a racist screed, it is, in fact, exactly the opposite. In taking the right that any human being has to simple dignity for granted, Goad demonstrates that this right is (or should be) colorblind. Deploring the popular inclination to treat poor whites as cardboard cutout objects of legitimate social scorn he creates of this socio-racial hillbilly class a group of living, breathing human beings with real feelings, comprehensible motives and an inalienable right to respect. When he explores history, he’s brilliant. When he examines culture, he’s insightful. When he discusses ideology, however, he’s really, really smart, until he gets dumb. While normally I wouldn’t delve too deeply into an author’s writing style, Goad’s style is such an integral part of his message that to ignore it would be an unforgiveable omission. As much shtick as it is prose, his writing style is a manic fusion of in-your-face irony and comedic rapid-fire realism that is designed to be at once shocking, funny and thought-provoking. Irreverent disregard for social taboos is a huge element of his riff. During the first third of the book, for example, he carpet bombs his pages with the word “nigger”, and yet the violation of this most scrupulously attended social taboo is to a valid point. Those who are offended by his usage will quickly put the work down, which is a shame as he’s reserved the entire last chapter of his book for them. Those who wade through it will see what he’s on about – that the power of marginalizing racial pejoratives, which can be as hurtful as we make them or as liberating as we choose to let them be, is colorblind. For me his style worked right up until it didn’t anymore. Somewhere about half way through page 132 I’d had enough…..not that I was offended so much as it had stopped being funny, and so created a barrier between his ideas and my interest in hearing them. Perhaps the books greatest achievement is to cogently articulate the status of poor whites throughout our nation’s history and the means by which natural class allies, enslaved blacks and indentured whites, were set against each other to the benefit of the powerful. While there’s a bit more to it than what he’s letting on, his point on the whole is accurate – that England essentially made America the place they used to “take out its social trash”, and that a huge proportion of the whites who came to America in the 17th and 18th century did so against their will, were treated horribly once they got here and have lived horribly ever since. This is not to diminish the depredations of slavery, Jim Crow or our current era of post-racial oppression – these Goad takes for granted - , but rather, to acknowledge that regardless of a victim’s race awful treatment has awful consequences, and to ignore one group's suffering in deference to another’s is to blind us all to common suffering’s root cause. “It’s not about race” he declares, “– it’s about class.” For the last year or so, I have immersed myself in America’s racial history, current issues of race and the contemporary schools of philosophical thought. “It’s not about race, it’s about class” is nothing short of black philosophical heresy. In saying it, he whacks a hornet’s nest……or churns butter, depending on your willingness to abandon dogma in the search for answers. In adopting a class view of human disadvantage, his ire is reserved not for people of different races, but rather, the people whose wealth and influence allow them to control society. Their tactics, he argues, have always been to divide and conquer; to set poor whites against poor blacks in a manner that renders each group powerless and leave them free to pursue their own financial and social interests unperturbed by plebian dissent. Anyone who has carefully studied American’s racial and social history would be hard pressed to disagree with him. Where he errs, however, is in then ascribing to “government” the inevitable role as the instrument of class oppression. He embraces the “get government off our backs” ethos which, in the fifteen years since he published the book, has been the guiding inspiration behind America’s Tea Party movement. This just doesn’t make sense to me…..and never has. If the wealthy and the powerful are inclined (by self-interest, and not necessarily malice) to abuse and exploit the poor, “government” can indeed become a tool of “oppression” when surrendered into their hands or it can be a tool of liberty when entrusted to the people. By stripping government of its power, the Tea Party and proto-advocates like Goad would strip away the only thing standing between the poor and the power of the rich. Deregulation does not help the poor, but instead, robs them of their leverage. Lower taxes do not benefit people who are one parking ticket away from financial ruin or so destitute that they’re not paying taxes anyway. Yet in, what is to me an incomprehensible irony, Goad summarily and cynically rejects the possibility of governing well, and would instead strip the last vestiges of buffer between those who have nothing and those who control everything. His answer is no answer, and is as much a dead end as the black community’s fifty year old campaign to guard some imaginary branded franchise in human misery. The bottom line is that, notwithstanding its deliberately coarse plebian tone, the book is deeply thought provoking, While I disagreed with much of what he had to say, there is much that he has to say that is correct, and in that his thoughts are ultimately informed by a sense of fairness and social equality, they deserves to be taken seriously.....except when they're really, really dumb.
