There's all kinds of Florida Man this and Tampa, death metal and strip clubs that that you could say about this novel, but right now I'm stupid to come up with a clever remark to sell this book to you. Maybe (hopefully) the "vibes" wave has crested and crashed somewhere on some sunny Floridian shore, but irregardless, for lack of vocabulary, this novel's got the late 80s/early 90's vibes , the sleeze, video stores, night clubs, cocaine and advertising, punky bondagewear, spirit animals, the anthropological meets pharmacological plus some boudoir photography and cartels for good measure. I mean cripes, the protagonist is named Justin Gray, a Gen X dreamboat flying a massive red flag. Justin's just left St. Louis because he got busted for dealing coke. His wife divorced him. He wants to start fresh in Tampa where his male platonic life partner Erik has transitioned from photojournalism to softcore porn. Erik introduces Justin to April, a friend and model of Erik's, at a club where Justin, king of bad decisions, decides to hoover up some kinda new green schnieef that Tony Mendoza is trying to peddle. One of the boys hoovering green schnieef in the john at the club goes all animorphs and eats some people on the dance floor and chaos ensues. Meanwhile Kerebawa, a Yanomamo man, is on a mission to retrieve that green schnieef that Tony has recently acquired. (Here's where I could compare and contrast Kerebawa with Boro from BNCF but eh, one does 90's exoticism (for what its worth) well and the other is BNCF .) The result is more sleazy crime thriller than horror novel, but there's some great gore and some psychedelic drug novel moments, and frankly the ending had me wondering how they were going to pull it off to the very last page. And believe me, I was worried it was gonna be all and then Stephen King explodes . Sure, I may have some problems with a thing or two here related to attitudes towards sex work (product of their time), or spirit animals and 90's exoticism, or the inconsistencies in April's characterization, but they didn't detract from my good time with this book.
