This was the dead-weight anchor of my sophomore teaching experience, though a fine anthology, not that innovative in selections--say, of the play from Shakespeare or the Book from Paradise Lost or the liveliest of Seventeenth Century lyric poems. Take this last stanza from John Suckling's "Love's Offense," "Love is the fart Of every heart. It pains a man when 'tis kept close And others offends when let lose." I'll let the reader try to find it in NA; it may be there now, but surely wasn't during the 30+ years I taught English Lit. (My grad professor Tom Clayton edited the first modern--Oxford--edition of Suckling's poems to include that stanza. My community college library, when I ordered Clayton's Oxford edition, kept buying cheaper editions that did not have this verse. I persisted--and you may see why I wanted such an accessible, possibly offensive, verse. To make the Cavaliers look more men of the people. As for the play of Shakespeare's, when I started it was 1Henry4, a great play, but very male-dominated. My community college was two-thirds women students, so I preferred Measure for Measure or Much Ado, or even Othello. All these choices are of course determined by other anthologies as well, notably freshman comp and lit which came to include Othello (hence redundant in sophomore lit). One of my better students, once she graduated and attended a state college in Boston, returned to tell me she had had Oedipus required five times in her four years. Freshman English, sophomore psychology, junior history and psychology, and senior something-or-other. In other words, there IS no curriculum. Each course reconstitutes its own. For twenty years I avoided this NA, using six paperbacks instead, with library supplements: Spenser's, Sidney's and Shakespeare's sonnets, Sh's MFM or Much Ado, a collection of Donne, Jonson and their successors, Milton's prose, a Restoration comedy like The Country Wife, Pope or Sam Johnson or Defoe. I would intersperse readings from English law and history I had found in my many postdocs at Princeton, Brown, Harvard, the Folger, etc. Also, Clarendon's History of the Rebellion, especially his description of Charles II's Portuguese wife. Gracious, French-raised Charles of course introduced his new wife to his mistress within a week of her landing in England with her household of black widow attendants. Should be in the NA for its prose and its insight into comparative cultures. (Since my students were predominately Portuguese, Brazilian and Azorean, they were attentive.)
