I am on my second time around reading through one of my favorite series. Later on it becomes more of a police procedural, but the earlier books concentrate more on character development and growth. It has been 4 months since Joanna Brady's husband was murdered and 2 months since she was elected Sheriff of Cochise County, Arizona. She is dealing with a new job as she learns all about law enforcement, is still reeling with grief from the death of her husband, and trying to raise her 9 year old daughter, Jenny, alone. Understaffed since she has been elected, assaulted with budget woes, and dealing with personnel, Joanna and her staff are working long hours and are exhausted. "Joanna Brady is an engaging heroine, vulnerable but determined to meet the challenges in her personal and public life". The book opens with Hal and Bonnie Morgan visiting Phoenix on their 19th wedding anniversary. Returning to their hotel, they are crossing a street when a pickup comes careening around the corner on two wheels, spins out of control into the intersection killing Bonnie, the love of Hal's life. The driver gets off with little more than a "slap on the wrist". The next chapter flashes forward to Bisbee where Joanna discovers an altercation while taking her dog to the vet. The confrontation is between Dr. Amos "Bucky" Buckwalter, the local veterinarian, and Hal who is outside his clinic picketing and handing out M.A.D.D. literature. It turns out Bucky was the drunk driver who killed Hal's wife. Diffusing the situation, Joanna leaves but is called out later when Bucky is found murdered by a pitchfork inside a burning barn. Hal is unconscious by the door. Hal is, of course, the logical suspect. Dick Voland, Chief Deputy for Operations, and a prickly thorn for Joanna with his good-old boy mentality, is positive they have their guy. Joanna's intuition and sympathy for Hal (she also lost her husband on their anniversary) leads Joanna to believe his is innocent. Another suspect is Bucky's wife Terry. Terry doesn't seem to care that Bucky is dead. She sheds no tears, plays golf the day after he is murdered, and already has plans in the works to sell the veterinary business and become a golf pro. Hal Morgan disappears from the hospital and confirms everyone's suspicions that he is Bucky's murderer and on the run. Joanna even has her doubts now. A few other subplots include: - Marianne Maculyea who is Joanna's Methodist minister and best friend is worried about her husband who has flown to China to pick up a little girl for adoption. Jeff Daniels contacts his wife and says he needs more money, but can't tell her why because of monitored telephone conversations. - Joanna has a contentious relationship with her mother Eleanor Lathrop and is in for a surprise when she finds out her mother has been secretly dating Dr. George Winfield, the Cochise County Coroner. - A man named Reed Carruthers has been found murdered in Sunizona. His daughter, Hannah Green, is the suspect but has disappeared. Later she turns up at Joanna's house holding Jenny hostage. Joanna blames herself for what happens to Hannah when she is jailed. - Bebe Noonan, Bucky's veterinary assistant, declares she is pregnant with his baby. She confronts Terry for money to take care of her and the baby. Is she a suspect? Joanna ends up giving her some valuable advise. - Eighteen adults were locked in a speeding van that flipped over near the Tombstone Municipal Airport. They turn out to be illegal aliens. Dealing with the prisoners and injured proves to be a logistical nightmare. - Joanna's daughter Jenny is lobbying to get Tigger, Bucky's horse, for her birthday. Joanna feels too overwhelmed to consider adding one more animal to her responsibilities. - Butch Dixon from a previous book shows up in town on his motorcycle. He says he is checking out the scenery in the area, but is he really checking out Joanna? Other recurring characters include Frank Montoya, Chief Deputy for Administration; Ernie Carpenter, Joanna's sole homicide investigator; Deputy Jaime Carbajal, Marliss Shackleford, reporter for the Bisbee Bee; Eva Lou & Jim Bob Brady, Andy's parents; Kristen Marsten, Joanna's secretary; Angie Kellogg, the reformed prostitute; and Deputy Dave Hollicker. There are several twists and turns and a red herring or two. Recommend reading the series.
