Maryanne and the Great Romance Richard and Sharon are gone out on another date so Maryanne and Dawn are spending the evening together. There’s a Heley Mills marathon coming on, but after an hor they get bored with it. Kristy calls and sounds a littlelonely. She’s sitting. Dawn and Maryanne talk to her for a little. At the BSC meeting, Mrs. Arnold needs another steady sitter to watch the twins. Maryanne gets the majority of the days while she’s working on a school project. When Maryanne goes to sit for the Arnolds Marilyn opens the door. Carolyn is out with her friends. She notices right away Carolyn has an attitude about this. She suggests she can go play with Carolyn, Heley, and Vanessa but she takes this to mean Maryanne doesn’t want to play with her. So, they open her Kid Kit. While looking at a puzzle, Marilyn starts to tell Maryanne about a new friend at school that’s lived in Paris. Then Carolyn comes home and says she, Vanessa, Heley, and maybe Charlotte are thinking of starting a girl’s club. Marilyn calls them snobs. Then she runs up to her room. After a little while Maryanne convinces her to come down and color with her and Carolyn. That night, Maryanne makes lasagna for dinner and Richard says they should invite Dawn over since her mom is working late. Then he suggest that since her birthday is coming up they should surprise her. They can get a client to invite her to a “business dinner”. Then they’ll give her a cake and presents. Maryanne is surprised that he wants to do this since this is just her 42nd britrthday. Dawn says she’s going to get her a day planner. Maryanne thinks of getting her a pen, a book, and a pin shaped like a cat but Dawn shoots down all of em and says they aren’t her style. But then they quickly make up. Maryanne takes Carolyn and Marilyn to the Pikes on her next sitting job (or is it just Carolyn). They all decide to play “Sardines” which is an alternate version of hide n seek where there’s more than one seeker and when the seeker finds the hider they both hide. Maryanne asks where Marilyn is but Carolyn says they don’t hang out anymore. No ones seems to have heard of her new friend. Carolyn says she talks about her all the time so she’s heard of her. Maryanne sits for the twins the next time on a rainy day. She’s brought over some new things (a kalescope) and a game she “invented” (coughs stole) that’s a imitation of “Go To The Head Of The Class”. The twins start to argue and then Marilyn gets mad and says she wants to go to her room. Then Carolyn says she can’t because she’s going to their room. So they both end up going (pushing and shoving). Marilyn tells Maryanne Carolyn doesn’t want to hang out with her anymore. Carolyn tells her she stopped hanging out with her because she was bossy to her friends. Carolyn thinks her dad ;oles At Sharon’s birthday dinner, Dawn and Maryanne find out their parents have already agreed to marry but decided against rings. Although Richard stuck a ring on tone of the cake’s candles. Maryanne gets her a carm of a high school ring since Richard couldn’t afford to give her one back then and she loves it. At the next club meeting, Dawn and Maryanne share with everyone (including Logan) their good news. Then they talk a little about how sometimes siblings fight and how the twins might be trying to go out of their way to get the favor of one of their parents. Sometimes they say parents do this too. For example when Kristy’s mom first married Watson Watson would side with Kristy and her brothers and her mother would side with Karen and Andrew if there was an argument. When Kristy sits Karen gets jealous of Emily and blames her for making a mess in the kitchen to see if Kristy will punish her. Kristy gives Emily a time out but then Karen confesses and she gets it instead. Karen tho gives Emily some of her old toys to play with and she’s forgiven instantly. Also, Charlie gets a new car and David Micheal gets mad because he lets everyone else ride in it to take his friend home, but Charlie sees a sign he made and corrects this. The Schafers and the Spiers talk about the wedding. Maryanne and Dawn want a big wedding but theier surprised to hear that’s not what their parents want. They just want to go to the court house and get it done. They do agree tho to a small wedding and a dinner. Dawn drops the bomb that Maryanne and Richard will be moving in with them and this doesn’t go over so well with Maryanne. Dawn is in tears and she and her mom leave. Sharon promises Maryanne that Tigger willl be welcome at there house. Before this she’s shouted at Sharon she’s not giving up Tigger. Maryanne sits for the twins again and suggests they each are growing up and mentions having separate rooms. (The tape is back up and Marilyn is downstairs practicing). Their mother seems to be ok with this. Stacey sits for the twins and they each show her their new rooms. Marilyn has the sewing room and has it decorated in all yellow. Carolyn has the guest room and has decorated it in blue stripes with cat accsories everywhere. They draw with the pastels a while and they both say they’ll give their pictures to both parents. Carolyn wants to go see Heley. Claud is sitting for her. Then she asks Marilyn to come. When all of them are together (Heley, Vanessa, Marilyn, Carolym, and Charolotte), Caroyn asks Marilyn to be in the club “if” she doesn’t act too bossy. So it’s a probation but she’s happy with it. Stacey realizes that her “Friend” was probably made up. The wedding is held. Jeff invites the triplets. Dawn and Maryanne are allowed new dresses but only Dawn gets a new dress (a hip sailor dress?). Maryanne borrows her Laura Ashley dress (Dawn wore this to the dinner where Richard proposed). Claudia does a great job with her hair and makeup. (She pmakes her look like she’s not wearing any: pale gloss, clear polish, blue shadow). The ceremony goes fine. The only thing that happens is the triplets start laughing in the middle at one of the angels in the stain glass window because it’s naked. At the dinner we immediately see issues come up. Richard tries to give Sharon some of his veal but she doesn’t take it. Then there’s the thing about Dawn and Maryanne sharing a room and clothes. Then I think there’s going to be something about whichever one caught the boquet. My Thoughts: I just didn’t have a lot of commentary on this one. I have a sister but since we aren’t that close I couldn’t imagine living with her in the same house or sharing anything if my father married her mother. No hope in hell of that! Richard marrying Sharon didn’t really give me any thoughts either. Sharon could have married the Trip Man for what it mattered to me in this series. Then there was the Marilyn and Carolyn plot. Eight is a good age to have your own room. I wonder will this be my cousin’s twin daughters experience when they get older -fighting to have their own identites-. Rating: 5
