"It was no accident that I went to the Los Alamos Ranch School where they couldn't wait to make the atom bomb and drop it on the Yellow Peril" stated Nordic degenerate William S. Burroughs. Burroughs felt the atom bomb symbolized America's final loss of innocence and that here on out "everything was permitted." Burroughs was also a fan of German genius Oswald Spengler's two volume pessimistic masterpiece "The Decline of the West" and Burroughs himself was symbolic of this decline. The Grandson of brilliant adding machine inventor William Seward Burroughs I, WSB was a drug addict, unrelenting homosexual, wife killer, and failed father (among many other things). As a writer however, William S. Burroughs created nihilistic worlds of sexual perversion (with nonexistent STDs that would predict Aids), tribes of homosexual criminals, talking assholes, and other oddities scattered throughout the world. William S. Burroughs was no doubt a writer of his time (which all great writers usually are), reflecting the world through his own unique lens, a lens that fortunately the majority of the United States population wasn't seeing through, for Burroughs life was a life of pain. His only outlet for this pain, aside from drugs and sex of course, was his writing. "Literary Outlaw" is easily the most powerful biography I have ever had the fortune (other might call it a misfortune) of reading. If Hollywood wasn't run by mostly hacks, I would like to see this bio adapted into a film, although David Cronenberg's "Naked Lunch" is certainly a worthy Burroughs tribute. For the writers and would-be writers out there, "Literary Outlaw" is also an inspirational work. Those people that lead interesting and unconventional lives (with unconventional personalities to boot), usually also make interesting writers as "Literary Outlaw" and William S. Burroughs make testament to. "Literary Outlaw" is no ass-kissing tribute or soulless academic analytical text, but a portrait of a man that lived a fairly pathetic, sad, and many times shameful life. Thankfully, he has left a legacy in written form for those out there that cannot ignore the degeneracy of the modern world. William S. Burroughs tried it, traveling throughout the world and living in many exotic places (while on exotic drugs). Of course, he could never escape this world and most importantly, he could never escape himself.
