Two tortured souls, both lost in their pain of losing a child, both struggling to find themselves after the horrors of war – find themselves in Charleston South Carolina though their first meeting goes less then stellar. Vickie is mourning the death of her kid sister who perished in the fire at the Church some few months ago. She is the quiet sort though is feisty when confronted with rude behavior and rude behavior is Adrian’s MO. Adrian is a veteran pilot, mourning the loss of both his wife a few years back and now his only son in the same fire that took Vickie’s sister, though he doesn’t know it yet. Adrian is described as a darkly tormented man whose pain is obvious to everyone he meets. It makes him come off rude and abrasive. When he shouts at Vickie for knocking into him, Adrian is sorry for his behavior and seeks her out to apologize. The problem is, Adrian’s temper gets the better of him again and it soon becomes apparent that he and the nice young woman may never come to terms. Until they meet in the church and realize just how close their lives are intertwined. It’s that bond of loss and grief that finally brings them together and from that moment, it’s like they were meant to be. However, when both Vickie and Adrian begin spotting what they think is their dead children playing around town, they never imagine the paranormal world they will find themselves in, nearly 65 years in the past. This book lost steam FAST. What connection to these characters and their pain I had at the start was lost very quickly after they found themselves in the past. It’s like the author too lost interest in the whole thing because it became mush. I was so emotionally invested at the start and the scene at the church when they realized how close their children were before their death could have moved me to tears. Then, it just became a repetitive mess that made me completely lose interest. Also, Adrian was oddly sexually aggressive toward Vickie. When she didn’t want to sleep with him because she didn’t love him (keep in mind it’s 1945), he basically started begging her for sex. It’s was completely out of character for him, or so I thought at the time, as he held himself as an English gentleman otherwise. Sad to see a book with such a great start turn out to be a not so great ending.
