If you were a kid growing up in the late 1980’s and early 90’s, Michael Jordan was most likely a god to you. He was a ubiquitous, towering presence peering down from billboards and exhorting you from your tv screen with that smile to be like him. I know that I drank gatorade and wanted Air Jordan sneakers like all my friends did. Why wouldn’t you after all want to be like a man who could seemingly walk on water and fly at the same time? When “The Jordan Rules” was published in the Fall of 1991, it sent shockwaves through the sports world in its unflinching portrait of a Michael Jordan who seemed almost unrecognizable from the carefully managed persona we had all come to know. This Jordan frequently gambled large sums of money (often with questionable characters), mercilessly berated and belittled his teammates, and seemingly cared more about his personal statistics than what was good for the whole of the team. While these things may be true, he was also a relentlessly hard worker who expected the same from his teammates and was frustrated by anyone who didn’t put forth the same effort he did in the way that genius all too frequently has a way of distorting our image of what others around us are capable of. He was someone who always had time for small children, often donating his time before each game to meet with a sick child to lift their spirits. He was a man fiercely loyal to his family who was devastated at the senseless murder of his father. In short Jordan was a human being. Capable of pettiness but also generosity. Quick to anger but also capable of kindness and a warm smile to those he trusted. While this book angered Jordan and a large number of his fans who were understandably upset to see the curtain pulled back to expose the flaws of their hero, this book in fact brings him closer to us than the marble man we thought him to be. As a child of Jordan’s era who was unaware of any of this and just wanted to see him soar through the air one more time, I can look back now as an adult at the man who gave me so much joy and appreciate that his flaws make him more like myself than I was capable of knowing back then. No matter what anyone may say, this is no bad thing.
