"At first, I made a promise to myself: I would do nothing that was connected ever so faintly with the importing and sale ans use of slaves. But I soon discovered that everything I considered bore, somewhere along the way, the imprint of black hands." (PG. 174) Newbery Award winner 1973 I was pleasantly surprised by this small book. I learned about how white children in the streets would get kidnapped and taken on slave ships which led me to Google about this time in history. This is a children's book. I will say this is a very heavy read as I was warned by @Julie. I do not think my 11 year-old son would understand the depth or feelings of the book. I always keep the time of when something is published in mind so I don't get all judgmental or shocked into anger or better yet "Does it go with the story?" And in this case I will say YES. The book uses the N word plenty of times and let's the reader know the slave holders think they are unworthy, unfeeling apes. Like I said, a heavy, sad, book. The part that interested me most is when I read that their own Africans were selling slaves to the Portuguese and Americans to sell in Cuba or to the Americas. It was a very interesting fact. I had heard about it but never paid attention to it. So I Googled again and I found that yes there were in fact prosperous African men selling other human beings (in several cases Queen Ana Nzinga and Prince Infante D. Henrique and Pope Nicholas V). On the internet article I read it said it was common practice at that time to be sold in cases of outstanding debt, exchange for exotic goods, etc. Even when the practice of slavery became outlawed in the Western world these same sellers were confused and distraught that their "merchandise" wouldn't be selling anymore. (Website for anyone interested 'My Nigerian great-grandfather sold slaves' on bbc.com) Such a dark time in history. This book brought out the historian in me and I appreciate the author putting this story out there. It served as a cautionary tale and brought back a time in history we should not ignore.
