If you have heard Dr. Eby's testimony of his visit to Heaven, his miraculous return from death when his body was drained of blood, and his visit to Hell, and you expect this book to be a long detailed description of what happens in Heaven, you will be disappointed. If you read this book and see how he was raised from the dead by the simple heartfelt prayer of his wife, and you think "that sounds great, why don't I do the same thing?", you will be sadly disappointed. Many people read books like this and think that they can then copy the same actions. They do, the actions fail, and they give up. They do not understand the difference between the Logos Word of God which states what God wants and the Rhema Word of God when the Word becomes alive in your heart and you speak it with power and get results. They do not understand the difference between presumption and faith. Most books about Heaven, Hell and supernatural healing emphasize the experience of the author without giving the lifelong path of spiritual growth that allowed him to arrive at that supernatural level where miracles occur. So we read the story of a heavenly encounter and wonder why we cannot have the same experience. It is the same as reading the story of an Olympic champion at the Olympics. Sounds pretty great, but if you read a biography of his entire life, you see the true picture of the sacrifice and dedication of his entire family for his entire life. You see how he lived a lifestyle that led to his success. His victory was not a 5-minute experience but a lifelong commitment. This book is like the biography rather than the event. There are a few pages describing his supernatural healing and his encounters in Heaven and Hell. Most of the book recounts the lives of 3 generations and their faith and commitment to God. It details the miraculous and the ordinary answers to prayers that were a part of their existence. It shows the faith walk that is required to build the "spiritual muscle" to receive the miracle of being brought back from the dead. For this reason, this book is much more valuable than most books which I have read about the miraculous and about Heaven and Hell and I have read many. I bought this book when it first was published 40 years ago; I then purchased more copies which I gave away, and recently bought another copy for myself. I was interested in details about the type of heavenly body which Eby had in Paradise. Because of Eby's medical experience, he gave a description with more understanding about how the "body" functions when it is no longer on earth. However, I think that there are other books which give better insight. Eby himself says that he went to Paradise, the entrance to Heaven, but did not go to Heaven. I believe that he is technically correct and that people do not enter Heaven until they receive their raptured bodies when Christ returns for us in the air. In the meantime, they are in Paradise which was moved from the bowels of the earth beside Hell to the region of Heaven when Jesus rose from the dead. But, even though he says that he had no bones or flesh, I think that he was in his spirit/soul form but without the new body that he will receive when Jesus comes back for us. I personally believe that Jesus already has this body. That is why he told the disciples after His resurrection that a "ghost" did not have flesh and bones like He did. So He was not a ghost. But I do not think that we get this body upon death. That is the only explanation that I have for why Eby's description of his body would be different from that of Jesus after His resurrection. This may seem like an insignificant point, but I believe that any supernatural experience should be able to be backed up by the Bible. If Eby's account does not correspond with the Bible, it must be rejected. However, I think that his encounter was recorded accurately and that it really happened. His return from the dead certainly occurred and was documented. So this is a very inspirational book that shows us how we can begin to walk in the supernatural daily. As we become more confident in our faith and closer to God, the degree and frequency of miracles increases. This is not a microwave miracle. It is the result of a steady consistent relationship with God in which His love just overflowed to produce miracles. A book that is definitely worth reading.
