Do the parts make a whole? I’m not sure. But does it even matter when the totality adds up to something that held me totally enthralled from start to finish. The parts are made up of two novella length tales, two short stories and an epilogue that seeks to tie up loose ends. The uniting theme here is, I guess, the Vietnam War, although maybe it’s more about growing up and discovery and friendship and pain. I suppose it’s for the reader to decide. The stories flow chronologically and the first is set in 1960. We follow the plight of eleven-year-old Bobby Garfield who lives with his protective mother in Connecticut. King paints a nostalgic picture of that time and for the most part it feels like a standard coming of age tale. But Bobby befriends lodger Ted, who we gradually start to understand is a little odd. Ted introduces Bobby to Lord of the Flies and other books; he opens Bobby’s eyes to a world Bobby’s not seen before and a kind of hero worship begins to grip him. But the events take a darker turn as Bobby’s mother sets off for an ill-fated business trip. And what of Ted, what is to be made of the strange requests he’s now making of Bobby? The jump to story two is sudden and disconcerting. We’re thrust into the world of college students in 1966. Pete Riley is a freshman who needs to keep his grade average up to prevent himself from flunking out and, potentially, being shipped off to Vietnam via the draft. But he becomes sucked in to a mania for the card game Hearts that is rampant within sections of the college. He starts to stay up late playing the game, avoiding classes and study. Before long he’s in trouble: his grades are falling and and early exit is starting to look like an inevitability. This is a very different story but some continuity is provided by the inclusion of a girl named Carol Gerber, who appeared briefly in the first story as Bobby’s first girlfriend. In the two short stories that follow we meet up two Vietnam War veterans. One spends his time impersonating a blind veteran, begging on the city streets, and the other is a salesman haunted by the violent death of a Vietnamese woman. The uniting elements here are that both continue the war theme and characters from previous stories are drip-fed into the narrative of the second of these. In the final section Bobby returns to the town of his youth, a town he hasn’t visited in 40 years, to attend a memorial service for a childhood friend. This is really a continuance to or closure of the first story in the book. I listened to an audio version which was read by a combination of actor William Hurt and the author. Hurt did a superb job and I can’t help feeling that this version would have benefitted from having had him read all of the stories. But I’d have been happy to listen to a dozen more and I was sad when the I’d finished the book. I’m not going to get too hung up on the worth of each particular element here or whether the epilogue was a useful add-on, I’m just happy to spend time with stories from this brilliant writer. I’m already searching eagerly for my next Stephen King fix!
