The Rise of Silas Lapham is a realist novel by William Dean Howells published in 1885. Howells was particularly known for his tenure as editor of The Atlantic Monthly , as well as for his own prolific writings, including the Christmas story "Christmas Every Day" which sounds lovely and I have to go find it, and the novels The Rise of Silas Lapham and A Traveler from Altruria and a whole lot more. Howells is known to be the father of American realism, although I don't know how he got that title, and he rejected the conventions of sentimental romantic novels as unrealistic and deceitful. I wonder how many sentimental romantic novels he read? That just made me almost want to go find one, almost. Howells grew up in Ohio, I can't name one place since it seems the family moved all over the state. His father was a newspaper editor and at an early age Howells helped his father with typesetting and printing work. In 1856 Howells was elected as a clerk in the State House of Representatives, which sounds awful. In 1858 he began to work at the Ohio State Journal where he wrote poetry and short stories. He got married on Christmas Eve which would be awesome. We should have done that. Eventually he ended up living in Massachusetts and wrote for various magazines, including The Atlantic Monthly and Harper's Magazine. He published his first novel Their Wedding Journey in 1872, but it was his 1885 novel, The Rise of Silas Lapham that became his biggest success and that's where we are right now, with Silas and his family. The story follows the materialistic rise of Silas Lapham from rags to riches, and his ensuing moral susceptibility. Silas earns a fortune in the paint business, but he lacks social standards. This seems to be a big deal, I don't know why, but it is. The novel begins with Silas, now a middle-aged gentleman native of rural New England, being interviewed for a newspaper story about his life and how he went from poor farming boy to wealthy paint person. In this interview he says this: Bartley saw his opportunity at the word paint, and cut in. "And you say, Mr. Lapham, that you discovered this mineral paint on the old farm yourself?" Lapham acquiesced in the return to business. "I didn't discover it," he said scrupulously. "My father found it one day, in a hole made by a tree blowing down. There it was, lying loose in the pit, and sticking to the roots that had pulled up a big, cake of dirt with 'em. I don't know what give him the idea that there was money in it, but he did think so from the start. I guess, if they'd had the word in those days, they'd considered him pretty much of a crank about it. He was trying as long as he lived to get that paint introduced; but he couldn't make it go. The country was so poor they couldn't paint their houses with anything; and father hadn't any facilities. It got to be a kind of joke with us; and I guess that paint-mine did as much as any one thing to make us boys clear out as soon as we got old enough. All my brothers went West, and took up land; but I hung on to New England and I hung on to the old farm, not because the paint-mine was on it, but because the old house was--and the graves. Well," said Lapham, as if unwilling to give himself too much credit, "there wouldn't been any market for it, anyway. You can go through that part of the State and buy more farms than you can shake a stick at for less money than it cost to build the barns on 'em. Of course, it's turned out a good thing. I keep the old house up in good shape, and we spend a month or so there every summer. M' wife kind of likes it, and the girls. Pretty place; sightly all round it. I've got a force of men at work there the whole time, and I've got a man and his wife in the house. Had a family meeting there last year; the whole connection from out West. There!" Lapham rose from his seat and took down a large warped, unframed photograph from the top of his desk, passing his hand over it, and then blowing vigorously upon it, to clear it of the dust. "There we are, ALL of us." I live in Pennsylvania close to coal mining parts of the state. I now have in my mind men going into these mines, not bringing up cars filled with coal, but filled with paint. A different mine for each color, I can't get it out of my head. And so the wealthy Silas and his family buy a home at Nankeen Square at the South End, where they think the best of society live, they are wrong. "Society" moved away from there years ago which doesn't really matter to them until their daughters become old enough to meet other young society ladies. Men too for that matter. Mrs. Lapham had the ladies of the neighborhood to tea and Lapham brought customer's home to pot-luck suppers, but neither of them imagined having dinners. The two girls had gone to the public schools and never finished at a private school for girls. They never learned to embroider or do needle-work. They learned to dance, but not in the private classes, they didn't even know there were private classes. There was a great gulf between the Lapham girls and society. The Lapham girls are nowhere near "society", to fix this their parents decided to build a mansion in the area where all society is now living. And eventually society does invite them to a dinner, but what should Lapham wear: Finally, all that dress-making in the house began to scare him with vague apprehensions in regard to his own dress. As soon as he had determined to go, an ideal of the figure in which he should go presented itself to his mind. He should not wear any dress-coat, because, for one thing, he considered that a man looked like a fool in a dress-coat, and, for another thing, he had none--had none on principle. He would go in a frock-coat and black pantaloons, and perhaps a white waistcoat, but a black cravat anyway. But as soon as he developed this ideal to his family, which he did in pompous disdain of their anxieties about their own dress, they said he should not go so. Irene reminded him that he was the only person without a dress-coat at a corps reunion dinner which he had taken her to some years before, and she remembered feeling awfully about it at the time. Mrs. Lapham, who would perhaps have agreed of herself, shook her head with misgiving. "I don't see but what you'll have to get you one, Si," she said. "I don't believe they ever go without 'em to a private house." He held out openly, but on his way home the next day, in a sudden panic, he cast anchor before his tailor's door and got measured for a dress-coat. After that he began to be afflicted about his waist-coat, concerning which he had hitherto been airily indifferent. He tried to get opinion out of his family, but they were not so clear about it as they were about the frock. It ended in their buying a book of etiquette, which settled the question adversely to a white waistcoat. The author, however, after being very explicit in telling them not to eat with their knives, and above all not to pick their teeth with their forks,--a thing which he said no lady or gentleman ever did,--was still far from decided as to the kind of cravat Colonel Lapham ought to wear: shaken on other points, Lapham had begun to waver also concerning the black cravat. As to the question of gloves for the Colonel, which suddenly flashed upon him one evening, it appeared never to have entered the thoughts of the etiquette man, as Lapham called him. Other authors on the same subject were equally silent, and Irene could only remember having heard, in some vague sort of way, that gentlemen did not wear gloves so much any more...... The night before the dinner came, and the question of his gloves was still unsettled, and in a fair way to remain so. He had bought a pair, so as to be on the safe side, perspiring in company with the young lady who sold them, and who helped him try them on at the shop; his nails were still full of the powder which she had plentifully peppered into them in order to overcome the resistance of his blunt fingers. But he was uncertain whether he should wear them. They had found a book at last that said the ladies removed their gloves on sitting down at table, but it said nothing about gentlemen's gloves. Also in this novel we have the Corey family, these people are those society people. The Coreys are "old money" cream of Boston society. One of these Corey's is young Tom Corey. Tom joins Howells paint company because he doesn't want to rely on his wealthy father his entire life, but wants to find his own place in the world. And he ends up spending a lot of time with the Howells, time that isn't in the paint company. Howells said he didn't like sentimental romantic novels, but there is a romance in the novel and it is sweet. We have two daughters and a young society man in the book after all, there has to be a romance. I loved this book, it is seldom I hate no one in the book. There isn't a single person I want to take hold of and throw out of the story altogether. I'm glad I read it and probably will again, once I get through all the other books I have here, so it may take a while.
