I wrote all already in my previous reviews. I just add that I simply melted when Freddy stepped aside during the last conversation between Kitty and Jack. Writers of bestseller romances can write long, details scenes, love declarations, etc., but Heyer could do a marvellous (much better) job with just a few words. ----- My review after the second reading: ----- Yes, you would not choose Freddy to fight dragons. Yes, he wasn't the kind to make me swoon. But when he 'got a notion' it was a wise idea. And if you need a friend, someone to whom you can look for help, and who has a kind heart - he is your guy! The book was about Freddy - one of the best man characters ever . Freddy was the book. Besides Freddy, the novel was a pure pleasure of language, wit, and amusement. To savour, have fun, and shine the mood. Other reviewers have written all. So I will just go and kiss the book again. PS This time I have had a paper copy and I could hug it properly at the end ;-) ------------------------- My review after the first reading: "It Won't Do, You Know!" I fell in love with Heyer's hero - again! This piece of her was brilliant. I think it was the funniest I have read by now. And, really, I wasn't sure one hundred percent how it would up. When it ended up I had a big (really big) smile on my face and I was hugging the book [To tell the truth I was hugging the tablet. I regretted that in this case, I hadn't a printed book. But still, I just had to hug it ;-) ]. What should I add? Very funny, witty, even a little surprising plot twists. Many interesting characters . I haven't even one complaint. I had understood one thing during reading it: that Heyer was more accomplished than I thought. In her (one would think plain) romances she smuggled a hard, sometimes painful truth . In "Cotilion" it was the fate of girls like Olivia or men like Lord Dolphinton or Camille. Yes, their fates were funnily described and had happy endings (in Heyer's novels), but if you give them a second thought you will understand that in real life it surely was different. But, first of all - "Cotilion" is a book which makes you laugh, which makes your day sunny ;-) If you are not yet convinced read Anne review ;-)
