she was beginning now to see – to realise – to understand – that the thing which was truly wrong was not so much the dreadful scene into which she had just been precipitated, as the misapprehension …. which had given rise to it: I read this book after joining a Goodreads group re-reading the 1997 Booker shortlist. After deciding to join the readalong and ordering all the book I then researched the 1997 Booker to see that (even discounting the perennial Booker trend to bemoan either the state of English language literature or the incompetence of the judges’ selections, the 1997 year does seem to have been universally acknowledged as something of a low point – even by the judges themselves) and that I was mistaken if I had felt this re-read would introduce me to six classics of literature. And this book in particular seems to have been a particularly uninspired choice – beginning with an opening when Nicola (who works “in the publications department of a famous, but not quite medium-sized arts organisation” ) returning to the Notting Hill flat she shares with her lawyer lover Jonathan (his career taking off due to the Lloyd’s scandal) that he wishes to end their relationship as he can see not future in it. I am all for books which capture period detail – but I don’t think it’s unreasonable to expect them to capture the period in which the book is actually set rather than some odd amalgam of the previous 30-40 years (a particularly "whizzy" low point is when Nicola says she and Jonathan had been ”walking out for slightly less than a year” – to which I could only say “cor” ). With an arts-working protagonist, a lawyer love interest, the comfort of various girlfriends and a dialogue heavy book driven entirely around relationship breakup and male/female communication issues, there is quite a heavy resemblance to “Bridget Jones” – published a year previously: but whereas one book captured the zeitgeist and inspired a whole genre, the other seems to have misplaced it altogether and mainly inspired my amazement as its inclusion on the Booker shortlist. A book which features Lloyd’s, high net worth valuables insurance and which uses compound interest at the crucial point of the book (where Nicola suddenly gains insight into the “accumulation of doubt and fear” which has built up in Jonathan’s mind to and beyond the point of crisis) might have been expressly designed to appeal to my professional interests. Unfortunately, the leaden and dated writing may as well have been expressly designed to offend my literary sensibilities. In the opening quote of my review, Nicola expresses eloquently my own feelings (on the book and on the idea of reading the 1997 shortlist). Upgraded my one star though for a clever reference to her own debut novel (the rather more appropriately chronologically set “Women in Black”) as Jonathan listens to a recording of a book. ”The story began, and went on: some footling tale about some shop assistants in an antipodean department store, fretting about their wombs and their wardrobes and other empty spaces”it
