I would have never thought that I'd find a perfect book aside from fiction ones but it's hard to compare "London: The Biography" with any other non-fiction that I've ever read. This work is not simply monumental and pivotal in its field but is also attractive with its unique nature because it lies on the border between history and biography. The name of the book is not accidental. Peter Ackroyd considers London not as a mere city, roads, and buildings but as a live organism with its spirit, habits, and memories. And London as described by him actually reminds something separate, detached from the reality familiar to us. The history of the city is unparalleled and unrivaled; from the Roman fortress through the first megalopolis of the planet to the world economic center. You can talk A LOT about London. When the Saxons came to the island, they moved the conquered descendants of Celts and Romans to the eastern part of the city which was still considered the abode of the poorest and the most powerless citizens a thousand years later. The medieval London was practically an independant state and the Londoners didn't really care whether the King resided in their city or not. They weren't very thorough with the names of the streets and called them according to what they were famous for: you can still find a few Cock Lanes where the prostitutes made their living. London was always famous for its eminent citizens as well as foreigners who thought it their duty to visit the city. Moore and Dickens, Shelley and Woolf, Doré and Casanova, Heine and Dostoyevsky wrote about London. You can even find recollections of the guests from the USA, Peru, and Japan. Ackroyd mentions everything, in particular the strangest aspects of city life which other writers would never think of writing about. There's information about language and literature, geography and suburban area, rivers and underground, law and lawlessness, prisons and madhouses, wars and fires, noise and silence, food and refuse, children and women, smog and artificial light. And if you're not impressed with this random list, you'll be definitely impressed with the minute details from the lives of people of different origin. There's an infinity of topics to explore.
