RIP Jonathan Enters a Sentence of William H Gass's Out there by the bare yard the woodshed stood in a saucer of sun where she once went to practice screaming her cries and the light like two cyclists passing on a narrow road, the light coming in through cracks between the shed’s warped boards, the ax she wouldn’t handle, its blade buried in an ash tree’s stump the shed had been built around so the stump would still be of service though its tree had had to come down, dad said, it would have a life like an anvil or a butcher’s block because as long as you had a use you were alive, birds flew at the first blow, consequently not to cry that the tree’d been cut, groaning when it fell its long fall, limbs of leaves brushing limbs of leaves as though driven by a wind, with plenty of twig crackle, too, like a sparky fire, the heavy trunk crashing through its own bones to groan against the ground, scattering nests of birds and squirrels, but now she was screamed out, thinned of that, or the thought of the noble the slow the patiently wrought, how the tree converted dirt into aspiration, the beautiful brought down, branches lofty now low and broken, the nests of birds and squirrels thrown as you’d throw a small cap, its dispelled shade like soil still, at toppled tiptop a worm’s web resembling a scrap of cloud, it should have been allowed to die in the sky its standing death, she’d read whatever there is of love let it be obeyed, well, a fist of twigs and leaves and birdspit rolled away, the leaves of the tree shaking a bit yet, and the web whispering what was left In this review, rather than speak about how great these stories are, and how essential Gass is for anyone interested in words, and what they are capable of doing, instead of that I intend to wander a little inside this long, limpid, convulsing sentence and thereby attempt to gain a little insight into the craft of a Master. As Gass has pointed out in interview, we are taught to avoid rhyme, assonance and alliteration in prose. Editors are apparently prone to committing unilateral genocide against any evidence of such techniques. As Readers, we should therefore be grateful for those Writers with Egos large enough to let them stand their ground… What editorially-transgressive joys can we find in this sentence? A brief skimming sights the following: "there" "bare" "wood" "stood" "wouldn't" "bones" "groan" "die" "sky" "by" "bare" "boards" "blade buried" "butcher's block because" "birds" "blow" "brushing" "bones" "birds" (again) "beautiful brought" "branches" "birds" (again!) "be" "birdspit" "bit" "stood" "saucer" "sun" "she" "screaming" "shed" "stump" "shed" "stump" (lovely repetition there) "service" and on and on with "shade like soil still" and "scrap" and many more. "toppled tiptop a worm's web" There is much more, of course, though this suffices to demonstrate the point, not to mention all the consonance, assonance and other evidence of Craft contained in this single, though admittedly long, sentence. Alliteration is one of Mr Gass's favourite techniques, and it has, of course, a long and important history within the development of the English language. It formed a cornerstone of Anglo-Saxon literature, and has remained part of our heritage for over a thousand years, and yet a simple Google search finds hundreds of pages advising aspiring writers to keep it out of their prose, lest they "distance" the reader. But distance us from what? Distance us from the "story"? From the fact that we are reading a series of words placed in a certain order on a page by another human being? Why on earth would we want to be distanced from that? The Writer's Consciousness on display at every turn of phrase is a gift to the Reader, and an act of intellectual honesty. We should be grateful for it. Some criticism of Gass submits that his characters lack clear, authentic voices; that it is Gass himself that speaks through and around and over them. Well of course it is, how could it be anything other? Do we criticise Egon Schiele because every line of every one of his portraits is so recognisably his? If I wish to write from the perspective of a mute character, must every page be blank? The intent is not to create someone "real", and to pretend to do so is a lie. But, just as Schiele's paintings tell us so much about our own Being, and the Being of others, so can these long, twisted and twisting sentences of William H Gass. That they are, whatever this word is worth, Beautiful and filled with Music, is an added pleasure. His sentences wait for us to slip into them, as though into a warm and complexly scented bath. I will stay in until I wrinkle.
