With Coming Winter, DCJ wraps up several of his previous stories. At times, it seemed like the book had too many components, but the ending was certainly 5-star level. While I highly recommend it to people who have read Elkhorn Tavern and Roman, I think readers unfamiliar with DCJ's novels might appreciate the rich tale more after reading the earlier books first. *** The linked and quoted review from the New York Times does contain spoilers. (Caveat - the review contains at least one notable mistake.) http://www.nytimes.com/1989/12/02/boo... "Books of The Times; Defining the Western, and Two Current Examples By Herbert Mitgang Published: December 2, 1989 Come Winter By Douglas C. Jones 418 pages. Donald Hutter Book/Henry Holt. $19.95 Outlaw By Warren Kiefer 518 pages. Donald I. Fine Inc. $19.95. To get into the right frame of mind for a couple of westerns - normally not my patch of sagebrush - I reread ''The Virginian'' by Owen Wister. The 1902 novel, ancestor of the classic western, turned out to be not only corny and flag-waving but also intolerant and reactionary by today's standards. The story includes sentimental lectures on Americanism that sound like a jingoist speech by Theodore Roosevelt, to whom the book is dedicated. It does have two scenes -of the toe-kicking cowpoke meeting the pretty New England schoolmarm and the traditional walk-down with pistols in the last reel - that have often been copied and, of course, one enduring line: ''When you call me that, smile!'' It's hard to disagree with Alexander Woollcott, who branded him ''Owen Wisteria.'' Westerns have come a long way since Wister. As with other genre fiction, the best are really full-fledged novels and not strictly western except in their locales. In ''Come Winter,'' Douglas C. Jones proves himself a strong storyteller who knows the territory - in this case, rural Arkansas, where he lives. In this novel he has created a family drama set against national events at the end of the 19th century, when clashing views about Reconstruction still existed between traditionalists and freebooters moving into the Western territories. ''Come Winter'' is the last of several novels in a saga, but the story stands on its own. Among his previous books - not part of the saga - are ''The Court-Martial of George Armstrong Custer'' and ''Arrest Sitting Bull.'' The family patriarch is a man named Roman Hasford, a former cavalryman with memories of chasing the Cheyenne in Kansas. The novel swings from the end of the Civil War to the Spanish-American War. The wealthy Hasford, a banker and political power broker, has a childhood friend who is black. Hasford insists that his friend be entitled to hold property, which does not sit well with many of his neighbors. Nor do they appreciate Hasford's employment of a Jewish bookkeeper at his bank. A confrontation builds between Hasford and the narrow-minded proprietor of the local newspaper, who - in those days of free-swinging, libelous journalism - calls Hasford money-grubbing and a turncoat who believes in racial mixing. After the black man is murdered, the town, including the local prostitute, clams up. Hasford decides to get to the bottom of the case in his own way. From Kansas he imports a professional killer, a cool one-armed veteran who knows how to make people talk. In one of the most dramatic scenes in the novel, the hired killer tosses a roll of greenbacks on the prostitute's table and then takes out his sheath knife and plunges it into hot coals. Hasford's man gets the evidence he needs to avenge the black man's murder. ''Come Winter'' includes a townful of characters, with women as tough as the men, building fortunes in new businesses where the railroads reach. Mr. Jones has created real people in a sympathetic story that covers an authentic corner of the West."
