Kate Chopin (1850-1904) offers a magnificent glimpse into 19th-century Louisiana, where many people – including the author herself – were of Creole descent. I was not aware of the original meaning of that term, which apparently only shifted after the Louisiana Purchase. The Awakening is set within this particular community. “You are burnt beyond recognition,” he added, looking at his wife as one looks at a valuable piece of personal property which has suffered some damage. On the surface, the story is straightforward: a married woman falls in love with another man, questions her marriage, then finds herself torn by her dilemma. Chopin was ahead of her time, however, turning the narrative into a striking exploration of defiance and female sexuality. Edna Montpellier is a memorable protagonist, paving the way for later literary characters like Countess Ellen Olenska in Edith Wharton’s The Age of Innocence or Laura Brown in Michael Cunningham’s The Hours . Her journey is less about men and more about conventions in general. The moment she stops conforming to societal norms, society quickly closes in on her. Ultimately, Edna finds herself torn between desires and expectations. The sentiment which she entertained for Robert in no way resembled that which she felt for her husband, or had ever felt, or ever expected to feel. She had all her life long been accustomed to harbor thoughts and emotions which never voiced themselves. They had never taken the form of struggles. They belonged to her and were her own, and she entertained the conviction that she had a right to them and that they concerned no one but herself. According to the introduction, The Awakening was a response to ‘male fantasies’ as expressed in Henry James’ The Portrait of a Lady . I haven’t read that book, but I am enthusiastic about Kate Chopin’s novel. Her female perspective in a male-dominated world is both interesting and well-articulated. It also taught me more about colonial history in the United States.
