These are fun! And I'm glad I decided to re-read them. I devoured this whole Witch saga when I was a kid, a couple years before I graduated to reading the likes of Christopher Pike, R.L. Stine, Caroline Cooney, etc ( and from there it was a slippery slope to VC Andrews and Ann Rice...with a bit of Stephen King mixed in for that decidedly macabre male perspective ). And I can probably trace my lifelong fascination for anything and everything Witchy to this series. Well, this series and The Headless Cupid . I love "Gateway" books, don't you? Ha ha! You think Harry Potter did corrupt me? Oh honey, wait... In this first one, we meet Lynn, a super imaginative tween with nothing better to do than spy on her quirky, reclusive old neighbor, Mrs. Tuggle. Lynn obviously watches waaaaay too much Scooby Doo, because after some 'detective work,' she begins to suspect the poor old lady is a witch. And not the actual sort of witch who collects crystals, coordinates her life to the moon phases, and is into the whole Girl Power Goddess thing. No... we're talking the "Come Little Children/I'll Get You My Pretty" sort of witch of popular, if misguided, mythology. The sinister sort who deals in black magic like a gambler deals in poker chips. Granted Mrs. T isn't the friendliest sort, but really, Lynn? Really?? Someone get this poor bored child a paper route or sign her up for some summer classes. Perhaps some creative writing where she can put her imagination to use. Kiddo really has waaaaaaay too much free time on her hands! All this wouldn't be so bad if Mrs. T kept her witchy workings to herself, but now she's involved Lynn's older sister, Judith, whom she hired to help with odds and ends around her house. Worse, Lynn's parents are going out of town and put Judith in charge. Also, where did that mysterious boy come from? He's certainly not Mrs. T's relative as everyone claims he is, but rather a demon conjured up from the depths of the nether-world. There's evil afoot, Lynn is sure of it, and she (and her friend Mouse) are the only ones who can put a stop to it. I loved how there was so much back and fourth in this book. Is she or isn't she? I can't wait to re-read the rest of the series.
