This book is a beautiful imaginative work, full of love, full of analysis, full of humour and light cynicism. Does that sound quite the mixture? It is. How to describe? Post-modern Middlemarch. Erudite Neo-Victorianism. Playful examination of the way we are all, or all fated to be, fossils. In Chapter one we are plunged into the sea air of Lyme Regis on a stormy day. It is 1867. Sarah Woodruff, nicknamed “Tragedy,” or “The French Lieutenant’s Whxxx,” gazes out to sea. She is almost universally despised, but Charles Smithson, out walking with his fiancée, pauses, and wonders. And we begin a tale – simple on many levels, an age-old story – infused with sunshine, ammonites, accents, class, change, emancipation, and Tennyson, Darwin, Matthew Arnold, Marx, Sartre and an authorial voice firmly rooted in the late-sixties, which comments on every aspect of his text, his characters, the times they lived in, the forces shaping them, the strains in a smothering society that is beginning to groan at the seams. A scene in which Charles goes fossil hunting comes to me often, to remind me that what is right, or appropriate, is very much a symptom of the society we live in. Charles goes collecting along the beach in fussy, heavy Victorian clothes and nailed boots. How can he not have seen that light clothes would have been more comfortable? That a hat was not necessary? That stout nailed boots on a boulder-strewn beach are as suitable as ice-skates? Well, we laugh. But perhaps there is something admirable in this dissociation between what is most comfortable and what is most recommended…. If we take this [19th century] obsession with dressing the part, with being prepared for every eventuality, as mere stupidity, blindness to the empirical, we make, I think, a grave – or rather a frivolous – mistake about our ancestors; because it was men not unlike Charles, and as over-dressed and over-equipped as he was that day, who laid the foundations of all our modern science. Their folly in that direction was no more than a symptom of their seriousness in a much more important one. They sensed that accounts of the world were inadequate…they knew, in short, that they had things to discover, and that the discovery was of the utmost importance to the future of man. We think (unless we live in a research laboratory) that we have nothing to discover, and the only things of the utmost importance to us concern the present of man. So much the better for us? It goes on, allowing Charles to remove his shoes in a school-boy moment of abandon, considering the way that broad learning was appreciated then, and specialization now and coming to dwell on the explosive new (to the Victorians) Darwin, and the more recently relevant understanding of species extinction. Some readers find this relentless breaking of the fourth wall on the author’s part distracting. It is distracting. But it’s what makes the book. It is a realist novel at war with itself. Or not at war, that suggests it is trying to be something it is not. And this novel is joyfully and exuberantly what it is: unique, questioning, playful, digressive, profound. As a lover of Victorian fiction who is not much a lover of neo-Victorian fiction, this was the best of both worlds in a way, a text that is self-aware enough to comment on what annoys the modern reader in a 19th century work (or at least what annoyed the reader of 1969), while unapologetically embracing the 19th century novel itself. And so Charles’s interjections of “My dear Miss Woodruff!” and similar are interrupted by observations by the author on the nature of Victorian chastity, or by the observation that in the nineteenth century “more churches were built than in the whole previous history of the country; and one in sixty houses in London was a brothel.” Later, Fowles brings his post-modern flourishes to bear not only on the Victorians and the hidden strata of their character, but on the nature of fiction itself: Who is Sarah? Out of what shadows does she come? I do not know. This story I am telling is all imagination. …If I have pretended until now to know my characters’ minds and innermost thoughts, it is because I am writing in (just as I have assumed some of the vocabulary and ‘voice’ of) a convention universally accepted at the time of my story: that the novelist stands next to God. He may not know all, yet he tries to pretend that he does. But I live in the age of Alain Robbe-Grillet and Roland Barthes; if this is a novel, it cannot be a novel in the modern sense of the word. And Fowles, despite his disclaimer, comes very close, like my beloved George Eliot, to being God. His is a voice I would trust a great deal, even when I know he is playing with me. Among my readings, the novel’s closest relations are Tom Stoppard’s Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead and Arcadia , and John Gardner’s Grendel : literature from the height of postmodern experimentation by writers to unabashedly love earlier periods. All these works are warm-hearted in a way; their experimentation never becomes cold or overly precious, because it is infused with love for literary history and, I feel, a great gentleness for these long-dead and indecipherable fictional people. A book that I think would hold up to an infinite number of readings, and a firm favourite of mine.
