I would have given this book a lower rating because it seemed like it would never end. But if anyone wants an elaborate, in-depth, all-you-want-to-know-about-alien abduction book, this is it. We first read about a background of how the author got into this field of hypnotizing people who claim to be alien abductees. It was interesting to learn that a popular story about alien abduction happened in 1961 to Barney and Betty Hill that was later made into a movie. (The UFO Incident, 1975). A main part of this book has us reading the actual hypnosis sessions with several individuals. After several years and hypnosis sessions with many people, the author devised a matrix of three tiers the abductees may or may not go through. They are eerily similar and not only scary, but frustrating. No one wants to be abducted, and for the most part, the abductees are powerless to stop them from happening. One can believe the tales or not, but many theories have been debunked and no alternative has emerged giving a better answer of what's going on. I came up with two main thoughts. I agree that the hypnosis sessions by different people were somewhat similar...the way the aliens looked, what was done to them, and the surroundings. But the movie Fire in the Sky, which came out a year after this book was published, seemed different. All of the abductees in the book were only gone at the most a few hours, where the movie had the abductee gone for days. In the book, if there were other people around the abductee when they were taken, no one seems to notice. Where as in the movie, the friends of the abductee who were in the car with him knew about a strange circumstance that occurred and he disappeared. My next main thought is, if alien abductions are true, not much has changed or has been done since this book was published. As the author points out, if he found out that alien abductions were completely false and just made up, it would be wonderful, since these abductions are just cause for anxiety and making one's life a mess.
