To say the least I did not enjoy this book. The dialog is forced and cringe worthy, the characters do not develop at all, the plot is predictable and very basic. It takes a lot for me to not like a book but this book definitely did it. The only reason I stuck with it till the end (which, was by all means utterly predictable) was because it was a book read for school and refusing to read school material can do a toll on your grade. The characters are stagnant and don't change over the course of the entire book. You never get attached to the characters they are not established enough for you to do so. And the character you get to know a little are irritating and get on your nerves. Sorry, Lessie but you deserved pneumonia for being such a nuisance. What about Scylla? or Katie? They should be more involved in the story. The book would have been a better read through the eyes of Scylla or Katie. There are ten main characters and I can name about six of them and tell you maybe one or two things about four of the characters. I usually am very invested in the character throughout a story but this book made this incredibly hard to do. And what is the moral? Don't let robots take your jobs? New beginnings are needed to keep from make the human population extinct? If you know please tell me. Although this was a cautionary story they talk about now modern technology like its exotic and foreign and won't be invented for another 150 year but spoiler alert these things are happening now. Don't even get me started on the plot it is predictable in every way shape and form. No, i'm not done yet. I haven't even gotten started, next stop on the pity train is the dialog. The dialog in this so called book is the most forced and awkward conversations you will ever read. No one talks like that and if you do I feel bad for you. Example (no big spoilers): “No way! Oh, for a little hot chicken soup. My throat-” “Why don’t you just pipe down, Rich, before I make your sore throat worse?” “What’s happened to you all? You just awful!” “Jogging. I looked for our old place. But I couldn’t find it.” (page 124) Ect. I would find another better example but if I look at this book again I might throw it out the window. Am I the only one we thinks the characters talk like robots? This has nothing to do with the quality of the book but THE COVER makes me want to barf. I screams. Cool, futuristic, adventure that is if you think an outdated drawing of a cheesy girl wearing a headset is adventurous . This cover was made in the 90's I am begging someone to please give this book a cover update. And um the girl on the cover is wearing an orange jumpsuit it clearly states several times throughout the book that the jumpsuit are plan and gray-green. Proof (no big spoilers): "There was every possible size to chose from, but otherwise they were an identical greenish-gray" (page 61) The only reason it gave this book two stars instead of one is that I do see the thinking behind this book and can see how this could be an amazing tale. But, instead it is a crappy excuse for a book that seems as if the pages where slapped together and put under and cover that makes me ill. And if you still want to read this book after reading my rant, you should skim it. It might be a good skim book. Thanks for reading my rant.
