With a Little Help from My Friends by The Beatles What would you think if I sang out of tune Would you stand up and walk out on me Lend me your ears and I'll sing you a song And I'll try not to sing out of key Oh, I get by with a little help from my friends Mm, I get high with a little help from my friends Mm, gonna try with a little help from my friends What do I do when my love is away Does it worry you to be alone? How do I feel by the end of the day Are you sad because you're on your own No, I get by with a little help from my friends Mm, I get high with a little help from my friends Mm, gonna try with a little help from my friends Do you need anybody I need somebody to love Could it be anybody I want somebody to love Would you believe in a love at first sight Yes, I'm certain that it happens all the time What do you see when you turn out the light I can't tell you but I know it's mine Oh, I get by with a little help from my friends Mm, I get high with a little help from my friends Mm, gonna try with a little help from my friends Do you need anybody I just need someone to love Could it be anybody I want somebody to love Oh, I get by with a little help from my friends Mm, gonna try with a little help from my friends Mm, I get high with a little help from my friends Yes I get by with a little help from my friends With a little help from my friends An amazing and remarkable story about friendship. what is a friendship? Friendship is like the sun above thats always shining bright, Friendship is like a golden smile that warms the coldest night, Friendship is a priceless gift of faithfullness and grace, and nothing in this world could ever take true friendships place... The story is so sobering but touchful, u'll learn more about how to be a good friend, to be a good man for your brother even he was dead. how to be a meaningfulman in short life. Gosh, I love this short novel so much. Unforgettable characters and absolutely magnificient story. something in this book will make me read it again, and again, and again. haunts me by a warm feeling. and... this book has made me remembered my old friend who's dead :( Wonderful people are carefully created by God Wonderful moments are carefully planned by God, Wonderful friends like you are carefully gifted by God Hundred words does not give pain. But a true friend silence makes more tears in heart. Make your life a house your heart can live in. With a door that is open to receive friends. And a garden full of memories.... of many good things But friendship is precious, not only in the shade, but in the sunshine of life; and thanks to a benevolent arrangement of things, the greater part of life is sunshine
