I'm in a bit of an odd position with the Arthurian original sources I read. I'm forever referring back to the Boorman 'Excalibur' movie as a reference (which I still love, and has set the tone for all future Arthurian stories for the rest of my life), and I'm dancing around Malory's 'Le Morte D'Arthur' which has been sitting on my shelves for a very long time. I guess, in order (in my mind) to fully appreciate Malory's famous work, I feel like I should be doing my homework i.e reading more original sources and commentaries, which I am slowly doing. This story, according to introduction, is the third romance in the Vulgate cycle, which I am reading horribly out of order. Having read the second part, 'The Quest for the Holy Grail' somewhat recently, and having recently obtained a copy of the first part 'Lancelot of the Lake' but not actually read yet, I seem now in a position to follow up, at some stage with 'Lancelot' in order to complete the basic French Romantic cycle familiar to Malory. As anyone familiar with Arthurian texts, there are many more narratives pre- and post- Malory to follow up on, a decent selection of which I have in the wings. The introduction also lays out, in quick order, the tone of this romance, in as much as it tells us right from the outset that there will be 'none of that absurd fantasy that fills most French romances of the period', that in this romance, 'the turning points are dictated by human psychology instead of otherworldly events.' For that warning, I was rather appreciative, as I would likely have been far more disappointed with this version had I gone in otherwise uninformed. As stated, I am very fond of the Boorman 'Excalibur' movie which is drenched in the supernatural, heavy in allegory and symbolism and oozing in magic and 'otherworldly events'. I do expect the supernatural world to mirror the world of Arthur and the Holy Grail, and I do expect the Death of Arthur and the end of the Knights of the Round Table to have spiritual and mythic resonance. And I am quite fond of 'The absurd fantasy' that is associated with Arthurian tales. There is precious little of any of that present in this version of the Death of Arthur. Alas. Despite all of that, it does come across as a fine tale, with many of the usual suspects (Merlin, apart from one mention, is otherwise absent, as one would expect given the warning in the intrduction). I was struck by the event that set the entire story in motion, triggered by a knight called Avarlan and his attempt to poison Sir Gawain. The poisoned fruit is intercepted unknowingly by Guinevere and handed on to another knight, who died, seemingly at the hands of the queen. A tragic series of events unfold from this, resulting in the tragic end for Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, all teased out admirably from this one event. Yet the knight in question, Avarlan, is neither mentioned previous to or after this pivotal event. As an agent of the destruction of all that is good and noble, he is otherwise an inconsequential character, which rather reduces the downfall of Arthur to almost a random event, rather than as machinations from an important character (yes, such as Morgana in the Boorman movie, I know, I should stop comparing). Perhaps this is what was meant by 'none of that absurd fantasy' being present in this romance, including, seemingly, Fate. Apart from my gripe about Avarlan, as stated, the consequences from this one action are teased out masterfully and alarmingly, with each step making sense in the context of the story, until Arthur's nobleness ends up being his weakness at the end, with his refusal to ask for Lancelot's help leading up to the final battle. Every step is well argued or justified from the character's point of view, made the more tragic gived we all know what's looming. A few little exchanges between characters come across as a bit odd or less than knightly, but otherwise each character well represents their station, such as it was at the time. All in all, a fine Arthurian read, even if the 'fantasy' is largely absent.
