This is a reread for me. I'm slowly rereading all my old favorite authors from high school, to see if it's worth retaining them in my library. I was pleasantly surprised by rereading another Victoria Holt novel recently, so I thought another of her books, set in French wine country, would perfect for a vacation in (German) wine country. In a way it was. It was an appropriate vacation read. Just not a great book. I feel like every time I reread a gothic romance that I read as a teen, I see the similarities to Jane Eyre, and this story was no exception.The first wife was dead, but otherwise there were so many similarities. In theory, I love Jane Eyre, so realizing a book is in the same lines isn't a problem for me. But it still needs to be well written and enjoyable, and this story simply didn't do that for me. Dallas is an impulsive, emotional, inconsistent, and even reckless character, impulsive and impetuous in her emotions as well as her actions. I appreciate that Victoria Holt didn't try to make her a standard shrinking violet romantic heroine, but how she was portrayed wasn't very likable, and often left me wondering how historically accurate and appropriate her life was. There were sections of text detailing the castle and the lands and communities around and in it that suggested Ms. Holt did a lot of research, and I mostly enjoyed those parts, even when they verged on info dumps. And I realize that a woman trying to gain acceptance and respect in a trained profession at that time would have had to be a strong character. but I just couldn't buy into the story. Dallas' internal narrative is simply too erratic. Instead of creating romantic and suspenseful tension, it just annoyed me. Lothair isn't a very appealing hero either, despite certain revelations that certainly shed a different light on his character. So I didn't love any characters in the book, and had a hard time believing or investing in the romance, so while I finished it, and really couldn't remember whodunit (and what they done) until the end of the story, I can't say I enjoyed myself a lot. the book did keep me occupied during boring travel times via plane and bus, but mostly I'm glad it's finished, and I'm going to give away my old copy and move on to something more enjoyable.
