The Green Darkness by Anya Seton is one of my favourite novels. I originally found my first copy of it in a laundry mat, I randomly picked it up for something to do while I was waiting and then I fell in love. I sadly stole that book from the laundry mat so I could finish reading it. In a twist of fate I have gotten and lost that book on three different occasions! The book is set in two different time periods with a Tudor setting and a more modern setting (well kind of more modern) of 1968. It is a beautiful and tragic tale of reincarnation, love, jealousy, envy and selfishness. Have you ever felt Deja Vu or looked at someone and felt you knew them? That theory is the basis for this book. Celia meets Richard on a luxurious cruise and it's love at first sight for the both of them. They have a whirlwind romance and quickly get married. Celia moves into Richards country estates in England and that's where things begin to change for them. It culminates in a weekend party where all the players in an ancient drama get together again causing Celia to return to the past to fight the evil that afflicts her love/life in the course of a couple of life times. To me the really interesting part is that the author is known for her historical writing and this book follows that genre as well. Obviously we don't know if the reincarnation is real but the base story from the Tudor Era actually is. There is evidence about a priest written in a family's chronicle book as well a woman who was walled alive in another manor house from the same time era. Most likely these two events have nothing to do with each other but I love how she blended the two of them together to make an amazing and beautiful story. So if you are looking for something new to read and you love historical or paranormal romance then I would most definitely suggest this novel! The language is lovely and you genuinely feel as if you get to know Celia and Richard throughout the novel and feel bad for them as things just never seem to go the way they would have liked. Hopefully you enjoy this book as much as I did!
