William Blake sometimes seems like a man out of all time and place – his ethereal pictures and his songlike, often incomprehensible poetry don't appear to be connected to any familiar schools or movements. They're just there: the products of a single, unique mind. He was doing outsider art before it had a name. Two factors made him an outsider – money (he didn't have any) and spirituality. His religious imagination was of a particularly vivid and active kind, the sort that would now doubtless be classed as mental illness and that even then was seen as disreputably ‘wild’ or ‘enthusiastic’. Blake lived amid a crowd of spirits: he spoke regularly with his dead brother, saw God at the top of the stairs and angels in the trees, and chatted to Apollo on Primrose Hill. And he mentioned such things in a matter-of-fact way in general conversation. Almost no one in his time saw him as an artist or writer. To most people, he was just ‘a harmless tradesman with some strange ideas’, as Ackroyd puts it. His trade was engraving, and this book is very good on the messy details of the craft, the slow, painstaking work that engraving required, the paraphernalia of copper and burin, the constant smells of sal-ammoniac and burnt walnut oil and verdigris. It was out of this labour that his own creations emerged – ‘Words were for him objects carved out of metal’ – but these never made any money and Blake remained a working engraver all his life, producing illustrations based on other men's art and making functional pictures for encyclopaedias and brochures. For the most part, the establishment's lack of appreciation for Blake was mutual. He alternated between feeling outrage at their failure to recognise his genius, and angry insistence that he didn't want or need their help. This could make him difficult for his small circle of friends and admirers. He thought little of almost all his contemporary artists, with the notable exception of Henry Fuseli (whom he called ‘The only man that ever I knew / Who did not make me almost spew’); like Fuseli, Blake had no interest in painting from nature (which he called ‘the work of the Devil’), and preferred a style based on wild inspiration – ‘an art of vision rather than verisimilitude or proportion’. There is a grim irony in the fact that all the then-famous painters, sculptors and engravers who undervalued Blake's work are now famous mainly for having known him. I confess I did not come to this biography as a devoted Blake fanboy. Ackroyd calls him ‘the greatest and least respected of eighteenth-century artists’, but takes the first half of the hypothesis for granted. The main impression here is of a working engraver who did some pictures and verse in his spare time; I waited vainly for an explanation of why his work is so significant. Blake's death comes on the last page, so there is no space for any discussion of how subsequent artists took up his ideas. I have always been puzzled, for example, by Blake's personal mythology – as Ackroyd says, he is ‘the first English poet since Edmund Spenser single-handedly to create his own mythological reality’ – and I was looking forward to an explanation here of who exactly Urizen, Los, Orc and co. are. It never comes. What Ackroyd is really good at, as you'd expect, is the context, especially geographical. He does a great job of setting out Georgian London, from its religious manias to its industrial development, and he can tell you the name of every print shop, coffee shop and public house within a five-mile radius of Blake's home. He also treats Blake's visions and spiritual convictions with considerable sensitivity, giving you a good impression of having plausibly entered into Blake's interior life. And that's a strange place to be. Blake was driven by a mystical, Paracelsan view of reality, and inspired by Swedenborgians, Behmenists and various contemporary strands of sex-magic: ‘What are called vices in the natural world,’ he said, ‘are the highest sublimities in the spiritual world.’ It was partly this sensibility that made him so hard to fit in as the nineteenth century got going. Blake was from an older, earthier, more revolutionary time: ‘very much a product of the mid-eighteenth century, and he cannot be said to have adopted any of the moral attitudes of the new century, which would soon be labelled “Victorian”.’ His earthiness was part of a crazy fusion of turn-of-the-century angst – he saw ‘thwarted or concealed sexuality’ not as something to explore for titillation, but rather as something serious that ‘leads to war, industrialism and perverted science’, which was an insight that would not really get properly explored again until Freud. It makes me very curious to go back to his art and poetry in more detail; the happy consequence of being out of time and place is that you can be for all times and all places.
