There are many things I love about False Colours —the hero, Kit, is one of my favorite among Georgette Heyer’s men; his mother, Lady Denham, is one of her most perfect wigeons; and the Dowager and Sir Bonamy are delightful secondary characters. But the novel makes its way only into my second rank of Georgette Heyer favorites because of the plotting. Kit Fancot, the younger of a pair of identical twins, comes home to London from his diplomatic post in Vienna because he has sensed that something is wrong with his brother, Evelyn, Lord Denham. He discovers that Evelyn is supposed to turn up the next evening at a gathering of the relations of a woman he has proposed to, Cressida Stavely; but Evelyn is missing. Kit agrees reluctantly to impersonate Evelyn at the party in order to keep Evelyn’s engagement to Cressy from being derailed. It turns out that Evelyn is absent longer than expected, so Kit has to take his place for more than just one evening. In the process he learns a lot about his mother’s disastrous debts and chaotic life, and he forms an inappropriate attachment. He must unravel the mystery of Evelyn’s disappearance and disentangle the scandalous sequelae for the story to reach its happy ending. The setup is well crafted and the first half unfolds very promisingly. In the early going I would have liked to have seen more scenes showing the untenable situation that Miss Stavely is in, rather than simply being told over and over that it is untenable; there was a missed comic opportunity in that situation, and the scenes would have attached us more to the heroine. In the second half of the book, the story becomes trapped at a country house and the action flags; comic minor characters such as Ambrose are underused. One or two other characters with crucial roles to play, such as Lord Brumby, never appear in person. There’s even a slightly uncomfortable undertone to the character of Evelyn, who seems almost bipolar to me. The final dilemma doesn’t seem to be as major a problem as it is made out to be, and its resolution—again described and not acted out—is only partial and feels like a letdown. Nevertheless, my love for the hero and delicious scenes like Sir Bonamy’s final undoing carry me through and make this a very pleasurable read. Cradled by Georgette Heyer’s delightful prose and hilarious dialogue, I notice the flaws only in retrospect.
