I've read quite a few of Heyer's novels and this one struck me as particularly interesting. Heyer is a legend among romance readers--her characters have depth, the events make sense, and while these are books with more talk than action, that talk is lively and always well written. Heyer's novels fall into a few categories: silly, young heroine marries worldly hero and the two agree to a "French" marriage, only to discover they are in love; older, independent, sophisticated woman finally meets a man that's up to scratch and is persuaded to marry; independent, free-spirited mature lady (i.e., in her twenties) wreaks havoc among society before finally being convinced to settle down; older woman resists a convenient marriage to an even older eligible bachelor, only to find that said bachelor is in fact in love with her. A Civil Contract isn't quite like any of those. Adam returns from Salamanca only to discover that his newly inherited estates are heavily mortgaged. His only choice is to sell the family seat or to marry a wealthy heiress. He gives in and weds plain (but loaded) Jenny Chawleigh, but sacrifices his own happiness in the bargain--settling for money means he can never marry Julia, the beautiful young woman he's been in love with for a few years. Practical Jenny decides at the outset that she's determined to make him comfortable, and so she sets up his house, makes sure his favorite macaroons are always around, has a son, and generally turns a blind eye to the fact that her husband practically drools every time Julia walks into the room. The usual antics ensue in which patient, devoted Jenny martyrs herself on the altar of domesticity and good housekeeping, while Julia turns out to be a selfish flirt. The novel is odd however: Jenny has a son. This is the only Heyer novel (to my knowledge) in which the heroine has a child. Given the awkwardness of many of the scenes between Jenny and her husband, the romantic fantasy is radically disrupted by the idea that (within the framework of the romance formula) these two practically perfect strangers are "breeding" (as Jenny puts it). Heyer even incorporates this break into the story itself: Julia, upon learning of Jenny's pregnancy, can only utter "Only to be expected. How--how stupid of me!" Julia could well be echoing the reader's own thoughts on this topic. The pregnancy, instead of drawing the couple closer together, has only heightened their conflicts and brought to the surface both Adam's emotional infidelity and his lack of respect for the excellent qualities in his wife. It is, in fact, only to be expected that even a marriage of convenience would result in children, and yet this is the only Heyer novel in which this occurs. Such a plot structure hardly bodes well for a satisfactory "happy ending." To Heyer's credit, she doesn't give in, either. It would be so easy to make Adam suddenly do a 180, but this is not a novel that can end happily--Adam is selfish and thoughtless. Jenny, despite her refreshingly prosaic nature, has determined to devote her entire life to making Adam comfortable and happy. The novel ends with Adam admitting that he loves his wife and that he couldn't do without her. Julia becomes "only a boy's impractical dream," but practical Jenny must admit to herself that Adam still loves his dream more than he loves his reality. Jenny argues to herself "they would have many years of quiet content: never reaching the heights, but living together in comfort and deepening friendship . . . I daresay I'm better off as things are." Once again, the romance reader cannot help but agree with such an assessment, and yet admitting Jenny is right is paramount to admitting the fallacy of romance fiction, in which "heights" and "deepening friendship" go hand-in-hand, just like the simultaneous orgasm. Heyer has written a wonderful anti-romance romance, and yet it seems very fitting to me that this should be her only one.
