warning: i am really into the babysitters club books. i started reading the original series shortly after the first book was released, in the summer of 1986. i was seven then, a fairly typical target age for the series. but i am almost thirty now & have yet to give them up! my childhood was such a total suckfest that i like to go back to re-visit the babysitters club books every now & again to re-live some of the better parts of being a kid. the "friends forever" series was long after my time. the original series ended with book #131, when mary anne's house burnt to the ground. by that point, in addition to the regular books, there were fifteen super special, over thirty mystery spin-offs, four super mysteries, a portrait collection, special edition books starring associate members, an entire enormous spin-off series about kristy's stepsister, karen, & even a spin-off from that series, focusing on karen's classmates. "friends forever" is a short series of twelve regular books & two specials bookending them, starring the original four members of the club: kristy, claudia (my fave as a kid--we even have the same birthday & [original--before i changed my name:] middle name), stacey, & mary anne. the "friends forever" books are somewhat similar to the "california diaries" series, another BSC spin-off starring california dawn & her dysfunctional buddies, in that it emphasizes the inter-personal difficulties & complications of early adolescence more than babysitting or the girls' bizarre over-involvement with neighborhood children. i had never read them before, considering them BSC Lite, but i scored the whole lot of them for like $4 off ebay, so i figured i'd give them a whirl. dude! they are awesome! like crack. i never read the sweet valley high series (i was totally creeped out by ANYTHING that seemed remotely sexual when i was a kid, even prince, who i now love) but this series seems like it appropriates the drama of sweet valley high & cleans it up for a middle school (or 29-year-old anarcha-feminist?) audience. kristy's big news in this book is that her deadbeat biodad, patrick, calls from california to say he is getting re-married, & he wants kristy & her two older brothers to attend the wedding. he forgets about poor david michael, who was just a baby when patrick walked out, altogether. at first charlie, kristy's oldest brother, refuses to go. he is PISSED. but kristy talks him into it & the whole experience is really awkward. charlie is a grumpus the whole time, while sam, the middle brother, jokes around & tries to make everyone happy. patrick lavishes attention on kristy, & she is conflicted between anger at him for suddenly wanting to be a dad now that it's convenient for him, versus all those kid feelings of wanting to think your parents are okay people, despite all evidence to the contrary. DUDE, I SO RELATE! kristy really likes patrick's fiancee, zoey, & even thinks maybe zoey is too good for patrick. charlie & patrick finally have a big fight, all the kids stand in solidarity with each other, but then they decide you only get one dad & they might as well go to the damn wedding. so they do. but they still kind of think patrick sucks. i relate to everything they are feeling, & i think they make really mature choices (attending the wedding so as to not wreck it for patrick, even though he's a douche)--i just question whether teenagers would really be this mature. i know people ten or twenty years older that wouldn't be able to handle it. i was surprisingly into this book, considering that kristy always bored the pants off me during the BSC days. but it was really interesting to see her relationship with sam & charlie fleshed out a little bit more, & to see them interact with patrick & react to the fact that he abandoned them as children. that is what i like about this series: it seems to answer some lingering questions & fill in some gaps from the regular BSC books. kristy always seemed to really have it together, despite having this big trauma in her past. even in her own books, she could be a bit of a caricature, just talking about sports & bossing everyone around all the time. she seemed more like a real 13-year-old kid (yes, the time warp is still in effect; supposedly this book takes place during the summer before 8th grade AGAIN!) going through some real turbulent emotions this time. i can't believe i wrote so much about a BSC book. everyone will defriend me now.
