For all the detail Tacitus goes in to, this is a fast paced introduction to a turbulent year in Roman history. Emperor Nero has recently committed suicide and has been replaced by the elderly Galba who in short order is murdered by Otho who seizes the imperial crown only to commit suicide himself when Vitellius declares himself Emperor and marches on Rome, defeating Otho's army with an army drawn from the Rhineland frontier, but Vitellius doesn't get to enjoy being Emperor for long before he is executed by supporters of Vespasian who has left the siege of Jerusalem for his son to complete while he launches his claim for the Imperial throne. Pause for breath. This has taken place over the years 68 to 70AD. Tacitus' account of the course of the war is shaped by the role of the unpredictable and unforeseeable. Plans are made and the Generals have a fixed course of action but troops panic or are unexpectedly successful, battles develop almost by chance and loyalties change. Particularly enjoyable are Tacitus' prejudices. Natives are cowardly and fickle (although despite this opinion, they fight no less bravely). The plebeian soldiers are prone to swing from one extreme mood to the its opposite. While members of the upper classes have vices that are sadly too appalling to be detailed. Occasionally someone will meet with Tacitus' approval, generally for having committed suicide with appropriate dignity. On the subject of suicide, apparently if you are a messenger in Imperial Rome and your news is not believed, killing yourself is a sure way to convince people that you were telling the truth. This happens a couple of times during the course of the narrative. As unlikely as it sounds Suetonius mentions this in his life of Otho (one of The Twelve Caesars ). Reading between the lines Tacitus' views seem unusual even in the Roman world. For all his negative comments about Otho and Vitellius, both are described as having been cronies of Nero. If Vitellius is frequently shown eating and being greedy both he and Otho seem to have inspired affection and support from parts of the army and from the people of Rome. You are left with the feeling that perhaps the people of Rome liked these extravagant, larger than life figures and that their massive appetites better reflected the Roman way of life than Tacitus' ideas on virtue and old-fashioned discipline. If you enjoy The Histories then there is more along similar lines in The Annals of Imperial Rome , although admittedly the pace of it is somewhat less intense.
