RATING: 3.25 Although his heart belongs in Montana, Milo Milodragovitch has been living in Texas for quite a spell, having moved there to be with a woman by the name of Betty Porterfield. Despite having been married 5 times, Milo has not quite mastered the relationship thing; and all the signs are there that this one is going sour too. He is ostensibly the owner of a bar, but the reality is that the business is just a front for laundering money. He's actually a rich man, but bored with his life. So he dabbles in a bit of private investigating now and again. Settled down but not settled in, Milo is moved to change his circumstances when he has an encounter with a killer that leads him on to a quest that is hard to satisfy. He's going in a lot of different directions but ultimately finds some measure of peace, albeit at a very high price. Milo has turned 60 in this book, and there's a sense of world weariness. But never fear, he hasn't given up boozing, drugging and the pleasures of the boudoir. And a fairy tale ending is highly unlikely. Having read all of Crumley's Sughrue and Milo series books, I can state that the man is a master of the written word. The pages sing with the poetry of his prose with lyrical passages that leave the reader gasping at their beauty. However, the plotting generally tends to disappoint in his books. He turns his plot threads into strands of spaghetti, many of which never meet their sauce. The characters are well drawn, but Crumley operates in a whole different moral realm. Even though Milo is supposed to have cleaned up his act, he drank gallons of booze and snorted a million lines of cocaine. I generally feel like I need rehab after reading his books. In spite of Milo's recreational choices, he remains a knight in shining armor who tries to redress wrongs and defend the innocent. In this book, he's searching for a missing wife, proving a convicted man innocent, dealing with piles of killers and more. Milo's core of goodness in the midst of so much evil is what keeps the reader coming back to these books. They are dark but with just enough of a glimmer of hope that they aren't depressing. It's best to approach this book after reading some of the earlier books to understand just where Milo has been. He's the kind of character that grows on you. This is a book that a lot of people are not going to like. But I'm not one of them. The sheer beauty of his writing in spite of the weakness of some of the other narrative elements keeps me coming back to this series.
