UGH. I was feeling like something light, easy, and fun, but this just got so IRRITATING. And by that I mean Brady. Brady got irritating. He's supposed to be the dream guy. Masculine and dominant but also gentle and kind, with an adorable dog, and the 'flaw' of wanting to be too serious and committed too fast. Passionate, handsome, dreams of having children, is a successful doctor. But. He doesn't actually listen to Vanessa at all! There is zero empathy! Vanessa has bomb after bomb dropped on her after she goes back home. We learn that for the past 12 years she's had to deal with so much stress she's gotten an ulcer . It's gradually revealed that her father was an appalling man who cared little for her own feelings, kept her mother from communicating with her, and isolated her from the world (so much so that she knew nothing about the life of her best, closest friend) . On the night of her prom, he even filed rape charges against her boyfriend, which were completely unfounded, causing her to believe for years that she had been stood up . Her mother had a secret affair and was pregnant and had a miscarriage, AND her awful father threatened to try to take that baby away from her if she protested when he left with Vanessa . Oh, and on top of that, her mom is now marrying her best friend's dad . She has to try to figure out who she is as an individual, and determine if she's going to stay in her hometown, if she's going to keep performing on tour, and if she wants to be a teacher . Yet, when she explains to Brady that she's still working through all of those new, devastating details of her past, trying to determine who she wants to be, and whether she wants to commit to marrying him (him, a man she knew for a year when they were 18, and now has only been with for a few weeks), he is ridiculously impatient, insensitive, and not at all understanding. Can you cut the girl some slack, please?? He's just way, way too pushy. I certainly wouldn't have agreed to marry him that fast, if at all .
