2024 reread - 3.5 stars, lowered from my usual 5 stars for a Thirkell social comedy, set among the rural landed English gentlefolk of the 1930s and usually very entertaining. I first read this in 2011, left only a star review, wanted to review it for future reference- Thirkell is a comfort reread for me! She was prolific, producing a Barsetshire novel almost yearly, and as with any lengthy series, the quality varies. Now I know why I couldn’t remember a thing from my first read many years ago. This one is set on the cusp of World War II, only vaguely referenced here; in future books it takes center stage as beloved characters go off to fight, and those at home valiantly suffer blackouts, rationing and endless war work. I look forward to rereading those excellent books, some of her best, I think. This lighter than lightweight plot, about trying to stop development on a rural piece of county land, had several of Thirkell’s favorite characters - the pompous, self-centered windbag of an older man; the tired yet adoring younger wife around whom what action there is, revolves; the younger professional man and even younger handsome young swain, both imagining love for the wrong woman. There were funny, raucous meetings where county characters came together to gossip, make speeches and drink tea (and accomplish nothing). The young swain writes music, and willingly comes to play Gilbert & Sullivan for downtrodden Lord Bond, whose wife is one of those force-of-nature aristocratic women Thirkell does so well, who rule everyone around them with an iron fist. There are some very funny scenes, as one can expect from any Thirkell novel, all set in the rural, imaginary Barsetshire created by Victorian novelist Anthony Trollope. But I couldn’t help feeling that the author recycled several of her most memorable characters here, not entirely successfully for longtime fans who know better. The childlike, spoiled Mr. Middleton was a more annoying George Knox; the strong-willed, practical young woman was a more clueless Lydia; the tired, lonely wife, more of a caregiver at times, along with her young swain, and their painfully mismatched, never-to-be-spoken-of love has been done several times, and will be done again by this author, but not be such a downer! One is left with a vaguely unhappy feeling of futility and sadness for the exhausted Catherine - she’s such a good, patient, kind person, she deserves better. Anyway, knocked off a star and a half for not getting the usual Thirkell happy buzz I expect.
