“When Tenar is chosen as high priestess … everything is taken from her.” Ms LeGuin might think my interpretation of THE TOMBS OF ATUAN , the second entry in her now long-running EARTHSEA fantasy series, to be far wide of her intended mark. And other readers may well have different opinions and disagree with me completely. Be that as it may, I saw THE TOMBS OF ATUAN as a scathing allegorical critique of the evils of organized religion; the self-perpetuating nature of the patriarchy that created the religion (indeed, ANY religion) in the first place; the misogyny that is the fall-out of virtually every religion that exists (or has ever been created); and the resulting mental enslavement and denigration of self-esteem in adulthood that is created by the doctrine with which a child is brain-washed from the earliest moments of childhood! Whether it was by design or merely by happenstance, I found the entire first half of the novel plodding and repetitious and I’ll admit that I came very close to setting the book aside. But having finished the book, I now read that first half as a metaphor for a sacred scripture laying the almost universally tedious groundwork for an organized religion’s theology (mythology?) and outlining its doctrines. It was a personal revelation to conclude that this foundation was necessary to the strength of the entire novel whose beauty only began to peek through the dark clouds hiding it with the arrival of Ged Sparrowhawk. Consistent with my views on the novel as a whole, I saw Sparrowhawk’s arrival as a metaphorical stand-in for whatever set of life circumstances might give rise to that tiny spark of realization, courage, wisdom and strength to question the beliefs that have been beaten into you since infancy. Tenar ultimately comes to the understanding that she has self-worth; that the gods to which she had dedicated her life offered her nothing and took everything; that they were not actually gods at all; and that, whatever they actually were, intended that Tenar dedicate her life to serving their needs. For those lovers of plot-driven sword and sorcery medieval fantasy, I’d caution you that I don’t think THE TOMBS OF ATUAN will be your cup of tea. For those fantasy readers that are willing to put in more thought and draw some conclusions about what they’ve read, then I’ll most assuredly recommend the EARTHSEA series to you. Whether your thoughts mirror mine will remain to be seen. Definitely recommended. Paul Weiss
