Both Kate Bain and Julia Hunter have found happiness with men who are significantly their senior – or so it seems. Kate, who has been with the academic James for eight years, but refused to marry him, finds herself restless and unhappy, for seemingly little reason. She lives in James’ big house, working part time as a waitress and volunteering at a shelter for abused women but she sees a need for independence. To have a space that is hers, or hers and her daughter Joss’. She knows that she’s making James unhappy with her retreating but she can’t really think about other people right now. All she wants is a chance to be on her own and make her own way. Her daughter Joss has other ideas though. At fourteen, James’ house is her home, she has lived there since she was six. She has no desire to move out of her nice bedroom into a bedsit or rooms rented from someone else. She wants to stay with James and his cantankerous uncle Leonard, who lives in the house also, no matter what her mother says. Julia married TV presenter Hugh and gave up work to deliver two cherubic twins. At just over sixty, Hugh’s career in presenting is starting to wane – he’s reaching an age where most are shown the door and Julia finds that her career is starting to rise just as Hugh’s goes into decline. She has always known that by marrying such an older man, she would have to go back to work when he could no longer earn, in order to educate the twins and pay the bills. Julia is happy and excited when she is offered a rather lucrative presenting contract but this is marred when she’s told that they can only offer his by letting Hugh go. Although she knew that Hugh would always take such news hard, the extent to which he is affected by his enforced sort of retirement takes them both by surprise. Julia is lovely and patient and understanding and sympathetic but that only adds to Hugh’s misery and his reluctance to face the fact that he no longer has work and his pretty young wife is the breadwinner for the family. When James knocks an elderly lady off her bicycle one night coming home from work, it sets forth the chain of events that shape this novel. One moment will incite in Kate the frustration and unhappiness and urge her to leave. James and Hugh, lifelong friends, had once congratulated themselves on how lucky they were to have found love and happiness with young, beautiful, smart and happy women. Now both of their comfortable, happy lives are in upheaval. A little while ago I bought 4 Joanna Trollope books within a couple of weeks and I thought to myself that I’d better actually read one to see what it was like before I went and acquired her whole backlist or something. I had heard lots of people complimenting Daughters-In-Law which I also own but I picked this one to read first. Both Kate and Julia are in their thirties and their partner/husband are over sixty. I found the title of The Men and the Girls a touch patronising as lets face it, at thirty-something, they’re not exactly girls. The book opens with James knocking an elderly woman off his bike due to his forgetting his glasses and the darkness of the night. Instead of a sympathetic reaction from Kate, he gets scorn and it sets in motion the feeling of restlessness in Kate, the highlighting of the age difference. Her partner is someone who knocks old ladies off their bikes because he can’t see them. She’s also frustrated by James’ desire to make right with the old lady, who becomes a rather prominent part of the book, which merely seems as a vent for her feelings, an excuse and something to focus on. She’s not jealous in the romantic sense, as the lady is probably into her 80s, but she seems jealous irrationally, because she resents James going to see her and spending time with her, but she’s not particularly interested in spending time with James herself. Kate’s daughter Joss is a typical sullen teenager, black clothes, combat boots, badly cut hair, piercings, etc. At first she seems a bit typical but throughout the book she grows and evolves and actually becomes one of my favourite characters. I fully sympathized with her desire to stay in the house she has lived in for such a large portion of her life, and not move out into rooms Kate has rented in someone else’s house. She doesn’t want things to change, and although her and James have had a relatively distant relationship, her desire to stay with him makes them realise just how important they are to each other. Although never morphing into sunshine and lollipops, her relationship with James and with his Uncle Leonard is well written, believable and lovely. I have stepchildren and it’s a tenuous relationship, always. I found myself less interested in Hugh and Julia’s story line but I think the author herself was less interested in it also as it always seems to take a bit of a backseat to the story of James, Kate, Joss and Beatrice Bachelor, the spinster that James knocks off her bike. I liked them both well enough but they seemed less flawed, less involving than the chaos happening in the other story. Although I found it difficult to relate to both of the issues within the relationships (after all I’m not 60 and haven’t lost my job, nor am I discontent with my situation) I could relate to many of the interactions between the characters. I found this novel a pretty good introduction to a new author and I will be definitely reading the others I have soon (well soon-ish. My TBR pile is out of control!)
