the marriage is a transaction. she is short, squat, plain, and plump. her conversational skills are minimal; she is more comfortable with being dry and straightforward than sparkling and ironic. her tastes in decor and couture are what would be expected of a nouveau riche heiress: gaudy, loud, overdone, not the thing . he married her for her money. she understands this, but doesn't care: she has loved him for a very long while. we, the reader, rarely see inside of her; instead we are mainly with her new husband, a kind fellow who treats her kindly, but with some distance and no passion whatsoever. he is deeply in love with another, more vibrant woman. and so we see our heroine, Jenny Chawleigh, at a certain remove. no matter! Jenny is completely admirable and loveable, as the reader soon sees and, of course, as her husband eventually will. eventually. this is an amazing novel in so many ways. although it is formally a romance, there is very little of that in the book. instead the reader sees the lovers Adam Deveril and Julia Oversley slowly fall... out of love. theirs was the passion of youth; a passion that did not allow them to fully see let alone understand each other. I didn't realize that most of this book would be about Adam's restraint and his coping with his reduction in independence, his recognition that he must move past his pride at the transactional nature of his marriage, and of course his slowly dawning understanding of Jenny's worth, her strengths, the deep value she has as a human being, beyond her wealth that will save his sister and estate from destitution and abandonment. but Jenny remains on the sidelines for much of the novel. Adam must fall out of love with Julia before he begins to fall in love with Jenny. (and the same goes for Julia - she is no villain.) this slow waking does not happen until near the end of the novel. a long wait! but so worth it. I'm so grateful that Heyer made her protagonist a modest man of quiet, empathetic affect, rather than having him be one of her more supercilious, arched-eyebrow, man-of-style type heroes. I was able to feel some sympathy for him, as he ever so slowly woke up out of his dream-state in which Julia was the only person he truly loved. Heyer has given readers many dashing, lightly villainous dreamboats who are comfortable with a little (or a lot) of cruelty and much sardonic wit at the expense of the slower-witted. that sort of hero would have been a terrible fit for this gentle, wise and very adult tale of, well, becoming an adult. needless to say, Jenny had my fullest sympathies, from beginning to end. but I appreciate that Heyer did not stack the deck in her favor. she is an awkward thing, most definitely. Heyer made this quiet, stolid woman who is getting what she has dreamed of - but getting it in the worst sort of way - so dignified and careful, so understandable, so herself, that I was enchanted by her. I love that Heyer doesn't even allow the idea that Jenny has loved Adam for so long - despite him barely even registering her presence - any space on the page. that love is a subtle thing, in her words and actions, between the lines. but that understanding, undemonstrative, clear-eyed love is there all along. they are perfect for each other. what a uniquely affecting story! I've read nothing like it.
