In my younger, more innocent days I had no patience for the long-drawn affair of a Dickens novel. When I read Bleak House for the first time I devoured the first 200 pages and felt suddenly so full that the prospect of another 680 pages made me nauseous in anticipation. Each subsequent chapter went down painfully as though I were trying to swallow mud. I did manage to finish the book, however, and vowed thereupon never to read another Dickens novel again. The strange thing is, though, I digested the book—slowly and over the course of nineteen years, assimilating its girth as would, I imagine, the stomach of a whale. And before I knew it, the boredom had gradually crystallized and turned into the memory of pleasure. What? Am I nostalgic to the point of taking pleasure in the pains of yesteryear? Am I a retro-active masochist? No Ulysse, you are perfectly normal. You didn’t know it then, but what you read was a masterpiece. A novel essentially about waiting. Waiting for the fog to lift. Waiting for the sun to rise. Waiting for the rain to cease. Waiting for the streets to fill with people waiting for people to arrive. Waiting for the execution of a will. Waiting for an illness to subside. Waiting for your family’s forgiveness. Waiting for marriage. Waiting for death. Waiting for birth. Waiting, waiting, waiting. And you, Ulysse, you were waiting for the book to end. Bleak House that novel of endless deferment. Right from the start we are stuck in the mud. As much mud in the streets, as if the waters had but newly retired from the face of the earth. Dogs, indistinguishable in mire, horses scarcely better; splashed to their very blinkers. Foot passengers, jostling one another’s umbrellas, in a general infection of ill-temper, and losing their foot-hold at street-corners, where tens of thousands of other foot passengers have been slipping and sliding since the day broke (if the day ever broke), adding new deposits to the crust upon crust of mud, sticking at those points tenaciously to the pavement, and accumulating at compound interest. Mud accumulating at compound interest. Here we are trapped in a big mud machine whose sole purpose is to get us inside its wheels, so that they will keep turning while we run around in circles and accumulate interest mud. And become mud ourselves. Words, so many words, too many words caught in the wheels of a story splashing over us, covering us in mud. One wants to get away—but one can’t run in mud. Mud-words stick to the soles of one’s feet. Everything has taken on the slowness of a nightmare. Oh fascinating slowness! Nothing really happens. A lot of people die, but somehow death seems tributary to the plot, which like a muddy river flows implacably on towards nothing. And yet, you get a feeling of satisfaction when you have reached the last sentence and shut the book with a thud (for me Dickens can only be read in hardcover—he requires that final thud. And, another thing, make sure you chose an edition with a typeface you like, for you’ll be spending a lot of time looking at that typeface). When I was twenty-two the feeling I had on finishing the book was one of relief. I had finally gotten myself out of the mud, rid myself of Dickens and his glutinous sentences. The young me hated waiting. The young me wanted thrills—to live life to the fullest. Bleak House continually frustrated my need for immediate pleasure. I wanted to grab this loose baggy monster by the scruff of the neck and shake it, just like one might want to grab Vholes, Kenge and Tulkinghorn by the scruff of the neck and shake them . This time around my thoughts went more along these lines: yes, life is a succession of waiting for things to happen, which more often than not do not happen, but instead of doing nothing while waiting I might as well look around the room I am waiting in, which may happen to be the whole wide universe. And the people I am waiting with, I should pay attention to them too and observe the way they dress and sit and say certain things and the way their hands talk and the way the sunlight plays in their hair and listen to their stories and laugh with them and empathize with them and perform little acts of kindness that will make their lives a little lighter, and mine too. And waiting, well, isn’t waiting just another word for living? For isn’t the ultimate thing we are waiting for simply the end of all waiting? The end of waiting, the end of living. So while we’re waiting why not pick up a copy of Bleak House by Charles Dickens (hard cover, please) and ever so patiently and passionately and with the mud of his words in our mouths wind our thoughts through the labyrinth of waiting he wrote for us all to enjoy?
