Stacey has never been my favorite character, bit this book gets points for deviating from the usual formula (given that it starts with Stacey being in New York). Here are my notes: 1. I never realized that Stacey's parents were filthy rich to the point where her mom would buy jewelry out of boredom--and yet somehow, she was never described in the same way the girls would describe Mrs. Prezzioso). All the BSC girls' parents are well off (Kristy probably doesn't come off as rich because her executive mother is still a single mother with 4 kids), but holy shit. I always knew Stacey was sophisticated, but I didn't know that was code word for future socialite (the way Stacey describes her sophisticated New York best friend made me think of Ivanka Trump, and how teen girls used to be "discovered" in malls by predators). 2. Is it possible Stacey's dad died on 9/11? Since aging is an awkward thing in BSC world, he could be be in his 40s or 50s in 2001, but definitely still young enough to have not retired by that point, 3. Why did AMM want to so badly make Stacey someone who claim not to care about anyone being Black? Is it because Stacey would later hope her mom would move to one of those "nice neighborhoods in the Bronx" where the non-white people were few and between? There was also an odd scene between her and an unhoused woman, which I think is supposed to make Stacey look like someone who had some compassion for the unfortunate... but not enough to examine the root causes and to get the hell away when someone who literally had to live on the street could not hide her mental health issues (and really she was basically railing against capitalism, which WAS the reason she was in her situation)? 4. Why would someone as sophisticated as Stacey know anything about Star Trek? 5. I never realized before that Stacey McGill is Irish. Why didn't anyone ever go into detail about how she's Catholic, even if she only goes to church twice a year? 6. While making the pros/cons list on where she should live, guess which one of her BSC friends she lists last? Mal. Stacey, you met Jessi twice.
