I picked this up because Beth is re-reading the series and I needed something light. It's been years since I read the Trixie Belden books and I was surprised they held up at all . But I found this first one charming and way better written than Nancy Drew. (I read the Nancy Drew books when I was eight or nine and Trixie Belden at twelve, and I feel those are good ages for each even though Nancy is a few years older than Trixie.) So, impressions: 1. My parents bought me the Whitman reprints, the first 16, that were published starting in 1970. I had no idea this book was written in 1948. Trixie is way older than I thought, and that explains a lot about some of the details. Like, in one of the later books, Moms (what is up with that name?) takes Trixie clothes shopping and insists on buying her a girdle even though Trixie is maybe 13. Anyway, the point is, despite the age of the book (happy 70th birthday, Trixie Belden!) it comes across as fairly timeless because... 2. The characters are really well fleshed-out. Though the series went the way of Nancy Drew after book 6, when the writing was taken over by a series of writers under the pseudonym Kathryn Kenny, the first six were written by one woman, and she didn't just toss these off. They aren't perfect; in some ways they're still very old-fashioned to modern readers. But Trixie comes off as a realistic, slightly tomboyish adolescent, her friend Honey is realistically timid based on her background, Jim is a great mix of tough and tender, and the adults are all a lot of fun. My favorite of the side characters was always Regan, the Wheelers' groom, but they really all do come across as interesting, if not the kind of realistic we expect in contemporary YA fiction. 3. The story is a fun mix of serious, lighthearted, and ridiculous. Serious, because Jim's story is fairly tragic; lighthearted, because Trixie and Honey get into some funny troubles; ridiculous, because there are aspects of the plot that simply couldn't happen even in 1948. My memory is that I did not read this one first, I read the sequel first, so I already knew the details of how the mystery worked out. Seriously, guys, you didn't think to check the mattress? But I was still caught up in... 4. The friendship between Trixie and Honey and their friendship with Jim. I always identified more with Honey than with Trixie, mostly because Trixie is too bold for me, but I love seeing these very different girls develop a friendship that's based on their strengths making up for each other's weaknesses. Honey isn't as timid as she seems, and Trixie can be thoughtful. Jim is a lot less dismissive of them than I thought a boy of their era ought to be, which is refreshing, and I like how unflaggingly honest he is, even though the rogue in me thinks he could stand to learn how to tell a white lie or two. 5. Campbell strikes a great balance between the wish-fulfillment of Honey being a gazillionaire's daughter and Trixie being poor by comparison. Trixie doesn't instantly get to take advantage of her new friend's wealth, and Honey isn't a poor little rich girl--they both have things about their own lives they prefer and even envy the other for. I read the first two back to back because the second springboards off the first. It was a fun trip down Memory Lane, and even now I'm remembering the ones that stood out and look forward to revisiting them.
