Apart from being naturally diverse, the anthology is also very well balanced - the story plots, the literary influences, the social status of the characters, the topical conflicts – all form an exquisite mosaic of Japanese society in the first half of the 20th century. Upon finishing it, I have selected my favourites: of the total 25 texts, I ended up with 17 worth remembering – hence the reason behind my 5 out of 5 stars grading. The first three I liked the most are (1) The House of a Spanish Dog (A Story for Those Fond of Dreaming) - Haruo Sato: a surprisingly contemporary read, the story is about a man walking his dog while discovering a modern house in the middle of the forest. Despite being apparently inhabited (“on the corner of that desk lies a cigarette butt and from it, very gently, rises a thread of smoke”), the house’s only resident is a Spanish dog who, after an initial unfriendly clash with the man’s own dog, becomes curiously matey. The man occupies this space and, while having the lunch he had previously packed, he is waiting for the master of the house to appear. (2) Autumn Mountain - Ryunosuke Akutagawa: the celebrated reputation of a renowned painting leads a famous art collector to make an appointment to see it. Upon contemplating its beauty, the man is amazed and consequently tries to unsuccessfully buy the painting. The memory of the painting remains vivid and the master describes it to its pupil, who, years later, has the chance to see it in the house of another art collector who had managed to acquire it in the meantime. The viewing is auspicious, since the master has been invited as well to view the work of art after all those years. While contemplating the painting he has the feeling that it is not the same masterpiece which has bewitched his youth. (3) Shotgun - Yasushi Inoue: is the story of a love affair among the wealthy living in an exclusive Japanese suburb. Told from the viewpoints of three different women, the story starts with a writer who, upon publishing a poem about a lonely hunter carying a shotgun whose sight impressed him, is contacted by a the hunter himself. The hunter is moved by the poem and reaches out sending three letters addressed to him by three important women of his life. It is thus that we find out about the love affair between the hunter and his wife’s cousin. First viewed through the eyes of the lover’s daugher, who learns of the affair while reading her mother's diary, then through the eyes of the hunter’s wife, who had long known about the affair, and finally through the eyes of the hunter’s lover herself. The following thirteen I will only name in the order of their appearance: (4) Order of the White Paulonia - Shusei Tokuda (5) Hydrangea - Kafu Nagai (6) Seibei’s Gourds - Naoya Shiga (7) Tattoo - Jun’ichiro Tanizaki (8) On the Conduct of Lord Tadanao - Kan Kikuchi (9) Brother and Sister - Saisei Muro (10) Charcoal Bus - Masuji Ibuse (11) The Moon on the Water - Yasunari Kawabata (12) Nightingale - Einosuke Ito (13) The Hateful Age - Fumio Niwa (14) Downtown - Fumiko Hayashi (15) A Man’s Life - Taiko Hirabayashi (16) The Idiot - Ango Sakaguchi (17) Tiger Poet - Ton Nakajima This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
