A Gun for Sale and This Gun for Hire are the same book originally published in 1936. I looked but could not find why it was published under two separate names and am relatively sure different dates. The library book I read was This Gun for Hire. I haven’t read that the books are different in any way with each word being identical. [image error] First Edition Cover Raven, by the way, is a lovely last name for a villain/hero. The name conjures up brooding, dark, dank, dismal and Edgar Allen Poe for some reason. And it’s his God given (well by his wonderful mother who really, really cares for him, snicker, snicker . And his dad is only famous in Raven’s household for being publicly hanged. Poor dear Raven, who’s a paid assassin with a harelip; a dead giveaway for his chosen profession. He does his job, does it well and then gets swindled so off he goes to find the swindler and rightfully so, in my opinion. Damn, poor hairlipped Raven and then gets ripped off. What's with that? Who’s behind this caper, this rip-off? Raven is going to hunt down that bastard pig. Ahhh, here comes the bright-eyed bushy tailed already fallen in love, Anne. Her true love, a Scotland Yard detective, Mather, just happens to be on the tail of an unknown and unscrupulous bad fellow who is passing counterfeit pounds (We’re in England, folks.) Hey, wait a minute, could it be, could it be Raven who was swindled? You betcha, as our well-read two year Alaskan ex-governor would say. [image error] Thanks to Travis Nicholson for Photo Oh, my, then they all collide in relatively small (smaller than London) town hours away from London by train and there the action really heats up with Anne making a conscious decision which alters the life of Raven. And no, she doesn’t find him repulsive which, of course, endears her to him. The first person ever who he can trust and does not find him replusive. Greene’s writing is superb in my opinion. For whatever reason, it seems to me the earlier writers of mysteries, the only comparison I can make in genres, write with crisp and clear sentences. In my opinion, it’s not just American writers, such as Raymond Chandler either. The memo apparently crossed ‘the pond’ as the Brits say, or we Americans say or somebody says (not me though, I hate those trite terms); that clear, simple writing is what the people wanted to read I suppose. That may be just one reason why I'm reading a book 77 years old and enjoying it. I love mysteries as all my friends know and Graham Greene is considered a master, a classic mystery writer, therefore my jolly (jolly being one of few Brit slang terms I know) choice to read at least one Graham Greene. It’s just brill (Brit slang: awesome.) It will definitely be a knock up (Brit slang: wake up) for you. Here’s a pat on my back ( pat, pat for at least trying to learn some British and Aussie slang since I have about an equal number of Goodreads friends in the U.K. and Australia that I have in the U.S. (and certainly down my street.) Good reading, friends, I’m knackered. I’m sure I’ll be corrected on my use of slang but at least my buddies will that know I’m trying.
