Dayumm dis shiz was raw!! I couldn't help feeling simply awful for poor Claire. She wasn't that bad, despite everybody auto-writing her off as shallow and worthless; what was with that anyway, people could just tell at a glance she's not as noble/valiant/worthy as her cousin? It happened way too often. Did she have a sign on her head, Not As Good As Angeline? Speaking of, Angeline was a good heroine although maybe a bit tame. Very pure and Miss Goody-Goody. I may be being unfair to her because I feel so much sympathy for Claire. Okay, so Angeline was brave, uncomplaining, and very domestic (cooking, nursing, cleaning). I guess I can't call her boring though, because she did crazy brave things, like stampeding the cattle at the enemy, and had flashes of cunning intelligence, like figuring out her "escape" was a trap, etc. She was a great heroine, actually. I did like her, I just think it's so sad that Claire got the shit end of the stick every single time! That gang-rape for some reason seemed way too brutally realistic, I could feel the fear that their attention would turn to Angeline... but wtf poor Claire!! I dunno man, I just felt way too bad for her by the end. What a raw deal she had. And it wasn't like, Evil Woman Gets What She Deserves. It was like this normal, non-heroic, selfish teenager gets way in over her head and ends up betrayed, shot, framed, hunted, raped, gang-raped, kidnapped, beaten, prostituted, starved, murdered, and let's immolate her emaciated, shot-up corpse just to really bring it home. And everybody will remember her as a cheap shallow slut! Nevermind that she literally sacrificed herself twice for her angel cousin. R.I.P. Claire, I felt your pain. :( #shewasntthatbad Anyway so back to the main plot, the book was good. Angeline was good. Rolfe was alright, pretty silver-tongued if you ask me but hey who doesn't like fancy flowery speeches of love from a golden prince. Lots of sweeping action and the story takes you on a wild ride from drawing rooms and fancy balls to big ol' hunting lodges to shacks in the wilderness to Indian territories to foresty mountains with Jim Bowie. Good times and adventures!
