It's hard to put into words what I feel about this book. It was fun . It was interesting . It certainly wasn't a bad book, I'm just not really sure it was exactly good . There was too much going on, for one thing. You've got a vengeful spirit, a poltergeist/doppleganger, the return of the Mayfair witches, and a fantastically wealthy Louisiana family, with all the dark family secrets and Anne Rice's constant daydreams about renovating houses and showering money on poorer relations. There are vampires, of course, but they show up in about a third of the story, maybe as little as a quarter. It's as if Rice couldn't decide what she wanted the book to be, so she tried to cram everything that fans might have been asking for into one book. Between the family histories, and the fabulous amounts of money, and the wondering about what the main character's spirit companion was all about, and then Quinn having sex with every-damn-body and falling desperately in love with the dying Mona Mayfair OUT OF NOWHERE (not kidding, he proposes to her in a hospital restaurant before he's even been introduced), I didn't know where to turn. And that's a shame, because there's a section towards the end of the book that deals entirely with the vampire characters, and it's really good. Excellent writing, with fascinating characters and beautifully described scenes. There's a section that takes place by candlelight in a grand impossible palace in the middle of a swamp. I got a nice chill from reading that, seeing the marble floors and Roman furniture and high ceilings, and total blackness just outside the room. The Maker vampire was a completely unexpected character with a backstory I enjoyed reading (I've got a new fascination with cameo jewelry now, thank you very much, Rice). But the whole vampire section maybe lasted sixty pages, and then it's back to Quinn and his wealth and his family and how EVERYBODY loves him, except the people who don't, and they're not likable so they don't count. I wish Rice had used a little more focus and maybe written this as three or four different books, rather than making this mess of a plot with one.
