I've been a lifelong fan of John Steinbeck's, and he's a “top five” writer for me. . . so I take any comparisons to his work pretty seriously. So. . . I'm just. . . you know. . . dipping my toe where it wants to go at this moment, and in this moment that grubby little toe wants to splash a little, just thinking some thoughts about this novella, Tracker , and Steinbeck's novella, The Red Pony . I don't know. You know. Maybe. I've never made any comparisons between these two writers before, but they did both share a planet and a country for three decades. They were both men who thought quite a bit about what it means to be a boy, and what it means to become a man, and they were also both inclined to write about man's role in nature. I've made a recent connection, in my mind, to Gary Paulsen and Jack London, but that's a lot easier to do, what with all of the wintry landscapes and dogs. But, Steinbeck. . . Hmm. In my opinion, Gary Paulsen was neither as methodical nor as classically trained as John Steinbeck, but, after reading four of Paulsen's memoirs and this, my first fictional offering of his, I've got to tell you. . . the man had some real skills, and he had a big, juicy heart, as well. And, oh, my heart. Wow. This coming-of-age novella, centered around John Borne, an orphaned boy who was raised by his grandparents, had me bawling, by page 73. My 12-year-old felt obliged to give me the arm squeeze, and asked, “What did it, Mom?” Well, no spoiler alerts, but let's just say that, when young John faces his grandfather's mortality, it causes him to face the deeper repercussions that are involved in hunting. I could not help but think of The Red Pony , and, to be honest, I thought a little of Steinbeck's The Pearl , too. Who knew that Gary Paulsen, with his John Deere baseball caps and shotguns, could write a novella in 1984 that hints as such concepts as auras and karmic debts? Ever since I read his memoir, Winterdance , I have thought of him as a “high end human,” and he hasn't disappointed me yet.
