So .. with the ongoing genocide in Gaza, how can I write a review about this book? (I finished it late October) I believe that the creation of Israel on the mandate of Palestine is inseparable from the exodus of Jews from the Arab world, where people lived in quasi-harmony, unlike Europe. But can we say that the political regime in the post-colonial Arab world did not contribute to this exodus? I can comfortably say that it did in Egypt. I think questioning Israel’s role alone in this exodus is misleading to the lives we read about Jews. Anti-Semitism is a reality that existed, still continue to exist till today, and now exasperated by Zionism. You just check Israel population, you will know that %50 of Israeli are middle eastern Jews or Sephardi and Mizrahi Jews. The majority of the other %50 is Eastern European and Russian Jews. The reality, from what I have learned so far, is that Western Jews (Ashkenasi) remained in the west, and who were in the diaspora, like Aciman’s family, preferred to go to Europe and the US, rather than go to war ridden country like Israel. Aciman’s mother was Sephardi and his father was Ashkenasi. I was confused and shocked by how these two fractions of Jews treat each other. I didn’t expect it, because it didn’t exist in my Islamic upbringing. Muslims are far from being a monolith or a coherent community, but race isn’t a concept amongst them. Race, generally, is a European concept and product of their civilization. I thought Jews would be like Muslims, for some reason, because of the similarities between Judaism and Islam. The race of his mother (and her disability - she was mute) was an obstacle to her union to his father. When his grandfathers once fought, his father’s called his mother’s a filthy Arab and similar insults. Aciman is brutally honest and blunt. He tells how his family strived as much as they could to appear European, in culture and appearance and etiquette. They had their own biases against whatever was “visibly jewish” as his uncle Villi put it. Uncle Villi is a very fascinating character, who was a double agent spy to the British and Ialians, and Zionists wanted to assassinate him. (I am guessing, they were creating their network in Egypt at the time.) Antisemitism passed in the book from European as well as Jews, but the author tells how it never passed from Arabs and Egyptians in daily life. Not a single Egyptian character said anything racist or antisemitic. But in one instance, in VC, in his Arabic curriculum, there was an Antisemitic poem. I found that part odd. He admitted it was the pinnacle of British education. How did the school board or management pass this poem in the Arabic Curriculum? Edward Said and many people who studied in Victoria College rarely mentioned any antisemitic poems in Arabic classes! But like Edward Said, he recounted bullying and frequent physical punishments. It was heartbreaking to read about his time in VC. He was alone and isolated from both Arabs and European school mates. He hid his Jewishness from both. He recounted that he didn’t even like taking off his clothes among his white friends because he feared to show he was only the circumcised European. Also, to see him memorising a antisemitic poem while being Jewish, reminded me of Christians in our schools nowadays memorising verses of the Koran. Aciman says that they never wanted to leave. His grandmother (who prided herself of living 50 years in Egypt and only learning a single Arabic word every year and who also despised Arabs and Egyptians) thought she would be buried in Egypt and thought of Egypt as her home. His grandfather is already buried in Alexandria. The Egyptian government under Nassir made their lives hell. With frequent visits, harassment phone calls, interrogations .. etc. This is the second pre-wwii memoir that I read which also confirms that settlers in Egypt lived in a whole world, constructed around each other and themselves, where natives (Egyptians) are never in the picture, and when they are, they were simply servants, farmers, sellers, chauffeurs, and that’s it. Even up until the fifties!! Which is shocking to imagine. I can't also imagine how Egyptians felt, being natives, yet driven out of the country's riches and with no privilege.
