I've read a lot about George Washington, but given the current climate (summer 2020) and the reevaluation of historical icons from our past, I thought it was time to consider a deeper dive into Washington and slavery than most birth-to-death Washington biographies provide. And this nearly two-decade-old book offers just that - an examination of Washington's evolving attitudes toward slavery, and of the institution of slavery itself. This is a difficult one to review, because the information it contains is excellent, but the telling is very uneven. Wiencek introduces topics, goes off on long tangents, alternates between Washington's time and vignettes from modern times, and goes back and forth between third-person and first-person points of view - sometimes in the middle of a narrative about events occurring in Washington's time, the perspective abruptly shifts to Wiencek himself and the process he underwent in researching and writing the book ("here's what so-and-so told me" or "I was shocked at what I discovered in the archives"). It kind of feels like he couldn't decide how to frame the story - whether it was better told as straight-ahead history, or whether it was about his own personal journey of discovery - so he tries to do both, to mixed effect. That said, the book is well worth the occasional frustrations in reading it. Washington is the main character of the story, of course, but the book spends considerable time on the harsh conditions, the degradation and terror that slaves had to endure, just so you don't lose sight of what this story is really about. Historians generally have given Washington great credit for freeing his slaves in his will, which is more than what most other Founding Fathers did. Modern-day critics, however, condemn him for not freeing them outright much earlier, and for owning slaves in the first place. Both perspectives are valid, but Wiencek generally comes down on the side of being sympathetic to Washington. Washington, after all, was born into a society where slavery was considered acceptable and economically necessary. Wiencek traces how his attitudes changed, he started becoming more of a "benevolent" slaveholder (to the extent that's even possible) and ended up trying to clear the decks for emancipating his slaves as soon as he could make it economically feasible to do so. We can only wish he came to this realization earlier, and didn't ultimately wait until his death to act upon his epiphany. So should Washington be honored for the views he had upon his death and the actions he ultimately took, or condemned for the views he had earlier in life and the actions he avoided taking? Some old-school historians believe, since he ultimately freed his slaves, that Washington=good! Some modern critics believe, since he was a slaveholder and didn't free them during his lifetime, that Washington=bad! The truth is somewhere in between. You may not agree with all of Wiencek's conclusions, but his book does a great service in contributing to the conversation, all these years later.
