No, I am not dating a Jew, but having recently experienced my first Passover in NYC I decided it was time I learned more about Jewish culture. I selected this book because I wanted something that gave a good overview of the culture - not a doctrinal dissertation. Topics covered included religious beliefs, important holidays, wedding and funeral traditions, and the Jewish lifestyle. Sprinkled throughout were fun facts, humorous stories of mishaps from mixed religion dating, recipes, and some great quotes. In fact, my favorite quote pertaining to the peacefulness of Jews, comes from Mark Twain. He wrote: "The Jews constitute but one percent of the human race... Properly the Jew ought hardly to be heard of, but he is heard of, has always been heard of... He is as prominent on this planet as any other people... He has made a marvelous fight in this world, in all the ages; and has done it all with his hands tied behind his back." While I had been looking for something that wasn't doctrine heavy, it was the sections about doctrine that fascinated me the most. Prior to reading this book, I knew next to nothing about the religion, and I was surprised by how many of the beliefs resonated with me. According to the book, most Jews aren't waiting for a single 'Jesus Christ' type person to usher in the Messianic Age, but rather believe that the collective actions of mankind will achieve this. Because of this, they place great emphasis on individual good deeds. In a way, each good thing done tips the scales in favor of the coming of the Messianic Age, and each bad deed is a setback. To me, this way of thinking invokes a feeling of community. A good deed isn't just good for me - it's good for all of humanity. Likewise, a bad deed does more than just hurt me. The Torah also doesn't not even mention the hereafter, and in general Jews chalk God up to being a mystery (they don't believe in trying to imagine what he looks like and aren't even suppose to write out his name). This leaves much of the unknown where I think it sometimes belongs - in the unknown, and frees Jews up to simply focus on the here and now of everyday living and every day doing those good deeds. In essence, it is some of the common sense and even simplistic ideals of the religion that appeal me. That said, it's entirely likely that I feel this way because the book I choose to read was meant to be a brief overview. Had I chosen a more complex book, I have no doubt that I would have found that Judaism, like all religions, is cluttered with many obscure and sometimes quite strange doctrinal points. All that said, I found this book to be quite informative, entertaining to read, and gave me a great deal of respect for the Jewish culture.
