“Destiny is not a metaphysical confrontation with one’s self, rather, society has knit its pattern so tight that a confrontation with it is inevitable.” The Mixquiahuala Letters are a work of creative genius and I know that I wasn’t fully able to grasp it. When I finished reading the letters, I was left unsatisfied with the ending. I went back to read the author’s note and I seriously wanted to give a standing ovation. The letters aren’t meant to be read in the order we are used to. In fact, she warns the reader about this in the beginning, she then breaks down the different journeys you can take with the book. The options are “for the conformist”, “for the cynic” and “for the quixotic”. The letters allow us a literary voyage following the lives and relationship of Teresa, a writer and Alicia, an artist. The summary of this book claims that we are “focusing on the relationship between two strong and fiercely independent women” and I’m not here to contradict that statement but I will tell you that this book would majorly fail the Bechdel test. Every single experience presented to us surrounded men. That doesn’t take away from the beauty of the book and I believe it’s done on purpose to show how much conforming to the expectations, demands, and danger from men hampers their growth. The letters are from Teresa to Alicia, so we are only able to glimpse one side of the relationship. Teresa is a wonderful guide but I wouldn’t say she’s a reliable narrator as we are only able to see the intervening years through her perspective. There was a point in the book where Teresa intersperses her letters with poetry. It caught me by surprise but it was an amazing addition to the story. I want to say so much about this book, one that captures so many themes in only 138 pages, but there is so much I still have to comprehend. I will definitely be reading this book in a different order many times more. I wonder how much my interpretation of the book will change then. The women presented in this book aren’t perfect but they are rebels. They refuse to adhere to the conventions of the time that means to shackle them. They travel to Mexico by themselves, drink and smoke, sleep around with men, leave their husbands, subvert and play around with the roles and scripts thrown at them, and spout their opinions and ideas to everyone. They are flawed but they are human. They are fighting against a world that refuses to accept them as they are and continues to want to mold them, against their wishes, everywhere they go. If you are looking for a Chicana, feminist literary text then this is the book for you. If you want to fall in love with words, then this is definitely the book for you. Ana Castillo’s lyricism shouldn’t be missed. I am definitely not giving you a great review here and that’s because there is so much to unpack and it will require more readings for me to get at the heart of what Ana Castillo wrote. Just give this and her writings a chance. I am sure that it will be an enriching experience.
