Arthur M. Schlesinger’s work, The Age of Jackson, is a spectacular book, offering an exhaustive and insightful analysis of the period of American history dominated by the name and the ideals of Andrew Jackson. Schlesinger’s thesis is that Jacksonian democracy, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, represents a triumph of the common man, of merit over aristocracy and the rights of the many over the privileges of the few. Not all commen citizens supported Jackson and his party. Many left it, joined it late, or never identified themselves with it at all. Yet the success of the Democratic Party of Jackson and Van Buren, and the movements that it inspired, led to an advancement in the rights and status of the poor and common citizens. An abundance of evidence is included to advance this point, from the corruption of the Second United States Bank and its defeat at Jackson’s hands to the success of the labor movements inspired by Democratic ideals. In arguing that Jackson’s movement was the triumph of the ordinary man, Arthur Schlesinger succeeds. Schlesinger’s work is exceptionally comprehensive. The focus of the book is a period of history lasting about 30 years, from 1820 to 1850, and it contains suitably detailed explanations of what led to the events of that area and how the events of that era influenced American history in the decades that followed. Schlesinger’s Age of Jackson is an exhaustive study of American history over three decades. Before reading this book, I liked to think that I knew a lot about American history in the Jacksonian era, having read Robert V. Remini’s spectacular three-volume biography of Andrew Jackson in addition to some other smaller works on the time period. Yet I was not prepared for the enormous amount of information in this book, both concerning politicians in Washington as well as local politicians, small-time newspapermen, and community leaders. There were names of many such people I had never heard of or knew of in only a vague sense but which recurred frequently throughout the work. Their contributions proved wonderfully exciting and enhanced my understanding of this period of broadening political participation. The focus on lesser-known leaders is one of the most excellent points of this monograph. Martin Van Buren’s underappreciated position as a representative of the northeastern labor movement is well expounded upon in this book, and indeed, the book is hardly any more about Jackson than it is about Van Buren. But it really isn’t about either of them. It is instead a history of an idea and its impact on an age, its scope extending from the highest politician to the lowest frontier farmer or eastern city factory worker. This book is wonderfully readable. At just over 500 pages of text, it is neither an exceptionally long construction nor a short study. One may fear that a book with this density could be dry or overwhelming in its outflow of content, but Schlesinger’s exceptional prose make it a delight despite the enormous amount of information that he packs into his work. The narration is clear and attractively written, and within it are dispersed innumerable memorable observations and colorful touches of humor and wit. Despite the book’s thoroughness, there are shortcomings in the scope of its factual analysis. Although the book addresses major historical events in all parts of the country, it skews to the northeast. One of Schlesinger’s principal intentions seems to have been to counteract the common notion that Jacksonian democracy was primarily a Southern and Western philosophy and to demonstrate instead that it also had a very strong appeal, perhaps even the strongest appeal of all, to the Northern laborer. He makes this argument quite skillfully, even though this conception is still predominant in the modern age, but a result is that coverage of Western and Southern issues, though for the most part certainly not deplorably lacking, is less exceptionally thorough than coverage of matters in the northeast. The work’s greatest and perhaps only major flaw is, no doubt, the lack of attention given to Native Americans. Schlesinger’s sympathy and praise for Jackson certainly comes across as jarring and inappropriate to many modern readers, who tend to be fixated almost solely on the issues of slavery and Indian removal, often unable to get past their hatred of a man whose policies they blame for inflicting gross violations on the rights of Native peoples and encouraging the continuation of Southern slavery and judge his character and achievements fairly. Schlesinger gives suitable attention to the slavery issue, but the Indians are almost entirely absent from this work. His discussion of Jackson’s actions on Indian removal are consigned to a few paragraphs and a small handful of other passing mentions. The issue does not easily fit with Schlesinger’s idea of Jackson as a harbinger for modern liberalism and equality. Yet when one wants to make an argument and encounters an obstacle, it is a more intelligent and suitable practice to address the obstacle than to ignore it. A better example was set decades later by Remini in his trilogic Jackson biography. Like Schlesinger, Remini was sympathetic to Jackson’s character and many of his achievements, and he also believed that, while Jackson’s attitude towards the Indians was flawed, the approach that he adopted on the matter during his presidency saved them from likely annihilation. This approach is better than that of Schlesinger. When Remini came across the subject that, at first glance, may not have seemed to fit neatly with his broader thesis, he did not hide from it but dealt with the matter directly and offered a thoughtful assessment. Schlesinger’s failure to do the same belittles a subject that was absolutely, whether one wishes to defend it like Remini or condemn it like most 21st century Americans, one of the most important issues of the period. Despite this one flaw, this book is masterful. This is not a perfect book, mainly because of the Indian removal issue, but I enjoyed it so much and learned so much from it and it has had such a big impact on Jacksonian studies that it was not possible for me to give it less than five stars. Robert V. Remini’s trilogy is the best source on Andrew Jackson; this work is the best source on the Jacksonian age. It is easily comprehensible, thorough, and fascinating.
