Ah, it's been a while, but now I have another book to add to my self-curated canon of "Dick Lit". Crash belongs there at the top of the heap, along with Portnoy's Complaint and Couples . Stick with me, I'll explain. First though, I want to say that I read and loved J.G. Ballard's The Drowned World . It was one of those singular reading experiences for me, where the book teaches you how to read it, and how to love it. Ballard is an original, and his descriptive powers are on steroids, and he has a way of drawing you into a world of his creation almost unlike any other writer I've read before. I'm pleased to say he employed the same rigour, the same immersive commitment to the subject as in The Drowned World . The same completely over-the-top-ness. The same idea-based story, with little regard for character (except in this one, the characters are all vile sex maniacs). Crash explores dark material: the intersection of sex and death brought about by machinery. People who only connect via twisted metal, presumably a statement about the idea of technology as middle-man between human beings, something that is more true now than ever. However dark and prescient the subject matter, I found myself bursting into inappropriate laughter several times as I made my way through the novel. I mean, it's just so ridiculously pornographic that at some point I struggled to take it seriously. I mean, there's sooooo much penis talk, more than I would have ever believed possible (see: Dick Lit), and so much semen being ejaculated onto car dashes that it's actually funny. Hey, I have a question! Tell me, how does one's penis actually press up against the steering wheel of a car? Is the penis 18 inches long? Is the wheel at crotch level? Or is the driver sitting on several substantial pillows, with his seat moved forward as far as it will allow? Ballard's and other penises seem to be frequently in this predicament. These are the types of things that I found myself pondering while reading this great/awful 1973 unicorn of a novel. That, and how beautiful James Spader was in the film adaptation. That, and how strange and repulsive and fascinating the concept, and how miraculous it is that J.G. Ballard made Dick Lit something you could call a true work of art.
