Earth, the blue marble. This book, a marvel. No, the above statement(s) wasn't meant to be poetic - but it's utterly true. Where to begin in summing up this book … A young and brilliant scientist has created an itty-bitty tiny artificial black hole … and lost it "somewhere" in the center of the planet. While he is looking for it together with some allies, earthquakes start shaking the planet and a space station is lost. The reason is rather awesome ( because I had thought of a lot of possibilities but not a SECOND tiny black hole and "the laser" ). I mean, we dodged quite the bullet there ... now, if only there weren't still so many other bullets to dodge! But there is also the scientist's grandmother, herself a brilliant geneticist and founder of a new world religion, Gaianism. And she has either a god complex or other mental health problems. *lol* In any case, her observations are most often correct but she's also a force to be reckoned with that could become a problem. Then there is the space pilot who witnessed the earthquakes and disaster with the space station first-hand and is consequently roped into the whole retrieval affair. All that while secrecy is basically outlawed and technology (such as smart glasses that record and stream absolutely everything) is also making it insanely difficult for people not to know everything. Now of all times when they could use a bit of secrecy. Kinda. Oh, in case anyone was wondering, the year is 2038 and Earth is pretty much fucked. Thanks to global warming, overfishing, overfarming and other "nice" things we human did/do, there are billions of ecological refugees, more radical "religions" than I cared to keep track of and the whole political Spiel has become even more ludicrous. The space program has also been abandoned so as to spend the money on Earth (oh, the irony). Then there are the arks - several places around the globe that keep species in order to preserve them. Some of those even use genetic material to clone / mix species (bringing "back" the mammoth amongst other things). In short: the book shows the impact we humans can have on the planet, good and bad. The amazing thing about this? The book was published in the 80s!!! Yep, it won the HUGOs in 1989 but predicted stuff like the internet (especially with regards to it becoming the major source for news), hyperlinks in electronic correspondence, spamming, a reduction in privacy / the need to share all kinds of stuff with the world online, levees breaking on the Mississippi (this was especially creepy because his exact prediction came true in 2005), voice controlled tech, global warming / the consequently rising sea levels, smart glasses and VR overlays, and much more! And Brin uses all this to address critical topics (that are even more timely NOW) such as endangered species, global warming, production in and transport of goods from faraway countries (and the effects), refugees from ecological disasters, ecoterrorism, views on colonialism (less about racism and more about the audacity of the cultural theft) and the social effects of overpopulation. All while we're hunting for a black hole (two, actually, and beta's creator) before the destruction of the entire friggin planet! *lol* And let me tell you, the revelation about the creator of beta … ( not only did I not really expect it to have been aliens, it all made perfect scientific sense - from the brilliant tactic of how to take out humanity to the answer to the age-old question why we haven't met other sentient species and lots of them already )! As if that wasn't enough, THAT revelation got eclipsed by fucking Daisy being the big bad. I mean, I never liked her - right in the beginning when we first met her, I immediately despised her but finding out just how crazy the bitch really is had me raging. Seriously, the scope of this book is almost unimaginable and thinking about when it was written is even more mindboggling. The writing style is very fast-paced, has a nice rhythm/flow to it, is simplistic rather than pompous, but never boring or flat. Will it surprise you after all my fangirling that an author who is so great at writing such a thrilling story that moves at break-neck speed, incorporating so many technological and scientific concepts flawlessly, is also a PhD in physics? This has instantly become one of my favorite (sci-fi) books of all time!
