This is one of the most dishonest, spiteful, and acrimoniously fearmongering texts I've run into in a long time. It was bad enough that I considered not finishing it, which would've been the second time in more than a decade that I had gone through such a decision. In the end, I decided that, when it came down to sunken cost fallacy versus the everlasting annoyance of the unresolved read, I might as well power through this piece that I was happy enough to keep on my TBR for nearly a decade and commit to reading within a couple of years of finally tracking down a copy. Now that I'm finally through, I can say with some amount of credibility that the length of time which this work spent as a "biography" of London encompasses one, maybe two hundred pages that are devoted to detailing early histories of foundation and consolidation of the city along sociopolitical and geographical lines, aka drawing a clear line from the ones in power to the causes and effects they wreaked on infrastructure and the populace on this particular area on a rather small island in the Northern hemisphere. However, as soon as the work hits the timeline when the more awkward powers start gleefully executing the more awkward causes and effects that run along the lines of enclosure, colonialism, and other socioeconomic bloodsuckings on an international scale, it stops being a biography and starts being a tourist trap guide for the middle class English major, ever so enamored with that pile of stolen cultural wealth called the British Museum and ever so fretful about the immigration of those who would've gladly stayed in their own countries had their cultural wealth not been stolen in the first place. It's glib, farcical, and if the textual touting of the morbid urban legend ascribed to the "ring around the roses" rhyme can be extrapolated from, every single fact, citation, and quotation is entirely take it or leave it depending on your personal fancy. What isn't is how Ackroyd increasingly gets his panties in a twist about the huge wealth discrepancies that are a natural consequence of how London and the larger England has gutted the world for the past half a millennium and tries to pass off such rapacious Mammonism as not only inevitable, but praiseworthy. It's classic "well off folks whistling in the dark" sprawled out for 800+ pages and shoved through the publication mill on the strength of author repute and little else, and let me tell you: where Ackroyd sees "theatricality" and "egalitarian and democratic instincts," I see the set up for the decline and the fall. If you give people nowhere else to go, they will go, whatever the horror or the abject. If you ensure that everything: life, liberty, the pursuit of humanization, the realization of a nation, the continuance of a culture, the maintenance of a continuing line of production and consumption, ebb and flow, that everything has its price, the world will flock to where it is most possible to acquire such with the minimum of continually being able to choose between one's money and one's life. I certainly didn't expect Ackroyd to write an entire history of British imperialism as a mere part of his research into London, but to assign responsibility to political leaders and royal representatives for a few of the earlier centuries and then immediately bow out when it was clear that those up top were steadily razing the countryside from the inside cityscape to the outside international plane and reaping the benefits of every new product and every outcropping slum, all you're doing is dumping some milk and cream on a kernel of shit and calling it a milkshake. The cannibalization of Ireland, the rampant antisemitism that led leaders of 1930s England to more than fancy the idea of getting into bed with Hitler, the razing of India, Jamaica, and much of the rest of the world through a combination of tariffs, monoculture, and the IMF: to talk about London as sociopolitical growth as if such growth was simply manna from heaven is about as honest as mentioning Churchill without delving into Thatcher, and guess what, Ackroyd does just that. So certain sections of the city have had certain superficial consistencies over the years. To discuss segregations of populaces and workforces without looking at who was monetarily benefiting from such through a combination of civic policy and opportunistic bigotry seems to go against Ackroyd's constant praise of those furthering London's supposed raison d'être of commerce above all else, but I suppose that would've been a tad too avariciously on the nose. Same with the populations that couldn't manage to permanently flee London during the course of the Blitz despite the exhortations of "protect the women and children," or the "riots" that for some odd coincidence occurred around the time of a few small events that happened across the water known as the American Revolution and the French Revolution, or the myriad 21st century populations seeking stable prosperity in the foreign land that fed on their homeland's famines. There's certainly a tale, perhaps even a biographical one, to be told about that, but despite whatever linguistic trickery Ackroyd pulls in hopes that the reader is too fatigued to notice, it is no epic romance, and London is no hero. After trudging my way through those, I'm never going to be able to take any absolutist criticism of crowdsourced centers of information seriously. If something like this can make its way through the editing, publishing, marketing, and reading line sheerly out of textual-juggernaut-fatigue, there's little hope for the hardline stance that anything bound between two covers and calls itself 'nonfiction' is always going to be better accredited and approved than everything on a site such as, say, Wikipedia. It would probably be too much to expect that there's some site out there that goes into exacting detail of checking out which blithely stated "fun facts" are legitimate and which ones fall into the sort of hysterical paranoia that's always on the lookout for "fake" beggars and "lazy" immigrants, but this bloke called Iain Sinclair who seems to know a bit about London and whatever "psychogeography" is called this piece "fundamentally conservative," so there is that. In any case, do I wish I had had the sense of jettisoning this piece and never looking back before I took the risk of engaging with it? For certain. Do I hope that my review will aid others in doing the same? Of course. Perhaps circumstances are that maybe 30, 40, perhaps even 60% of what Ackroyd has to (however so mewlingly and pukingly) say is actually legit without being malignantly hateful and thus is worth a not too particular read. However, is 240-480 pages of what the title actually promised worth going through an 800+ page behemoth? I'll leave that for the reader to decide.
