4.5 ⭐ ”What dreadful nonsense we are talking!” - Alice concludes amidst a typically bizarre and directionless conversation with the Red and White Queens. Wrong again, Alice! “Really you are very dull!” For it is, in actual fact the most wonderful kind of nonsense; that unpredictable, dream-like absurdity that one only finds in exceptional works of surrealist fiction . It seems both ‘Alice in Wonderland’ (1865) and ‘Through the Looking Glass’ (1871) , along with the life of Lewis Carroll (Charles Lutwidge Dodgson) himself, have been turned inside-out in a manic search for a definitive hidden meaning, allegorical or otherwise, to neatly attach to the two works. The author's close association with George MacDonald (a prolific author of allegorical fiction), Carroll being a satirist himself and the fact that, you know, Alice does indulge in some questionably-sourced, mind-altering consumables and converse with a blue hookah-smoking Caterpillar who persuades her to eat magic(al) mushroom causing further hallucinations, all lead me to believe that the abundance of analysis is likely justified. ‘Alice in Wonderland’ began, however, as a children’s story written for Carroll’s eight-year-old acquaintance and photography subject, Alice Pleasance Liddell . Carroll was well known for telling stories to the children in his parish and it becomes clear as early as the first book, but particularly in ‘Through the Looking Glass’ that he truly lamented the inevitability of growing up and losing one’s innocence and imagination. In keeping with the irrational depth of analysis performed on this work, does Alice not cry so much, as she grows (up), that she nearly drowns in her own tears? In a way, these works are Carroll’s prosaic ode to the pure, unadulterated imagination of children . ”It brings a tear Into my eyes When I begin To realize I've cried so much Since you've been gone I guess I'll drown in my own tears” - Ray Charles It’s not just pure imagination though; Carroll attempts, with resounding success, to imitate a dream-like state which is of course not exclusive to children but to all of us; the one time our sub-conscious is permitted to run amuck, on night release from the prison that is the rational mind! The disorientation that Alice experiences with her surroundings, the morphing environments, shapeshifting characters, the non-linear timeline, the universal state of free-association; these are all characteristics of the unfettered dreaming mind. ”[Alice’s sister] pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.” I think it’s an absolutely charming tale for adults and children alike, particularly those with a fondness for surrealist humour. The copy I read was the 2019 Harper Design edition with illustrations by the MinaLima graphic design studio. The illustrations are great but I read this on Kindle and have since seen images of the physical Hardcover which is obviously much more vibrant not being black and white, as well as having interactive elements, so if you do read this edition, go for the physical copy if possible! I’ll probably get a copy myself; with so much to love about the story, not least of all the quirky cast of characters, this one lends itself almost too perfectly to a daddy-daughter read! Hasta la proxima chamos! And, though the shadow of a sigh May tremble through the story, For “happy summer days” gone by, And vanish’d summer glory-- It shall not touch with breath of bale, The pleasance of our fairy-tale.
