Larry Kusche’s The Bermuda Triangle Mystery - Solved is a classic work of paranormal debunking. Kusche, a research librarian at Arizona State University, was so inundated with requests for material on the Triangle (a supposed zone in the South Atlantic where ships, planes and people mysteriously disappear) during its phenomenal heyday in the early ‘70s that he compiled a comprehensive bibliography, then began investigating the phenomenon himself. Kusche quickly found that the legend of the Triangle was largely hype, a lumping together of mundane crashes and sinkings, genuine mysteries and a few outright hoaxes into a gallimaufry of lost civilizations, UFO abductions and interdimensional time rifts by sensationalist journalists and irresponsible writers. Kusche does not “solve” every individual case, conceding that cases like the disappearance of the Carroll A. Deering’s crew or the loss of Flight 19 remain genuine mysteries - but that the commonly stated version of these events either invents details (a fully prepared meal waiting in the galley for the former, spurious radio messages from the latter) or ignores ones that contradict the “unsolvable” label. Often, ships claimed to vanished in “calm weather” disappear during a storm; planes who “suddenly” vanished had a history of mechanic trouble or radio malfunctions. Some, like the Raifuku Maru, weren’t mysterious at all but were mundane tragedies sensationalized beyond recognition. Kusche’s book has some minor shortcomings - he doesn’t seem terribly interested in probing the origins or development of the Legend, one or two entries have incorrect information (the Ellen Austin, which allegedly lost a salvage crew aboard a derelict, was renamed the Meta when the incident supposedly occurs). Perhaps the modern reader would like an update to a book first published in 1975. But since Kusche wrote in the mid-’70s, the Triangle legend has largely died out, kept alive only by a few fringe investigators who still think there’s something to the idea of Atlantean power crystals or cursed “vile vortices” that send sailors to dimensions unknown. One supposes that, considering some of the other misinformation pervading 21st Century media, these delusions are relatively harmless. But it’s still nice to have Kusche’s work available as rebuttal.
