"Washington...stated that the single most important objective was guaranteeing the continuation of the Union: "In all our deliberations on this subject we kept steadily in our view, that which appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the consolidation of our Union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity, safety, perhaps our national existence."" An incredibly well-written work of nonfiction about the life of George Washington, colonial Virginia, and the American Revolution. Wiencek has greatly broadened my perspective of early America and our founding fathers, for better or for worse I still cannot say. Before reading An Imperfect God I knew a bit (granted, very little) about the controversies surrounding Washington and slavery. I can say after reading this book that this controversy is far more vast and complex than I ever could have imagined. My sympathies for Washington's decision and the mind-numbingly challenging situation he found himself in have grown, but along with that my conviction that his decision was the wrong one. Wiencek chose a fair chunk of this book painting the character of Washington, who he was, what his morals were, how his way of life was directly influenced and sculpted from childhood by colonial Virginia, all with such great detail and precision. A true product of his society, as we all are. Though I find the ultimate question of this book to be: can we be blamed for that? I think the answer is yes. Wiencek points out that the majority of people see criticizing people like Washington today as a pointless endeavor, given how different society and the times were centuries ago. To that Wiencek correctly points out that to fairly pass such judgement, we must look to the people who lived in that time. My immediate nominee is none other than Benjamin Franklin. Franklin held slaves of his own, he benefited economically from slaves, he surely experienced the cruelties of watching children ripped from their mother's arms, shipped off to distant lands, whipped, beaten, and mutilated. But Franklin was a man of reason. Over the course of his life Franklin came to understand the norms of society were in fact not just, but rather a long, deeply complex evolution of prejudices. To quote Thomas Paine: "A long habit of not thinking a thing wrong, gives it a superficial appearance of being right, and raises at first a formidable outcry in defense of custom." Franklin would go on to free all the slaves he owned. He became one of the foremost champions of abolition during his later years. He pleaded to Congress to abolish slavery when he very well could have economically benefited from it. If we are to praise the decisions of Franklin and other like-minded abolitionists as virtuous, then by definition we must condemn those who morally failed in that regard. Perhaps the most interesting takeaway from this book for me, something I did not realize had such force and importance, as it is rarely shown or taught in common history, was the absolutely critical role slaves played in the American Revolution. I would, with no qualms, go as far as to say we would not have the freedom we so cherish today without the help of those slaves. Were it not for the bravery of the slaves who led the suicide charge to capture the final British strongholds at Yorktown, the same slaves who were largely responsible for keeping the American economy from annihilation during the war, these truths that we hold to be self-evident may not have been realized. Further, it was those slaves who gave the Union their lives and the vital numbers it needed to push the Crown back, and who perhaps were directly responsible for the moral transformation that occurred in our first president. "The tragedy, for the nation, is that Washington did not act upon his convictions during his lifetime. Had he freed his slaves in 1794 or in 1796, while in office, the effect might have been profound. He would have set the precedent that the chief executive cannot hold slaves." - And here lies my conviction. For a man of Washington's stature, a man who was considered a living God by the colonists, the most respected and influential perhaps in the world at that time, Washington had the power of precedent, and he knew it. To have such a clear understanding of morality as Washington appears to have had, yet to not act towards those convictions, I find that may just be worse than being morally blinded altogether. Ultimately, I recognize and understand Washington's choice and decisions based on the preservation of the Union, and though I think they were the wrong choices, I am glad this book has opened my eyes to a new understanding. Washington knew, and most likely correctly too, that had he gone public with his stance, the nation would have been ripped apart. And though unknowingly all he did was delay the ripping apart of the Union, to that I say: Fīat iūstitia ruat cælum .
