The ugly face of slavery and racism Described in detail by one of the big storytellers Twain just had the intuition and talent to create a milestone of enlightening literature, showing humankind its worst flaws by not moralizing, proselytizing, and thereby boring the audience. Instead, all the atrocities are shown in the actions, mentalities, and especially dialogues of the Bigoted and primitive people of that time That deem themselves superior, smart, and just sheer Übermensch. Many works against slavery, fascism, extremism, and faith use that storytelling trick of making the hatemongering trolls, the stupid, uneducated antagonistic people of that time, ridiculous in contrast to the progressive, sophisticated protagonists. In the case of Huckleberry Finn Everyone except the protagonist is evil Because the norms, rules, and laws of the time allow them to be. That´s the subject Twain isn´t directly pointing his finger at, but the underlying core of the tale, that opportunity makes thieves. And a society based on exploitation and brutality creates inhuman, full citizen status subjects with all democratic human rights that treat anyone inferior like an animal and worse than their dogs. That´s A scheme as old as history And Twain digs deeper into it in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1... He goes above the average evil citizen and describes the ones, kings, god emperors, and faith fueled fanatics, who want this mess to better rule the mad masses. One of the, subjective, main reasons why Huckleberry is so much more successful than the Yankee is that it´s easier to read about bad people doing unfriendly things without directly attacking the system itself. The Yankee does this in a satiric way and is even today just too uncomfortable for people who believe that everything is fine. This Humor and irony are the final ingredients Other great works against slavery are mind opening and well written too, but come with a depressing and hopeless undertone. Twain doesn´t just deliver the important messages, but he does it in combination with creating hilarious dialogues, motivations, and character evolutions that combine deep thoughts and giggles. When first reading Twain as a teenager I didn´t get that, I didn´t see the ingenuity of the whole plot that permanently delivers deep and cynical, postmodern social satire with tons of dark comedy elements. Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
