Back in 2020, while doing a Kids Read Across America project with my daughters, I discovered a book called Water Rat . It's an outstanding, swashbuckling coming-of-age story set at sea that never received the attention it deserved and went promptly out-of-print. In contrast, this lackluster, unfocused coming-of-age story set at sea, THE SLAVE DANCER, earned the Newbery Medal in 1974. Why? Why do some worthy books earn nothing but obscurity and others achieve medals? This YA novel had a few sparkly one-liners to offer, including this one: The truth came slowly like a story told by people interrupting each other . Beyond that. . . this was some of the most uninspired writing I've encountered in a long time. Not one character on this ship was developed. As far as I'm concerned, every sailor was the same person. I'd read some dialogue aloud, then look at my 11-year-old, who suffered through this mess with me, and ask her, “Do you know who this is?” She would answer me with a slow shoulder shrug. The characters were supposedly on a ship, but I couldn't picture any of it. This is historical fiction, so, though it satisfied my 1970s project by being published at that time, the events in the story take place in 1840. This could have been terribly exciting/interesting/upsetting, but it wasn't. How was this written by Paula Fox, the same author who wrote the quirky, memorable Desperate Characters ?? Was she asked to write this? I wonder. This is definitely a YA, versus a middle grades read. The themes are far more mature. The recently abducted Africans on this ship are sometimes whipped and abused, and those who die on board are treated deplorably. There are hints of voyeurism and rape, as well, though they were both subtle enough not to be noticed my daughter. But, at the risk of sounding callous. . . this story was so dull. . . I felt completely detached from all of it. If someone were to argue with me, try to convince me that it was worth reading this for the anti-slavery message, I'd argue back: but, if you can't buy into any of it, the characters, the setting, the plot, the dialogue, then it has not made an impact on you as a reader. Would you like to read a compelling anti-slavery story? How about Toni Morrison's Beloved ? Margaret Walker's Jubilee ? William Styron's The Confessions of Nat Turner ? My daughter insists on three stars (apparently she liked that the boy slept in a hammock), but, I'm thinking that this book deserves a burial at sea.
