Toward the End of Time is a novel John Updike wrote in 1997 forecasting what life in the U.S. would be like in 2020. Well, now it is 2020, so I thought the book would be worth reading. It definitely was, though with qualifications. Updike's U.S. in 2020 has just gone through a war with China that China apparently won, while losing many more millions of citizens. For its part, the U.S. is no longer a functioning country. States (in this case Massachusetts) are on their own, issuing their own currency and relying on FedEx to provide not only mail service but security services. Our protagonist, Ben, 67, is a retired financial executive living on the Massachusetts coast with his second wife in her family house. He is beset with the problem of stray kids intruding on his property along with deer that eat his wife's flowers. He has accessible grandchildren who make little sense to him. And he decides the best thing to do is keep a journal--not dated, but regular--about the incidents of his life. This novel consists of three dimensions. The first is Ben and his activities, sometimes imagined. The second is the dystopian surrounding. The third is the cycle of nature, ranging from flowers to cosmic birth and death. Updike gives Ben a range of sexual opportunities, some successful, others not, and leads him into a prostate operation that impairs his ability to keep his wife interested. To the contrary, he perceives her becoming quite nice to him, expecting that he will die soon enough, and looking forward to her life in her 70s not encumbered with the nuisance of a man in the house. Updike also uses the wife to stir up potential rivals who emerge from the rubble of war. These are slim pickings, to be sure, but in general life itself has become slim pickings. As for nature, Updike indulges in extraordinary descriptions of Ben's wife's garden, naming every conceivable flower and its appearance, and tying these plants to the passage of time from spring to the following winter. He then goes on to meditating on the sky, the galaxy, and so forth, displaying considerable erudition...erudition that effectively cancels out the importance of life on earth. I have misgivings about this aspect of the book since it goes on too long, just as Melville's cetology in Moby-Dick goes on too long. If we need to read about flowers, I would prefer doing so as Lawrence dealt with them in Sons and Lovers or in some of the novels of Wallace Stegner. In other words, let's weave them into the narrative flow a bit better with finer counterpoints to the main character's psychology. For vivid prose, however, bearing garlands of facts and human insight, Updike displays his customary mastery. At one point he drops into the persona of a monk on the Skellig islands--don't ask me to explain how this happens--in the early middle ages. At another point he is tussling with Saints Peter and Paul. This is impressive writing. When critics and commentators focus on Updike's "style," they seem to focus on the energies of the language, but I don't think language is necessarily the secret ingredient. More to the point, Updike wrote out of an abundance of sheer knowledge. This can break language's bonds and make it much more compelling than mere matters of rare vocabulary, artful syntax, and even lively rhythm. He was (sadly he's gone) a very intelligent, intellectually curious man. Well, Toward the End of Time was never going to end well, was it? Read it if you are interested in how dystopia can be concentrated in the life of a single 67-year-old man.
