This biography of Burroughs is as good as Junky or possibly even Naked Lunch though of course you can't really read William as a straight narrative. Was it the best biography I've read period, or at least the most interesting, one that kept my attention in that way where hours pass nose deep in a good book? Yes it was. Was is at times almost devastatingly depressing? Yes it was. Especially the lamenting on monstrous mistakes of communicating compassion and affection with those that were closest to him, a memory of rejecting his father's love late on evening and all the chapters about Billy Burroughs, William's son and that sad interval after his first liver transplant when Billy already carrying the resentment he had towards his father regarding the now infamous William Tell act and who by all accounts was not to hep on surviving in the first place comes out of a coma to live a 4 year struggle of immense physical pain due in part to a fistula type hole in his side the size of a fist and drinks liver number two to death. Well, really he commits suicide in a sense by discontinuing the medication that kept his body from rejecting his new liver. Plus, Burroughs story is kind of a sad one, the gay outcast who finally made himself into the image of a criminal because he never fit in anywhere. But the flipside of that, as the biography points out in multiple ways is that Burroughs was always authentically original, his own person and for the most pretty honest. This biography reads better than a lot of fiction novels (his life was weirder than fiction in many ways, probably in part because he does not hesitate to explore parapsychological phenomena, his mom in her time being something of, at least according to Burroughs, an accomplished medium, in fact there is a weird little story about green men and a small deer he saw when he was a mere youngin', the sort of story that reminds me of Satre's mescaline induced lobster (or was it a pair of crabs) friends, though at the time of the little men and the deer {was the deer green or was it the men?} he was much too young to have ingested any hallucinogens). Of course Burroughs gets into some weird shit--I'm not talking about his ill advised dadesque cut-up obsession which was interesting for about one novel...ie when it was woven into a narrative, but then Burroughs has never been the sort of writers whose books I read like a novel anyways, I try to approach them the way he reads them, which given the discussion in this book and another biography about the routines Burroughs made up to seduce Allerton and later the acting out of routines to get a handle on what he was writing makes sense--but just the surreal paranormal stuff that Burroughs considered every day magic. Burroughs was a man of the curse and felt himself to be cursed more than once, or possessed, indeed the only passages he wrote about the accidental killing of his wife explore what he calls his possession by the ugly spirit. How much of this Burroughs actually believes verses how much is a symbolic is a mute point I think. One gets the feeling reading this biography that his metaphorical fiction sort of seamenlessly blends into his fiction. There's his obsession with Reich's orgone accumulator and belief that sexual oppression creates fascism (which may not be too far off the mark actually, fascists tend to be impotent, or at least fascist leaders tend to have small penises and ejaculate prematurely...ie cough cough, Franco and Mussolini and I'm just gonna run on conjecture here but considering how Trump jumps on the masculine paradigm, gladhanding that tired ideology of yore like a horny dog who just spotted a nice firm leg to hump one has to imagine serious insecurities about his manhood......a premie for sure...). Which is a poor segue into another notion in this biography, Burroughs explorations on the fringes of psychology. Okay psychedelics is one everyone knows, he hung out with Leary in 61, consuming psilocybin pills which he apparently disliked because of man-sized insect problems that followed. He also snorted DMT with Paul Bowles who apparently felt his face falling off or something of the sort. And then there is the infamous Yage, all the rage now, but Burroughs happened to hook up with the famous ethnobotanist Schultes and might have provided a significant contribution to ethnobotany by being the first to identify a second plant which seemed to be responsible for the hallucinogenic visions which was not Banestaria Capi. At the time, early to mid fifties I believe, it was not known what the active ingredient was. There are also a lot of great anecdotes for fans of writers or wannabe writers to gorge themselves on as well. The panel with Henry Miller and Norman Mailer and several others including an English writer I'd like to check who wrote a text called Cain's Book. is a highlight, this was right around the time Grove press was fighting censorship arrests, which I guess, or it seems according to this account the post office was involved in. Naked Lunch was considered obscene, booksellers were arrested and the case, along with a similar one against Miller and Ginsburg all sort of get hashed out and conclude with what seemed to be the end of censorship laws. Burroughs makes an appearance at the Democratic National Convention in 68' not really a spring chicken by that time but already well on his way to being the great grandaddy figure of the counter culture. There are other funny scenes with Burroughs and Terry Southern and a wheelchaired director working on a movie script that never gets made. Burroughs doing the rockstar thing and apparently pissing off Mick Jagger by turning down an invitation to his wedding. There are other factiod tidbits like the fact that Junky sold 100,000 copies in its first year on Ace paperbacks which is a pretty tidy sum and might mean that it was his most popular book. One thing the book shows is that Burroughs was not a reptilians cold person but at times more of a sentimental old grandmotherly type figure who tried to hide his vulnerability behind a hard exterior, though certainly he grew a degree of jaded bitter amour when it came to love after being rejected so many times, and most cruelly by Ginsburg who Burroughs apparently fell madly in love with and wanted to become one with, something he called schellupping which sounded to me a whole lot like the love he later referred to as a female con in an interview. Though Burroughs was nothing if not a man of contradiction, having said yet another time that there was nothing holy about Kerouac using Buddhist belief as an excuse to hide from possibility of pain that comes with love.
