“Read Marx,” they keep saying, so I finally did. I’m sure there are plenty of sources out there capable of providing the necessary context on communism and socialism with clarity and depth that Marx’s foundational text lacks. At the same time, it remains important to return to the primary work of one of the most defining and influential theorists on the subject, making The Manifesto a book worth reading. It’s not surprising that many people have misconceptions about socialism — or communism in general. Marx’s little pamphlet here is more about his and Engels’ predictions for a revolutionary communism, providing only surface-level details rather than offering the nuance needed to form a proper perspective on the movement. Most of what we learn from this text had already been said by earlier thinkers, but I suppose its brevity and bold statements are exactly what make it stand out. There are, ultimately, two things that stayed with me: 1. Individualism: Capitalists prioritise freedom and individuality, as we all know, but the whole thing about individualism is that capitalists get it backward. They view communism as a movement that enforces total equality, ultimately abolishing the individual. Marx, however, claims the opposite. He argues that to achieve true individualism, baseline equality must first exist: when society provides everyone with the same opportunities and resources, people finally gain the actual freedom to pursue their own goals. 2. Capitalism is defined by an ironic paradox: As modern industry expands, the wage-labouring class multiplies. Though mass production initially sparks competition among workers, it ultimately unites them against their shared oppression. Isolation transforms into collective organisation. In the end, the bourgeoisie’s methods of wealth creation forge the tools of their own destruction, transforming the proletariat into capitalism’s ultimate grave-diggers. Although written nearly 180 years ago, the concept of class remains the same: bourgeoisie and proletariat, wealthy and the poor. Marx and Engels’ text is in itself valuable, but it ultimately feels more like a revolutionary call than a convincing account of how communist society would emerge in practice. "The free development of each is the condition for the free development of all." 5/5
