I'm not sure this novel worked particularly well. The divide between the ball-room romances and the military maneuvering was just too wide. I really enjoyed both parts - but they didn't work that well together. I'm a big fan of fiction set during the Napoleanic wars. When the 95th rifles were mentioned I was super excited to see how Heyer would depict Richard Sharpe - before remembering that Sharpe is a fictional character from another series and not a real historical person. Heyer did a good job of showing Old Nosey at his best. Her Wellington is very much like Wellington as I've seen his elsewhere. That's not really a surprise. So much of his writing survives, and so many personal accounts and descriptions of him, that no writer really has any wriggle room for interpretation. I especially liked that almost every line he utters in this book is something that he said in real life. The man was just full of pithy phrases. Even more interesting was her depiction of Silly Billy. Heyer has a fondness for young men which is evident in all her works, but really, I think she's far too indulgent of his blunders here. Heyer's Prince William of Orange is a courageous if impetuous young man whose rash courage leads him to make some understandable military mistakes. An interesting comparison to Cornwall's version, where the idiotic foppish youth gets a lot of good men killed through unforgivable stupidity and arrogance. Overall though, Heyer is working far too hard to cram in as much of her research as she can. It clutters up the narrative and detracts from a clear understanding of the battles. Grownow and Creevey are both very interesting chroniclers - everyone should read them, especially Grownow, who writes some hilarious anecdotes about regency haut ton - but neither of them were important people in their own right, either socially or militarily. There was no point in bothering to mention them as characters and record their arrival in town. In fact, there was far too much listing of names. We don't need to know the name of every aristocrat hanging around Brussels, or every Major in the army. The love story between Bab and Charles is very sweet though. I especially liked Bab, who is a perfect Heyer Mark I hero in a female body. But once again, Heyer's desire to cram the book full of unnecessary info kind of ruins it. Except in this case, it's not military history, it's fictional backstory from characters in earlier Heyer books. I liked Mary Challoner and Vidal as much as the next Devil's Cub reader, but they really didn't need to be in this book at all. And all the interminable chat about people's ancestors and family history is only present to remind you of early books. It doesn't add anything to the story or the characters. So I don't know. I did enjoy the book - but I felt as if I enjoyed it in spite of itself.
