The book Angels on Assignment was referred to me by my loving partner Josh, i was truly enlightened, curious and amazed on something in the spiritual realm and amazing wonders of God. It helped me in my faith walk with God also the sacrifices of Jesus Christ 🤍🤍🤍 God is always with us, sometimes we are just so blinded by pleasures, complaints and such that we tend to forget the very reason why we are still here and why He loved us so much. He send His Angels and doing His work everyday on this earth to keep us from things we don’t even know/aware of. What struck me most and made me cry is His Amazing and beautiful love for us. When Angel Gabriel leave Chroni and Ronald buck at his house, God had given Chroni permission to answer questions whichever ronald buck may have in mind. Chroni discussed about their works as an Angel, Chroni mentioned the another responsibility angels have, and that is to take care of the wicked and ungodly people. Chroni emphazised this. “You can never comprehend the depth of God’s love because it is too Great” It is so amazing to see how people can curse and hate God and turn their backs on Him, and yet God’s arms keep reaching out because He loved them so much. 🥺😭. God is so good to us despite of the sins and mistakes we do. We people just remember Him if we are happy, sad and we need something from Him. But when we get all we want or if we don’t. We immediately ignore, curse and question Him. It was easy for us to complain and not be mindful of the things He do for us. All we do is take and take and take. And when we do something great for Him, it was like we are expecting some reward out of it, as if it was something to be proud of. That’s just not right. Everyday we should be thankful and grateful for Him and for His grace to us. With or without a reward. Lonely or not lonely. Happy or not happy. We should thanked Him and worship Him. This book is for everyone, believer or non-believer. This book will give you an assurance that God has His hand in everyone’s life and really cares about on every little things. He bas Angels assignments to you and to every member of your family. They are on assignment to the saved and unsaved. This book will truly bless you! ♥️ You won’t regret every page of this and you will more appreciate God’s purpose and love for us. And the sacrifice and love of Jesus our Savior. 🤍
