My book is a hardcover. It looks and feels very much like a school text book. The story of black people's hair begins in Africa. The variety of hair textures range from deep ebony kinky curls to the loosly curled flowing locks. The hair of men and women had a social significance that spoke to society standing, and religious importance. The hair is the most elevated point of the body, which meant it was the closest to the divine. One of the most important people in community life was the hairdresser because many believed a person's spirit nestled in the hair. The manner in which the hair was styled often sent a message about the person. Young unmarried girls often shaved parts of their heads to signal their unavailability for courting. A recently widowed woman left her hair unkept for a period of mourning. A man wore his hair in a particular braided style before going to war which signified he was prepared to die. In the tribe or social group, the hair braiding sessions were a time of shared confidences or laughter as a circle did each others hair. When Europeans first came in contact with the African natives in the 15th century they were astounded by the complexity of the style, texture, and adornments of black hair. As the African people were captured, bought and sold and transported to other parts of the world in the bowels of ships, they could not tend to the needs of their hair. Often the slave traders shaved the heads of their newly acquired property. Sometimes this was done for health reasons, but more often to erase the slaves culture. Arriving in the new world without their hairstyles, the people became anonymous chattle...human beasts of burden. Without the combs, herbal ointments and palm oil used in Africa for hairdressing, the slaves were forced to use common Western household products to achieve certain styles. Instead of palm oil they used bacon grease, butter, kerosene and even axle grease. As time passed and the number of blacks grew, the issue of "good hair" and "bad hair" became divisive among the black populations. Adding to that divide was the fact that the lighter skin of some blacks and mulattos were favored by the white society. Those with light skin were brought into the household to serve, while the darker skinned were worked in the fields. Malcom X referred to these as "house niggers" and "field niggers." Those with lighter skin and straighter hair were said to have good hair and the darker skinned were said to have bad hair. The good hair-bad hair divide was internal in black society...slave and free. By the time slavery was offically abolished in 1865, good hair and light skin became the offical keys to membership in the "Negro elite." In some churches a fine toothed comb hung from the front door. All persons wanting to join that church had to pass the comb smoothly through their hair. If the hair was too kinky, membership was denied. This was known as the comb test. While society was generally more accepting of lighter skinned blacks, black people, both light skinned and dark skinned helped perpetuate this truth by maintaining the straight hair, light skinned heirarchy within their own ranks. Jobs, marriage partners, and even education were typically predicated on the texture of the hair and the shade of the skin. Black men and women eagerly sought out the commercial products being manufactured exclusively for black hair in the late 19th century. Advertisements for skin lighteners and hair straighteners marketed by white companies suggested to blacks that only through changing physical features will persons of African descent be afforded class mobility within the African-American communities and social acceptance by the dominate culture. To gain access to the American dream, one of the first things blacks had to do was make white people more comfortable with their very presence. That was much easier for people with good hair. As black populations began to acquire disposable income, they had the means to purchase cosmetics...bleaching creams and hair straighteners. In the early 20th century, black owned companies manufactured products to help create an industry that was pro-black while pushing an agenda of altering or "improving" on black features by making them appear "whiter." Annie Malone and Madam CJ Walker were early successful pioneers in the hair business. Their companies sought to create safe, affordable products that would give all classes of black women the means of achieving the straight-haired ideal, by making black women feel good about how they looked. Others like Nannie Helen Borroughs and Booker T. Washington spoke against the idea that black women spend their time and money buying and using straightening products "trying to be white." Within the black community, straight hair was not only the preferred look, but a marker of one's position in society. Light skin and straight hair still represented wealth, education, and access to the upper echelons of society. As early as 1916, 80% of students in black colleges were light skinned and of mixed heritage. Some of the procedures used to obtain straight hair included metal combs that were heated...hot combs and various chemicals including lye. These procedures were time consuming and often painful. Added to the several products created to straighten "nappy" hair were hairpieces, then known as falsies, and wigs. After WWII, different attitudes began to be voiced by the likes of Cassius Clay...later known as Muhammed Ali and other black entertainers who wore their hair short in unstraightened styles that helped begin the thought that deemed straight hair was the equivalent to self-hatred. Malcom X said as much when he said he literally "burned my flesh to have it look like a white man's hair." Through the 1950's and into the 60's as blacks united and pressed for civil rights under the leadership of the Nation of Islam and the Black Power movement began to redefine themselves visually in order to find true emancipation. Colored people and Negros became Black people and they adopted an alternative to straight hair...the Afro. They also began to show a visible connection to their African ancestors by wearing African clothing and adopting African names. They came to realize that black was beautiful. Now that black was beautiful, straightening one's hair in the image of white beauty was seen as blasphemy. Marcia Gillespie said: "This blacker than thou game, it started in the 60's." Some blacks were simply born without nappy hair. The sought after good hair of the recent past was now a badge of shame for many. In the hippie peace movement, blacks with Afros took their place alongside of white "longhairs." The 60's changed almost everyone's way of thinking about themselves and others. The older folks, both black and white had negative reactions to the Afro and longhair because they were raised in a different way. Black hair product manufactures disliked the Afro for financial reasons. They were in a recession because not as many hot combs, relaxer kits, pomades, and curlers were being sold. The summer of love ended. The 60's and the 70's passed away. Another generation found its voice in the 80's. Jheri Redding, a white hair-care entrepreneur invented a chemical process that converted straight (white) hair into curly hair...the California Curl. With the help of a black colleague he reformulated his original product to adapt to black hair...and the Jheri Curl was born. Black owned hair product manufactures were back in business in a big way. So too were hair salons and barbershops. The Care Free Curl was applied in a salon at a cost of $80 to $100, then maintained daily with a variety of moisturizers and curl activators. The Curl was a gold mine for manufactures until people decided that the cost of replacing lubricant stained pillow cases, shirt collars and furniture wasn't worth the curly hairdo. Essance magazine in 1990 urged readers to Reclaim Our Culture by living a more Afro-centric life in order to travel the path toward self-determination. Black and white owned companies tried to out Africanize one another with new or improved hair and beauty products. Many of those products, not only didn't perform as advertised, "but actually caused harm with itchy scalps with oozing blisters, green hair, and in some cases complete hair loss." After three hundred years of waiting for that perfect product to make black hair straight, shiny, and long...the weave industry took off. By the late 90's, 1.3 million pounds of human hair were imported from China, India, and Indonesia. The human hair selling business from New York to Los Angeles was dominated by Korean immigrants. Blacks continued to dominate the salon and barbershop business, because black men and women feel more comfortable having their hair done by someone with black hair. Famous black women like Oprah Winfree, Janet Jackson,Diana Ross, and Tyra Banks wore weaves and braid extensions to get that long swinging straight hair which was once again called good hair. Beauty magazines, music videos and Hollywood movies sought out light skinned, long haired women. Dredlocks and cornrows were another way to connect with one's African roots. Dreds were soon adopted by whites too. Also wearing Dredlocks were Hindu holy men, Rastafarians, Maori warriors of New Zealand and Bo Derek. It is a hairstyle over which no group can claim ownership. Black children are indoctrinated into the culture of hair and the black hair lifestyle. Even now, the permanents necessary to having good hair require a lot of time and maintenance and money. Whether black people view their hair as a crowning glory or a lifelong frustration, finding the right person to clip it, cut it, or style it is very important. Their hairdresser is right up there as important in their lives as clergy and parents. Hair for me, a white man, has always had a major importance in my life. In the 60's and early 70's when guys my age had long hair, I could not because I was in the Marine Corp. After my military service, I tried to let my hair grow, but at work or in church or in Lodge, older men kept bugging me to "get a haircut." In 2007, I retired from pretty much everything and let my hair grow long...almost down to my waist. You can see it in my profile photos. My head of hair is very thick and has several colors in it. It's almost white in the front and on the top and graduates to a dark brown near the back of my neck. I have had many people comment about how "beautiful" my hair is. I don't mean to brag...I'm just saying the truth. When my wife would braid one single braid down the middle of my back that I call my "Jesus" braid, or makes two braids that hang over my shoulders to the front that I call my "Willie" (Nelson) braids, the several colors intertwine down through the braids. I seem to get more compliments about my hair from black folks, especially older black women. I've often wondered why that was so. Now I think I know......Michael
