David Foster Wallace wrote that Toward the End of Time was John Updike 's worst novel. I haven't read them all so I can't say, but Updike was such a master of observation and description that reading anything he wrote is always at least instructive. I've never read anything by him that I was sorry to have read. He makes a simple walk to the end of the driveway to pick up the day's newspaper after a snowfall an interesting event: The Globe delivery man always prudently stops at the mailbox. As I, having squeezed my feet into my L.L. Bean Maine Hunting Shoes, walked down to retrieve the morning paper, I observed in addition to my own tracks (which imitate chains laid closely parallel) others: the clustered four paws of the hopping rabbit; the stately punctures, almost in a line, of the deer; the dainty marks, shaped like pansies, of the Kelly's cat, who comes over here to stalk the Y-footed birds that feed on our purple pokeberries; and a troubling set of prints, as widely spaced as the deer's but larger and multiply padded. In trying to picture the animal I could only imagine a lion. A smallish lion. One reads that, as the woods of the Northeast encroach more and more upon cleared fields, bears and coyotes and mountain lions are spreading south. As our species, having given itself a hard hit, staggers, the others, all but counted out, move in. Think of those days when the hominids were just a two-footed furry footnote lost amid the thundering herds of horned perissodactyls. Why does that thought make us happy? You can hate him for his attitude toward women but I don't. My biggest qualm with this novel is how much time he spends on describing the plant life around him. I admire and respect people who know about plants and trees, but going on as long and as often as Updike does about them was as if he had long passages in a language I don't know. There should be a rule for writers that no more than two percent of your work should be spent describing specific plant species and how they look at different times of the year. I'd guess in this book he spends at least ten percent of it doing so, probably more. If your vocabulary is as bad as mine, you will want to have a dictionary handing if reading a print edition so you can look up words like exiguous, oneiric, chthonic and exeget.
