I am going back trying to find Mignon Ballard mysteries I had not read when they first came out and along came DEADLY PROMISE in my local library system. I thoroughly enjoyed this story, set during the Christmas season, when Molly, whose husband died 9 months earlier in an unexplained car accident, takes her 13 year old daughter Joy to spend the holidays with her late husband Ethan's aunts. Living with the aunts is cousin Asa and his 15 year old troubled daughter who has a tendency to steal, lie, and literally poison people for revenge (a little syrup of ipecac and poisonous mistletoe berries in your fruitcake and brownies anyone?). Molly's having plenty of trouble with her own daughter Joy who witnessed Molly and Ethan having an argument just before he left to visit his aunts in response to a mysterious message 9 months earlier. Joy copes with Ethan's death by blaming it on Molly and giving her the cold shoulder but Molly is determined to find out who killed Ethan. The mystery centers on a day years earlier when Ethan was young and spending Christmas with the aunts. He and two friends found an envelope with two plane tickets send from "Your Mouse" to the town slut who disappeared that night (minus the tickets) when her father's barn also was burned down. I found myself suspecting everyone. Did Reuben, the minister do it? He had a crush on Rowena and she pretended to date him to fool her strict father when she was really having Reuben take her to meet other guys. Was it school teacher Myrtis? Or maybe even one of the aunts? Poor Molly tries to stir up romance with a mysterious stranger but with three people knowing about the hidden letter and two of them dead (Ethan and a friend), is this stranger really the third endangered one- or is he someone else? There is teen drama mixed with poisoned fruitcake (that leads to death), gunshots taken at Molly, threatening notes, hiding from a mysterious shooter in a car, running for one's life, and creepers in the dark at the church. Warning- Santa might not be who or what you think! A body is found dead and buried- not Rowena but the guy she was supposed to have run off with. Where is Rowena and WHO is she. Read and find out. Show more
