What can one say, Barbara Tuchman is a great history writer. And this, the book before she broke Huge with The Zimmerman Telegram, is no exception. This is the tortured tale of Britain's relationship with Palestine the Land, Palestine the religious concept, Jews, Arabs, and the Turks from Seljuks to Ottomans. It's not a simple milieu, but of course Tuchman is there to hold one's hand and guide one from idea to idea. She really does go back a long way, so Dark Ages and Medieval themes and history come into play, as does the reformation and counter reformation as the two streams of Christianity become more than four, and politicize. Of course in Parallel, the Porte is unifying an empire, but all the time maintaining contact with a particularly distant power-England. From 1600 on- as the British Empire waxes- that of the Sultan wanes, and we have the proto-colonial/imperial tendrils begin to seek concessions in Greater Syria/Egypt, the two provinces that alternated control over what we now know as Israel/Palestine. The book it at its best though at the later parts where she's able to show the actions/motivations of key players Like Balfour, Lloyd George, Sykes and Chaim Weizman, in the 1917 Gaza/Jaffa Campaign in WWI, the Balfour Declaration, and the creation of the Mandate. She's able to explain why, pre Holocaust, Western Jews were far less Zionist than their Eastern European, Official Pogrom-scarred brethren, and why many other subtle influences effect the flow of this particular history. I will say that the Indigenous Voice of the Palestinian Arabs is Notably Absent, in this book, replaced by far more interest in the thoughts of Iraqi/Jordanian/Saudi rulers, but then that is more a reflection of the times, when the Palestinian ethnic was more subsumed within a Jordanian identity, before the 6 Day War rent it asunder. Junior readers will find this a challenge, but one well worth the struggle. My Military Enthusiast/Gamer/Modeller audience may want to pass it up, although it is a GREAT deep background book to understand underlying Middle Eastern Frictions since 1917.
