When Phoebe's apartment goes up in flames, she's rescued by hunky firefighter Jackson. And when searching for new apartments a few days later, who turns out to be her new landlord but the very man who rescued her! Before long, Phoebe's falling in love with her handsome saviour, as well as with his teenage daughter Lauralee. But can she cope with the strain of his career? I loved this book when I first read it as a teenager. As an adult, there are parts that I still love. Lauralee is awesome, and I loved the friendships between Phoebe and Lauralee, Phoebe and female firefighter Keezia, Jackson and his buddy Fridge, and particularly Jackson's relationship with his daughter, which is both touching and very funny. I was very interested by the blossoming relationship between Fridge and Keezia - I hope they get their own book, although knowing Silhouette's dearth of African-American protagonists, they probably don't. *sighs* I also quite enjoyed learning a little about firefighting. In fact, the only thing in the book that I wasn't really feeling was the romance between hero and heroine. I can't explain why, it just lacked - do I dare say spark? It lacked something, anyway. Aside from lust, I got very little emotion from the pair of them. They seemed like nice people, but I have no idea why they fell in love. In addition to that, the book felt a little unbalanced. On the one hand, you have the light, airy feeling that the teasing between Jackson-Lauralee and Jackson-Fridge evokes, and then Buck throws in this huge trauma that Phoebe's gone through, with her fiancé burning to death and her father dying in front of her. Aside from working as a plot device to make Phoebe scared of Jackson's job, this background serves no purpose and is basically ignored for the majority of the book, which really bothered me - trauma like this generally leaves major marks on a person, and if it's going to be included at all it should be given the page time that such a character-defining thing deserves, not mentioned once or twice as a convenient way to further the story and then forgotten about. It made Phoebe seem shallow, and there was no reason for her to be. Overall, Sparks was a sweet, funny read that was let down by a couple glaring flaws. 3 - 3.5 stars.
