There will be no spoilers in this review. But I will say that if you've ever read this entire book and talk to someone else who read the entire book you both might benefit from questioning each other about it. I am not certain whether one of the key events in it took place or not. I feel sure that Heller wants us to have a definite idea of what happened in this instance. This novel came out in 1974. It was very well received. Kurt Vonnegut wrote a brilliant essay about the book on the front page of THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW. Not only was the review positive, but it was one of Vonnegut's best pieces of writing. The review always stuck with me, and, in the ensuing decades, I read and re-read the first forty or so pages of SOMETHING HAPPENED, always meaning to tackle the whole book at some time. I was fourteen in 1974. Almost fifty years later, having now read the novel from beginning to end, I can say it has influenced my thinking all this time. As any cursory glance will tell the reader, this book covers ground most major mid-century American authors covered: A corporate executive has a miserable home life. John Updike, Saul Bellow, John Cheever, Philip Roth and John O'Hara, all of whom modeled their ulcerated fat-cats on Sinclair Lewis's Babbitt, explored this territory with sardonic joy. Joseph Heller, on the other hand, dispensed with his famous humor and wrote a Wagnerian saga of the post-World War Two businessman. There are a handful of mirthful moments here, but unlike Heller's much-earlier, infinitely more popular CATCH-22, or his slightly later, quite obscure GOOD AS GOLD, this novel is grim throughout. This is not to say it does not depict moments of joy. An exhilarating passage about the narrator play-fighting with his son is almost valiant in its love of life. But it's like those moments in Dostoevsky's NOTES FROM UNDERGROUND showing the wretched hero catching a fleeting glimpse of a purposeful existence; it is part of a Hellscape. If Joseph Heller has a literary model here, it is probably Eugene O'Neill. As with O'Neill, the audience or reader must be ready for clinical descriptions of despair. Heller, like O'Neill, shows a great sense of pacing. SOMETHING HAPPENED is a monumental treatment of the harrowing of the soul.
