“And I come down to deliver them…and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.” – Exodus 3:8, quoted by Vilhelm Moberg in Unto a Good Land ------------------------------------------------ Unto a Good Land is Vilhelm Moberg’s second book in what was originally a planned trilogy about the emigration of a group of people to the United States from the province of Smaland, located in southern Sweden. As it turned out, in order to complete the saga he had to write a fourth book. What follows are the main characters in the books and their motivations for leaving their homeland in 1850 and sailing to a new land: Karl Oscar Nilsson had inherited a small parcel of land, but the soil was thin and rocky and he had to heavily mortgage the farm in order to survive bad crop years. He was a hard worker but that has never been a guarantee of prosperity. And in his case, no matter how hard he and his wife Kristina labored, the family continuously faced hard times and even famine. Karl Oskar wanted to live in a land where the sweat of his brow would reap some economic benefit. Emigration to America, he believed, would allow him to provide a better life for his wife and their three small children. Robert Nilsson , Karl Oscar’s younger brother, as the second son of a farmer, had no prospects of inheriting any of the small holdings of his family. Emigration represented his chance to escape his life of drudgery as an indentured farmhand. Danjel Andreasson , Kristina’s maternal uncle, had been banished from Sweden due to his religious beliefs. The powerful state Lutheran church was intolerant of any and all dissent in religious matters -- and Danjel was a dissenter. He viewed America as a place where he and his family would have the freedom to worship as they pleased. Jonas Petter Albrektsson had an altogether different reason for wanting to leave Sweden. He felt trapped in an unhappy marriage at a time when divorce simply was not an option. Ulrika of Vastergohl was a former prostitute who was looking to escape her past and to start a new life along with her teen-aged daughter, Elin . The first book in the series, The Emigrants, concluded with the group reaching New York after a horrendous voyage across the Atlantic. Early in Unto a Good Land , they began their overland journey westward with the territory of Minnesota being their ultimate goal. After spending ten weeks crossing the Atlantic, it took them five more weeks to travel the 1500 miles to Minnesota. They travelled by river steamboat, train (which they had never seen before), lake steamboat, river steamboat again, and Mississippi steamboat, arriving at the town of Stillwater, Minnesota Territory, located on the St. Croix River. And even then their ordeal did not end until the little group of sixteen walked thirty miles along the river until they reached Taylors Falls. There would have been eighteen, but on their voyage across the Atlantic scurvy claimed one of their numbers and on the river boat on the Illinois River, cholera claimed a second. After arriving at Taylors Falls, Karl Oscar, Jonas Petter, and Danjel scouted the surrounding area in order for each of them to lay claim to 160 acres which was their legal right under the terms of The Homestead Act. Although they had arrived too late to plant a crop, there was still much for them to do. For one thing, they had to build homes that would protect them from what would be a harsh Minnesota winter. Karl Oskar and Kristina faced another daunting prospect. Kristina had been pregnant when the emigrants left Sweden and now she would be forced to give birth in a remote area without benefit of a doctor or even an experienced midwife. I have read about emigration, immigration, and migration for as long as I can remember. Always at the back of my mind as I read is the thought about whether or not people would have made the decision to pull up stakes and begin what was likely to be such an arduous and dangerous journey if they actually knew what risks they were undertaking. Furthermore, it wasn’t just single men who sailed from Sweden to America or travelled overland to California or Oregon or other points westward, but entire families, often with small children. The motivation, or perhaps desperation, would have to be extremely powerful to compel parents to place the lives of their children in such extreme jeopardy. Or maybe it was ignorance of what they faced that allowed them to take that chance. As dangerous as the Swedish emigrants’ journey from New York to Minnesota was in 1850, consider the plight of a family a decade earlier travelling in a covered wagon from Missouri to California or Oregon; at least the Swedish emigrants did not have to cross grasslands, deserts, and mountains and had to walk only thirty miles. On the other hand, most of the pilgrims heading to California and Oregon could speak English, unlike the Swedes who felt they were “deaf mutes” who could not make themselves understood nor understand what was being said to them. It is also true, as Moberg points out, that when the settlers reached their destination, the danger abated only by degree. Starting over is never easy, but it is many times more difficult in a remote wilderness. It has been pointed out that Moberg’s research was so meticulous and that his books adhered so closely to the historical record that they could be read as historical documents. In fact, he was once quoted as saying that he considered his four books to be more than historical fiction, that they should be read as documentary novels. Several critics have written that Moberg’s writing did for the Swedish emigrants what O.E. Rolvaag did for the Norwegians in his Giants in the Earth trilogy. That is indeed high praise. Thanks again, Diane. I’m looking forward to Book III: The Settlers.
