I’m giving this two stars even though I hated it because it contained a lot of elements unrelated to the writing that I just don’t like. I have an inherent bias against: 1.Small town settings -esp. when they are portrayed as “good” and the big city is “bad” 2.Ridiculous world building – thriving niche businesses in a small town, as well as a large police force, hospital, a Harvard med school trained psychiatrist that happens to eat breakfast with one of his patients at the local diner, outdoor rink with reliable ice before Christmas, etc . . . 3. Sequel bait minor characters who don’t add anything to the central narrative. 4. Minor characters who are there to add “charm” to the central narrative and give little sermons. 5. Christmas stories with all the trimmings. So I KNEW this was going to be a small town romance set during Christmas in a town called Bethlehem. So I got what deserved. But I didn’t deserve: 1. A hero who rarely had any good or interesting thoughts about the heroine until late in the story. He was cold – so cold that I didn’t believe for one moment that he cheated because he was lonely. He was not lonely - he was horny and his wife was too much trouble/unpredictable to get into bed. I hated him throughout the story and didn’t believe in his redemption. Also: He didn’t grovel enough. He didn’t defend his wife in a private conversation with his sleezy lawyer friend. He didn’t stop his wife from leaving on Christmas Eve – I do think at that moment he wanted her gone out of his life. She was more trouble than she was worth. I don’t think he would have been destroyed if she died. I think he was great at compartmentalizing his feelings and out of sight out of mind. That he had to keep going to the hospital/rehab was an irritant to him – not a penance for his guilt. He had no social skills and no charm. I don't know what the heroine ever saw in him. He was just an awful person all around I also did not deserve: 2. A heroine who wasted 16 years with the hero and is still wasting time being angry at the hero as she recovers. If she wants a divorce so bad, why doe she continually fight with the guy? He’s a waste of energy. Especially since she thinks she’s going to have a new man and a baby within a year. What magical thinking is this? She’s in a small town. Who is she going to meet? How do you fall in love on demand? Does she think that in her late 30’s she’s going to get pregnant on the first try? I will give the author this – this kind of magical thinking sets the reader up for the ridiculous angel scene at the end. And that ending? Honestly, it was laugh or stroke out from rage. I chose laughter because neither character is dealing from a full deck. She wanted an excuse to stay. He wanted . . . I don’t know - his doormat, predictable bedmate back? It wasn’t love that’s for sure. The reviews are all over the map for this story . I can see why. If you like this kind of setting and characters, then MP delivers. I never got carried away by the emotions. I just wanted to set all of her Christmas decorations/pumpkin pie recipes on fire (now there would be a festival of lights) and force the heroine to *change.* Amnesia stories are supposed to be a reset. This heroine just wanted to get well enough to be a cozy domestic doormat again. She didn’t change at all. The less said about the hero, the better.
