I bought Now and Then for my dad a few years ago for Christmas because he loves Gil Scott-Heron and ever since I contemplated borrowing it from him to read for myself. I finally did and needless to say I loved it. I wasn't super familiar with Gil Scott-Heron prior to this, but my dad at least made me aware of his songs "Winter in America," "Watergate Blues," "Whitey on the Moon," and of course the iconic "The Revolution Will Not Be Televised." If you aren't ready to spend money on this collection right away I'd highly recommend listening to those songs to get a taste of his lyricism but having the whole collection to read is amazing. There are so many poems in here that gushing about all of them would require writing a dissertation so I'll try to keep it as short as possible and highlight a few favorites. The Movie poems, "'B' Movie" and "Re-Ron," are Gil Scott-Heron's reflections on Ronald Reagan's election and re-election, and what kind of country would have a washed up B-list actor play the biggest role in American politics. In the 'B' movie introduction he states, "I remember what I said about Raygun: 'I called him "Hollyweird." Acted like an actor. Acted like a liberal. Acted like General Franco when he acted like Governor of California. That's after he started acting like a Republican. Then (in 1976) acted like somebody was going to vote for him for President.' Now he acted like 26% percent of the registered voters is actually a mandate. We're all actors in this I suppose." In "'B' Movie" he emphasizes the backlash that Reagan's presidency represented: "Nostalgia. That's what America wants. The good old days. When we 'gave them hell!' When the buck stopped somewhere and you could still buy something with it! To a time when movies were in black and white and so was everything else." I especially love "Re-Ron," not just for its clever title, but for breakdown of what a good old Ronnie presidency entails. From invasions of Grenada to arming reactionary forces in El Salvador and Nicaragua and how it all feels so familiar; how America just loves reruns of its greatest hits: It's a Re-Ron, a time machine stuck in reverse and filming new scenes. 20 years at the point of a gun. To hell with reality: 'Places everyone!' It's a Re-Ron. Nostalgia got stoned. Mom and apple pie. No place like home. And leave it to Beaver and the Twilight Zone. can't they face it, Goddamnit? Yesterday's gone. Just like the movie poems "Space Shuttle" (1978) is so good that I would just recommend reading the entire thing, but to summarize it, it's about how space was supposed to be about the infinite beauty of the universe but ended up being a Cold War agenda: Space was the place where at least we thought our dreams were safe; where yesterdays of youth and innocence and grace floated somewhere high above the planet's face. Ah, but the distance has been erased 'cause Uncle Sam is on the case. E.T. is joining the Arms Race! The refrain of the poem never lets you forget that millions is being spent on space while the planet and people are suffering for it: "Space Shuttle/raising hell down on the ground!/ Space Shuttle/turning the seasons upside down./ Space Shuttle/and all the hungry people know/ all change sho' 'nuff ain't progress when you're poor./ No matter what man goes looking for/ he always seems to find a war./ As soon as dreams of peace are felt/ the war is raging somewhere else." "Work For Peace" (1994) is Heron's rage against the moneyed interest of U.S. militarism, how the media plays its role as a stenographer for their agenda, and how it's up to us, the masses of people, to stop it: "The military and the monetary/ Get together whenever they think its necessary/ They have turned our brother and sisters into mercenaries,/ They are turning the planet into a cemetery." // "War in the desert sometimes sure could seem scary/ But they beamed out the war to all their subsidiaries/ Tried making 'so damn insane' (Saddam Hussein) a worthy adversary" Gil Scott-Heron states that his "Inner City Blues" (1981) was meant to be a "compliment/supplement" to Marvin Gaye's song by the same name: "To see sweet sisters, the blossoms of our African tree/ Profiling on the corners talking about 'ten and three'/ Because in spite of all the money we made and taxes we paid/ The woman was looking at hungry babes/ And some decisions had to be made/ Could you tell her it's better to go to your grave/ As a slave to the minimum wage." In a similar fashion "Paint It Black" depicts the poverty and struggles of African Americans in the inner city. This one is extremely short so what I type below is the entirety of it: Picture a man of nearly thirty who seems twice as old with clothes torn and dirty. Give him a job shining shoes or cleaning out toilets with bus station crews. Give him six children with nothing to eat. Expose them to life on a ghetto street. Tie an old rag around his wife's head and have her pregnant and lying in bed. Stuff them all in a Harlem house. Then tell them how bad things are down South. "The Ghetto Code" (1978) is a clever use of language and play on words to tell the history of FBI/CIA meddling in the world as well as in the domestic politics of Black America. He describes "the ghetto code" as a way of using code words when speaking on the phone to avoid giving away secrets to whoever may be listening in on the conversation. What he lays out in this poem is long list of the government's dirty laundry from war on Cuba to the overthrow of Allende in Chile to Che Guevara's execution to the hinting at the conspiracies surrounding infamous assassinations. It's all told with this never ending "dot-dot-dit-dit" throughout to replicate the sound of wiretapping a phone, implying that they're always listening: JFK. You believe that? RFK. You believe that? MLK. You believe that? Malcolm X. You believe that? All some elaborate 'c' - Coincidence? Or just a little old 'c' - Conspiracy? There are several questions concerning the letter 'c,' this most important of letters, that most in- dividuals should be asking themselves: 'The C.I.A.... who runs that organization?' And, 'Who runs this country?' 'Dot-dot-dit-dit-dot-dot-dash.' (Damned if I know!) One of the last ones in this collection is, "King Henry IV" (2010) which is another clever title that envisions HIV as a king conquering, killing, and taking over people's lives: "The kids believed if you wasn't gay and didn't shoot dope/ You was home free, take the day off and float" And while people blamed it on being gay or some kind of deficiency in your character, it was taking over the world like a monarchical empire on a mission: He was no more than a whisper at gay after-hours spots If there are no bloodless revolutions why hadn't he fired a shot? Sunday mornings from the pulpit he was blamed on promiscuity More confusing newspaper bullshit only furthered the ambiguity Preacher's became obsessed and called him a message from above The creature's game progressed since nobody knew who the fuck he was Completely taking over areas that had never seen royalty But soon millions on five continents could all pledge their loyalty The invisible monarch was steady doing his thing He never heard folks once saying, 'Hail to the King!' Again, all of these poems are available to read online because they are songs he released. Some are more musically inclined, others are performed in a more spoken word style, but all are incredibly powerful and relevant. Maybe I'm just not looking in the right places but I certainly can't think of any current artist or poet producing anything today at the level of political consciousness Gil Scott-Heron had in every one of these song-poems. I think it just goes to show how much revolutionary change was going on at the time and how much the capitalist forces he wrote about have sedated us and captured not only our political imaginations but, in doing so, has deeply inhibited artistic output. Now and Then is a wonderful reminder of how deeply intertwined music (especially black music) and politics has been.
