In the 80's, everyone and their brother seemed to recommend that I should read Daniel Moran's "Continuing Time" series. It took me over 20 years to find all the books (yes, they were THAT rare for a long time), but Amazon finally published The Last Dancer in ebook format and I was able to read one more book - I read Emerald Eyes about 10 years ago, and The Long Run a few years after that, but haven't been able to find The Last Dancer until now. While I freely admit that DKM was relatively good at predicting some technological trends (esp. regarding the internet (still in its infancy compared to what DKM imagines it becoming) - he was certainly very accurate about his prediction that governments would end up being very heavy-handed and draconian in their attempts to control the internet and that it would be a large controversial issue in society!), his ability to write convincing characters is a bit lacking, I think. This book was especially bad in that respect - the main heroine, Denice Castanaveras, is...well, the best way to describe her, imo, is "chaotic". For most of the book, I had a pretty clear idea of WHAT she was doing, but no idea WHY. Some of this is certainly attributable to her young age, and part of the theme of the book is about her finding herself - I get that. Her actions, even given that premise, seemed contradictory and inconsistent and her motivations were always inscrutable. Even after she supposedly "finds" herself near the end of the book and chooses a path that seems to be the life-affirming goody-two-shoes, the last line of the book has her doing an action that just seemed VERY contradictory to that path and, from my viewpoint, seemed to come out of left field. Most of the other characters in the book are the same way - inconsistent and unpredictable. Maybe DKM is trying to make a point that people are unpredictable and he's being more subtle than I'm giving him credit for, but .. I don't think so. In any case, I'm glad I finally read the book because it's been a LONG quest to find it, but I have to admit to feeling somewhat let down. For all the hype, I expected better. Oh well - it was certainly far from the WORST book I've read, and there were parts of the book that I genuinely enjoyed (the Dvan/Sedon background subplot and Dvan's telling of his history, for example), so looking at it objectively, it's worth reading. I just don't think it was worth waiting 20 years for.
