Review to follow. On a book buying trip. Whooopeeeee! And after some nice finds, it's back to business. Music for Chameleons: New Writing by Truman Capote Including Handcarved Coffins Although Random House plugs Music for Chameleons as new writings by Truman Capote , when it was published in 1980, all of the pieces had appeared in the two preceding years in Capote's usual venues, "Esquire," "Interview," "McCall's," "New York Magazine," and "The New Yorker." Within four years, Capote would be dead. The jacket photo revealed an older, perhaps more contemplative writer. There is no cigarette in his hand. As he indicated in one segment, he had quit smoking years ago. In the final segment of the book, "Nocturnal Turnings," Capote interviews himself, looking back at his life--his fears, his faith, his faults. "TC: What frightens you?" "TC: Real toads in imaginary gardens. "TC: No, but in real life--" "TC: I'm talking about real life." "TC: Let me put it another way. What, of your own experiences, hae been the most frightening?" "TC: Betrayals. Abandonments."... "And that's when I began to believe in God again, and understand that Sook was right, that everything was His design, the old moon and the new moon, the hard rain falling, and if only I would ask Him to help me, He would." "TC: And has He?" "TC: Yes. More and more. But I'm not a saint yet. I'm an aloholic. I'm a drug addict. I'm homosexual. I'm a genius. Of course, I could be all four of these dubious things and still be a saint. But I shonuf ain't no saint yet, nawsuh." And while Capote seems to have begun to contemplate his mortality, the range and depth of the writing in this anthology is breathtaking. All but one of the fourteen segments of the book are claimed to be non-fiction, or perhaps as Capote invented the form, non-fiction fiction, in these examples, short vignettes, portraits of people he knew and met, killers he interviewed in addition to Perry Smith and Dick Hickock. Only one story, "Mojave," Capote claimed as fiction, or in his own coy fashion as he said he wrote it as if it were. Capote ranges from the mysterious, where chameleons dance to piano music played by an old woman on Martinique. Is it real or is it the influence of Absinthe laced in his tea? Fiction or non-fiction? He reveals his humor while evading a subpoena to testify in the retrial of Bobby Beausoleil for the murder of Gary Hinman, the first of what came to be known as the Manson Family murders. He had promised what Beausoleil had told him would remain confidential. When Beausoleil was granted a new trial, Capote was served with a subpoena. His sneaking on a plane, dressed as one of Pearl Bailey's musician's, his head pressed to her bosom as she wrapped her arm around his shoulder will leave you howling. His meanness emerges in his portrait of Marilyn Monroe, whom he portrays her as "A Beautiful Child" who calls her competition cunts, pops pills and drinks way too much. "A Beautiful Child?" perhaps so, perhaps not. But it is in "Handcarved Coffins" that Capote reveals his mastery in the depiction of true crime. An unknown killer has targeted nine different victims. Each has received a handcarved coffin in which the killer has placed a candid black and white photo of his intended victim. Capote is referred to investigator Jake Pepper to render his opinion of the killings and the evidence that is too scant to make an arrest. The killings are diabolical. A couple enters a car filled with rattlesnakes pumped up on amphetamines to make them even more aggressive than they are in nature. A wire stretched across the road decapitates another. Will Pepper get his man, or not? Capote stretches out the tension at a nerve wracking pace, plummeting the reader to despair with each successful killing. This is a masterpiece. Pure and simple. Pepper and Capote put the pieces together, discovering the killer has a darkroom and prefers German cameras. Capote's interview skills are intuitive and directly on point. However, subsequent research by London Sunday Times reporters Peter and Leni Gillman shows that no case containing the details in this short piece exist in any law enforcement file. In all probability it was based on an unsolved case of Kansas Bureau of Investigation Agent Alvin Dewy whom Capote met during his work on "In Cold Blood." Capote was growing tired. There were no other novels. "Answered Prayers" remained unfinished. One Christmas appeared as a short story in "The Ladies' Home Journal" in December, 1982. Then a short article "Remembering Tennessee" appeared in "Playboy Magazine." There was nothing more. Once more I think of "Nocturnal Turnings." Capote knew he was slowing down. He knew he was tired. "TC:...Now let's knock it off and try for some shut-eye." TC: But first let's say a prayer. Let's say our old prayer. The one we used to say when we were real little and slept in the same bed with Sook and Queenie, with the quilts piled on top of us because the house was so big and cold. TC: Our old prayer? Okay. TC and TC: Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep. And if I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take. Amen. TC: Goodnight. TC: Goodnight.... TC and TC: Zzzzzzzzzzzz." For a final look at Truman Capote's last burst of creativity, this is the book to read, fiction or non-fiction.
