Can you Forgive Her? is the first of the Palliser’s series, Trollope’s political novels. At the centre is Alice Vavasor whom the author asks us to forgive, as she begins the story by jilting her very eligible and nearly perfect fiancée. This crime induces her to become engaged to her cousin who is so evil that Trollope made sure to give him a disfiguring facial scar lest the reader thinks for a moment George Vavasor is the tiniest bit good. George has a sister, Kate, and they have an Aunt, Mrs Greenow, a recently widowed woman set on enjoying herself after her financially satisfying but otherwise inane marriage to a much older man. The fourth woman in this novel is Glencora Palliser married to one who will certainly be a very important character in these novels, Plantagenet Palliser, the man destined to become Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Pallisers are by far the most interesting couple of all the duos and trios of this novel. Glencora is an extraordinary female character. She married her husband because he’s aristocrat and she’s rich, and because everyone pushed her to do it. She is in love with someone else, and is given plenty of opportunities to give in to those feelings. Yet she doesn’t. Glencora has the vitality of Emma Bovary and the sense of misplacement of Effi Briest, but she manages to avoid the path of destruction that would inevitably befall her had she followed her heart. Her husband, the oddly named Plantagenet, is a Karenin-like character albeit less interesting (Trollope isn’t Tolstoy, after all). But he does try to connect with his wife, which is a wonderful way to subvert the trope of the aloof husband. Trollope knows how to write women, which is just as well because the novel is entirely about the condition of women in society. The questions asked here are relevant only to them; the men of the story do not really understand or relate to them. But one gets the feeling that there’s an inability to answer the problems posed by the narrative. While Trollope realizes, at some level, that for a woman marriage simply isn’t enough, he doesn’t have the ability, or the freedom, to go further than that, to allow a woman to exist independently from the institution of marriage. Only Kate manages to escape that fate but it is possible to argue that she had deposited all her faith and energy on her brother George as other women do with their husbands. This lends the novel a kind of duality, as if Trollope is toying with ideas of female emancipation only to reject them. He does not do it out of a sense of male superiority, but because he simply would not know how to write down those notions. Their endings feel inevitable even when the narrative logically demands otherwise - in the case of Alice Vavasor, for instance, that she simply remains single. This is an excellent novel with good characters, good plot, good structure, interesting ideas. It’s all a novel should be. It’s good to know I can always count on 19th century fiction to deliver.
