It's always hard for me to review a Georgette Heyer book. She's one of my favorite authors and I've read most of her books many times. Which makes it difficult to feign objectivity or even to avoid gushing like a little girl. In False Colours , like other of her adventure-flavored romances ( The Unknown Ajax , The Toll-Gate , or The Talisman Ring for example), the central romance is resolved between half and three-quarters through the book (60% in this case, I checked). Unlike those others, however, the adventure side of False Colours is pretty tame—indeed, there isn't much for the heroes to do besides wait for Kit's missing twin to show up. And there's no malignant force to contend against. Indeed, all the factors of the dilemma they must extricate themselves from are caused, directly or indirectly, by the Fancot twins themselves or their mother. So you'd think this book would be less enjoyable than others of its kind. As you near the end of the book, there's no real urgency or threat or danger. And the romance is resolved—quite satisfactorily, thank you very much. Yet the ending, while a slower pace than you'd expect, is not only not a dead bore but is really quite enjoyable all the way to the very end. Indeed, though I've read the book more times than I can confidently state and I know very well how things will resolve, I'm not even a little bit tempted to simply stop reading once Kit and Cressy declare their devotion to one another or when even Evelyn shows up to tell them where he's been. The thing is, Heyer has populated the book with such engaging characters that you really aren't ready to be done with them until everybody is reasonably well-settled. The magic of the book is that you like Lady Denville, the Dowager Stavely, and Sir Bonamy even as you have to acknowledge the faults that cause so many difficulties. And Lady Denville shines as a character you can't help but love. Her love for her sons and basic good-natured care for others is endearing even as you understand that her inability to control her impecunious habits is at the heart of Evelyn's difficulty. Add Heyer's deft hand with dialogue and the book is fun to the very end. While not her best work or my most loved, this continues to be on my high rotation list because I simply enjoy spending time with these characters.
