4/7/16 - still a five-star book for me; I really enjoyed reading this book (third time) with the GR Heyer Fans group. Several readers loved it, some hated it and thought it was too much of a departure from Heyer's usual sparkling, witty romances, but I think we all got a lot out of the discussion, sifting through the many layers of this wonderful book and it's many flawed and fascinating characters. This is a book I will return to often, so much to discover and savor. July 2015 - this is still a five-star book for me - I read it over the course of two long days driving in the car and it made the time fly! I first read it several years ago and gave it five stars but could not remember a thing about it, but I'm on a quest inspired by the GR Georgette Heyer group discussion to reread several of her books. I loved this book because it has all the wonderful qualities I expect from one of my favorite writers - witty, sparkling dialogue, memorable characters and funny scenes, but with this book Heyer set out to write a very different, non-traditional love story, and she certainly succeeded, I think! Adam is a handsome, titled officer and hero of the Peninsular Wars, but he's in love with the dumpy heroine's friend; he doesn't even recall meeting the ravishingly beautiful Julia's friend Jenny. He is called home upon the sudden death of his father, a dashing spendthrift who cared more for running with the Prince Regent's profligate Carlton House set than managing his crumbling estate (and fortune). Adam's worst fear comes true - the family is financially ruined and his only option to support his mother and sisters is to sell the ancestral home - or find an heiress to marry. Appalled at the idea of selling himself to the highest bidder, Adam prepares to sell the estate and honorably breaks off his attachment to Julia; her father, Lord Oversley, suggests to Adam that he might consider marrying plain but practical heiress Jenny. Adam caves and proposes to Jenny, and the two begin the difficult task of navigating the yawning class divide between the two families. Adam's interactions with Mr. Chawleigh, Jenny's extremely wealthy but coarse and common father, are priceless and illustrate the gulf between the rising merchant class and the landed aristocracy. I was touched by the developing relationship between Jenny and Adam as their marriage of convenience slowly grows into something more, even as they deal with his obvious continued infatuation with Julia and her drama-queen hysteria! Heyer, who pretty much invented the Regency romance genre, turns it on its head with this mismatched pair. I always enjoy Heyer's characters, but she gives us some real standouts here - Adam, despite his heartache, sacrifices and disappointment is a charming, sweet-natured, strong yet warm-hearted and unfailingly polite gentleman - and he faces extreme provocation from his gruff vulgarian of a father-in-law! Yet Mr. Chawleigh truly hides a heart of gold under his rough exterior; the Dowager, Adam's mother, is the perfect counter-balance with her die-away airs and the guilt trips she attempts to lay on her children (which they see right through, of course...) Adam's younger sister Lydia is a delight, funny and outspoken and painfully honest, leading to lots of laughs for the reader and groans from her hypochondriac mother. Julia is the self-absorbed beauty who finally admits to Adam that she "cannot live without being loved", keeping her from being too black-and-white of a villainess "other woman" stereotype, even if she is an annoying drama queen! And finally Jenny, my favorite character - she's a real treat and a rarity for Heyer, a plump, plain and plain-spoken young woman with good manners instilled by her exclusive finishing school but no end of common sense. Jenny knows exactly who she is and what she's getting into with this arranged marriage - she so obviously loves Adam and only wants "to make him comfortable, for men like to be comfortable." She also dearly loves her controlling, overbearing father and wants to honor his dream of buying her a title and the aristocratic husband attached to it, but she loves Adam for his adorable self and means to build a lovely life together, and they do! This book really made me happy and was a feel-good read I will return to again. Highly recommended if you can suspend your expectations and appreciate an unromantic, yet deep and abiding love story!
