⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ five stars - Five solid stars for this stellar fiction novel, from the late great Dame Heyer that’s a romance, but is not really a romance 💁‍♀️ If you follow my reviews, you know that I keep a sorted list of all the Georgette Heyer’s I have read. The list includes all of her Regency romances, as well as a handful of her other works. Heyer is on my favorite author list and will remain there as I reread these books near compulsively (my top ten favorites mostly), and these books have been my comfort go-to reading throughout my lifetime. “A Civil Contract” is one of her more ambitious Regency romances, and this story falls at number twenty on my own personal Heyer list. The story here starts out as a through-the-looking glass type of read where the reader has the engaging perspective of what happens inside the drawing room of a high-flyer and her beau. While the reader is privy to a ringside seat to what would be a normal courtship, or one that would take place in any one of Heyer’s typical romances, it quickly becomes apparent to the reader that we are seeing a view of the B Side of a standard romantic Regency Couple in Heyer’s Regency. It’s morbid curiosity of this doomed courtship that opens the story, and what starts off as a disappointment for the perceived perfect couple quickly spirals into tragic heartbreak. How can this be a romance, you’re asking? Well, the story morphs into a tale that is spun with infinite care and plotted skill, and becomes a wonderfully drawn character study. This story, in my own humble opinion, is more about our Hero. The reader is treated to his thought processes, and they are those of a bankrupt, landed peer. I just loved this part of the story, and his whole character arc was fascinating to me. The romance that this book settles on is a marriage of convenience for our H. Does he come to love her? In all of his stiff upper lip glory, we are never quite sure. There is a scene where he meets with his first love again (the secondary heroine/OW from the opening scene), and it’s becomes quite clear that the great love of his life is his titled property. This insight into his character is well drawn. The reader feels the emotion, and it’s heartfelt. Does he come to love the wife he tied himself to in order to save his inheritance and to meet his ambition of transferring the property intact to his future offspring? We aren’t quite sure; nor is his wife, unfortunately. The heroine, on the other hand, suffers emotionally from unrequited love, or so we are told. This book is one of the better stories I have ever read. The overall tragicness of love lost, but loved gained, has stayed with me. The ending is one I will never forget. I did love this story for what it is: a well written, top twenty Heyer (on my own list), and an emotional, heartfelt read. I do reread this one every few years or so. Not as often as higher rated Heyer’s from my own list, but it does get a reread now and then. Five solid stars as only Heyer can provide. Do recommend.
