Danielle Steel's The Ghost is a fairly typical romance story: a dissolved marriage makes our hero feel like he'll never love again, like his life has fallen apart, until he has a chance to recover and heal and realize that maybe he can trust his heart to another after all. There's no drama to this story; you can see how it's going to come out after a few chapters. A lackluster plot like this can still be saved, though, if the characters are interesting and you care about their progress. Alas, Steel's characters come out flat and uninteresting. Charlie, the lead character, comes across as neurotic and annoying. Sarah, another important character in the novel, is more interesting, but painted in such broad strokes that it's hard to care about her part in the story. It's hard to take a character seriously when he or she is the single most attractive being ever to walk the earth (or so we are told repeatedly), so magically perfect that they affect every person of the opposite sex (and many of the same sex) whenever they come into contact with them. Worse, the characters are shallow. What motivates Charlie, other than his (previously) perfect jet-set life, and a desperate (but unexplored) desire to be with someone? We'll never know. His clinging dependency is obvious early on, but Steel never explores the reasons for it. Sarah is tough and independent, and attributes it to her early upbringing, but we never see enough of that to get an idea of how she turned out this way. The uninteresting characters can be blamed on Steel's extremely poor writing. Her descriptions of people, for instance, are ham-fisted. Instead of illustrating her characters personalities through descriptions of their interactions with other characters, she just tells us how they are, over and over again. Dull and deadly repetition seems to be Steel's only method of conveying meaning. In the first chapter, we are told that Charlie "just couldn't believe" what was happening to him constantly, sometimes three times in the same paragraph. A better author might have illustrated his disbelief with some dialogue between Charlie and his ex, or his boss, or a stranger on the street. The dialogue isn't very interesting, either. Most authors use dialogue to break up long descriptive passages, giving us a chance to read shorter paragraphs that offer some insight into the character. Steel mixes dialogue with description, usually giving each character one sentence and then following it up with a half-page paragraph of the character's inner thoughts. You're not really following a conversation; you're hearing the character's thoughts, interspersed with brief verbal efforts. Even the basics of prose writing seem to be beyond Steel's grasp in this book. Using the third-person omniscient viewpoint, she jumps from perspective to perspective whenever she wants us to know what another character is thinking. She'll shift perspective multiple times in the same paragraph. Not only is it confusing, it's lazy and unnecessary. At the most elementary level, the writing is terrible. One paragraph early in the book contained three sentences in a row that began with the word "and". Steel frequently runs several sentences together, using commas where she should have used periods. It reads as if it were dictated into a tape recorder and transcribed verbatim, without taking the time to edit the story for readability. Anyone who did reasonably well in high school English class should be able to do better. In short, it's a lackluster story with flat characters, poorly written. Personally, I've found that I appreciate good prose and storytelling even more after being exposed to this book. The Ghost is one the worst books I've ever read. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
