Some background...soon after leaving the safe haven of college and beginning what would be a slow progression toward an actual "profession," I discovered Ayn Rand. My father had recommended _Atlas Shrugged_ years before, which I read with some degree of tedium...but that´s another Goodreads review. Suffice it to say that, being a young, naive, somewhat disoriented, reasonably intelligent person who was trying to make sense of the Real World, I glommed onto Ayn Rand's militant flavor of individualism like a starving cat at a tuna buffet. I wanted, desparately, somewhere in my eclectically idealistic psyche, to believe that the Randian universe of steely-eyed heroes and unwavering devotion to Something was something possible beyond the abundant pages of her books. Enter "Judgement Day: My Years With Ayn Rand." I enjoyed it, which is to say, I think that Branden described these tumultuous years with what seemed an admirable mixture of clear-headed retrospect and self-awareness, and with that, I felt comforted to see that Ayn Rand's novelized fantasy world was in fact just that -- something that simply did not match the reality of her life or of that of those close to her. "Close," that is, as much as a pedestal will allow one to be. That said, this was my one and only purportedly "factual" account of any part of Ayn Rand's life, so how accurate it is I can't say. A particularly telling thread of the book was the cult-like quality that the first band of Objectivists, of which Branden was more or less a founding member, supposedly developed, and Branden's preception that Rand's idealized fierce individualism, in the context of her immediate circle, devolved into what was actually a rigid ideological hierarchy, where Rand stood at the center and brooked little or no discord. It helped put her work into perspective, at least for me. By "perspective," I mean essentially blowing my illusions about her philosophy straight to hell. Whatever inspiration I naively found in her one-dimensional portrayal of Reason and Ambition became much harder to sustain or take seriously after reading -- granted, through hardly unbiased eyes -- a portrayal of a desparately insecure, paranoid control freak with a near pathological disregard for the welfare or rights of even those closest to her. All that said, the book is essentially in the "Tell-All" category -- written by a man whom Rand ultimately grew to despise. How accurate it therefore is, I suppose, is for others who actually knew her to judge.
