On October 16, 1962, the CIA informed President Kennedy that Russia was building nuclear missile sites in Cuba. Kennedy convened an executive committee known as Ex Comm to consider what the response should be. This is not a history. It is a personal memoir of Robert Kennedy and his recollections of the crisis and the meetings of the Ex Comm. The fourteen regular members of this committee had diverse and shifting opinions about the correct response during the two weeks they met. President Kennedy consistently sought to avoid a nuclear exchange. In my edition of this book, published in 1971, there is an Afterword written by Richard E. Neustadt and Graham T. Allison. This is a valuable contribution to an understanding of the Cuban Missile Crisis and the changes it meant for our government. They mention The Nuclear Paradox, which is the MAD doctrine—Mutually Assured Destruction. That any country initiating a Nuclear attack would suffer untold damage by a Nuclear response. “In a world of mutual superiority, neither nation can win a nuclear war.” (Page 107) They also describe the changes in the Checks and Balances that the Founding Fathers had written into the Constitution. They envisioned the president and congress collaborating when considering a military action. Since then presidents have taken action without any consent of congress. World War II was the last time Congress wrote a declaration of War. Three of the four most deadly wars—the Civil War, Korea, and Vietnam—were the result of presidential action. In 1962 the president relied on members of his administration. These were people who owed their roles to the president and were not elected by the public, thus denying the public of any say in the president’s power to determine the use of military force. This presidential action worked for the benefit of the country. The authors of this Afterword explain some of the reasons for Kennedy’s choice. There was a need for flexibility and secrecy to give diplomacy time to work. A few years later a similar action by Lyndon Johnson found us in the quagmire of Vietnam. They also provide a extensive discussion of ways to avoid future Vietnam fiascos. Theodore Sorensen in a note at the end of this book states that Robert Kennedy was planning prior to his assassination to add a discussion of the basic ethical question of the justification for a government subjecting its people or possibly all people to a nuclear holocaust. In 1962 the world, for the first and only time, was on the precipice of a Nuclear Holocaust. At that time John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev searched for a reasonable and sane end to the crisis. Now imagine a similar situation with Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin as respective leaders.
