JUDGEMENT DAY! IF THE RED SLAYER THINKS HE SLAYS, OR IF THE SLAIN THINKS HE IS SLAIN, THEY KNOW NOT WELL THE SUBTLE WAYS I KEEP, AND PASS, AND TURN AGAIN. Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Brahma” It’s the dawning of the Final Day - the day of Armageddon. The final confrontation between the massed forces of Good and Evil. And naturally, we are all terrified. “I, Arjuna, am drenched in angst. I can find no meaning in life or in the cataclysmic approaching battle... “For that battle will pit friend against friend, brother against brother, the Devils of the Pit against Angels from the Realms of Glory - the Fulness of Being itself against the Void of Nonbeing. “Death is not only possible, but imminently likely.” But then the Lord - or Krishna, in this Hindu version of that battle - steps in. He comforts Arjuna with the knowledge that life and death are mere dreams we all must dream. That the battle itself is a dream. But, it’s a dream we must participate in. And face - head on. Back when I was young, I pretended I was a player in the battle of life. Only after a while I was overwhelmed by the cruel, cold logic of the noonday devils of the adult world. And I was desperately struggling to hold onto my dreams! I read the Gita and learned it was ALL a dream. And if all personalities were empty of selfhood, why worry? And that escape mechanism worked for a while. But in midlife, the fast and furious pace of my career started to burn me out. The world was now so in-your-face for me, that I looked for a new retreat - and found it in the elevated, circular thinking of the postmodernists. Both strategies did their part to protect me from the nightmares of the noonday devils and the garish predawn bêtes noires that my sleeping subconscious dredged up from my past. The two strategies were soporific sedatives. So I pursued my career to its successful conclusion, with full retirement benefits. Then, full stop. Finally, retirement! - and I could no longer ignore the Problem of Evil with either Hindu semantics or intellectual circularity. That bred anxiety - an anxiety that hung on. So I looked for something much more substantially positive for my reawakened mind, and found it in the faith of my youth. And rejoined the Battle I had so long ago deserted. Only by now - the battle had become an ARMAGEDDON. But, you know, I had known that long ago, when I effected my first vain escapes... I had just forgotten how fierce the fighting was. In an immoral world, moral action is imperative. We HAVE to fight. But years and years of avoidance had produced a sleeping vacuum where my seriousness about life had previously been. Much the same as some of my readers. Deep sleep is contagious. But I was now serious again. Deadly serious. So now, instead of staying a make-believe player, I became a tiny participant in one Huge Eternal Battle. I took a stand, even though I saw that my own impact all along had been minuscule, and was likely to remain so - especially from my renewed vertigo-inducing perspective. And it was only then, in the thick of the struggle, that it dawned on me that it’s far better during the charge to let the Lord (He is known as Krishna, the charioteer here) do the driving! Simple faith can work wonders. And it can give you Peace. THEN we can see the true face of the Master Charioteer, who then sets our frayed nerves at ease. THEN we can see the Vast Enemy face to face - the same enemy, as it tells us, that is doomed to defeat on that final day of days. The enemy that now (get this!) seems almost inconsequential in power... For that predawn cauchemar that was so terrifying is now just an outlandish magic lantern show cast on the wall of the mind by the Shadow. And the Tempter’s hulking granddaddy, the Noonday Devil, with all his cold, relentless logic, is just a scrap pile of ulterior motives - mercilessly exposed in the clear, bright dawn of a new day. And the battlefield? It’s been fully levelled, and our opponents - exposed for what they are - appear somewhat at loose ends in their attempts to seem their old terrifying selves. The worst part for them, of course, is that now they no longer have a hiding place in this vast battlefield, or a place to dive to cover from the fiery chariot wheels of the Lord. For His victory is certain... And the old fears, dreads and anxieties? They‘re now just harmless, broken curios in the enemy’s worn back of tricks, out of which myriad dust motes dance in the brilliance of the day. The Shadow’s power is vanquished to the winds. And, suddenly, the great Battle of Armageddon is just a part of another day’s well-paying work in the fields of the Lord. Because, now we are free of our long inner turmoil. And on the wind is written: Peace is at hand!
