First reading, 2016: This is not poetry where you will struggle to figure out why others have praised it so highly, and wonder whether you´re missing something vital. It lets you in at first glance. About a jogger: ¨the dark scissors of his legs / cut the moon´s / raw silk¨. Looking forward to delving into more works by Agha Shahid Ali asap. 5/5 stars. Second reading, 2020: I like some of the imagery in this collection as well as its treatment of the ex-pat experience of nostalgia for one's homeland, the city of Kashmir to be specific. It was interesting re-reading this work having recently read Midnight's Children, which mostly takes place in Kashmir as well. Some of the literary and cultural details in Agha Shahid Ali's collection still went over my head, and I would be really interested to learn more so as to have a fuller appreciation for the richness of some of these poems. I think the writing excels at conveying the poet's personality (albeit presumptuous to make such a claim, so perhaps I should replace "poet" with "the speaker"): gentle, someone who feels deeply, sometimes playful, other times philosophical and pensive. 4/5 stars. Here are some excerpts that I particularly enjoyed: Swallow this summer street, then wait for the monsoon. Needles of rain melt on the tongue. Will you go farther? A memory of drought holds you: you remember the taste of hungry words and you chew syllables of salt. Can you rinse away this city that lasts like blood on the bitten tongue? *** On the page befor me, the wind rustles the page. Something begins to stir: The villagers are coming back to life, the sun once again dresses their huts. It soaks up the dawn's washable blues. Something stalks through the page. (from "The Tiger at 4:00 A.M.") *** My parents sleep like children in the dark. I am too far to hear them breathe but I remember their house is safe and I can sleep, the night's hair black and thick in my hands (from "Houses") *** Somewhere without me my life begins He who lives it counts on a cold rosary God's ninety-nine Names in Arabic The unknown hundredth he finds in glaciers then descends into wet saffron fields where I wait to hold him (from "In the Mountains") *** My ancestor, a man of Himalayan snow, came to Kashmir from Samarkand, carrying a bag of whale bones: heirlooms from sea funerals. His skeleton carved from glaciers, his breath arctic, he froze women in his embrace. His wife thawed into stony water, her old age a clear evaporation. (from "Snowmen") *** Who were these people? And who finished them to the last? If dust had an alphabet, I would learn. (from "A Wrong Turn")
