Lewis Carroll's Alice duology has earned him a reputation for literary genius - but where exactly that genius lies has been hard for fans and critics alike to plot. What's needed, I think, is a multi-dimensional approach: Three charts overlaid to help us mark the spot. There is, first, Carroll's mastery of the dreamy feel to the story, the way one scene melts into the next, the way each scene retains familiar elements from the one before it. Carroll rarely changes everything at once, preferring instead to alter a few things at a time until, gradually, all is different. This gives the otherwise bewildering story the same sense of continuity that dreams have to the dreamer. (It has also led, thanks to the mushroom and the hookah-smoking caterpillar in Wonderland, to erroneous assumptions about Carroll's own drug use. These have been roundly disproved, and no similar objects alter Alice's experience of Looking-Glass World). Second, Carroll paid attention to the way children perceive reality - to how we struggle, in our early years, to reconcile new experiences with prior paradigms of how the world works. Carroll successfully voices Alice as a character because she is neither adultish nor puerile - she isn't so lost in the dream, as a dreamer is, that she accepts the weird as normal; but neither is she so mature in her worldview that she perceives the dream as mere dream and must resort to sarcasm and scoffery to protect her own perspective. Consequently, the story convinces. We trust what Alice sees, we know she has got beyond the mere dream to somewhere on the borders of Faerie... somewhere where the line chalked between imagination and consequence is skewed and smudged. Third, Carroll let his story be guided by his theme. Both Wonderland and Looking-Glass World* are deeply informed by Carroll's - or rather, Dodgson's - insistence that logic and mathematical reasoning remain firmly grounded in physical reality. In his view, abstract mathematics - which were beginning to be popular among his fellow math professors when Wonderland was written - were an esoteric game, a nonsense language lacking the intellectual rigor of the two-thousand-year-old Euclidean standard. When asked to publish Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and its sequel, Through the Looking Glass , Carroll discovered an opportunity to satirize the imaginary number with imaginary nouns and a commutable landscape. Alice frequently loses her way as she tries to move across Looking-Glass World from the Second Square to the Eighth, where she will be promoted from Pawn to Queen. Her adventures feel haphazard, yet uncanny; by leading readers through a series of cleverly disguised mathematical allegories, Carroll provides a strange sense of balance to his Looking-Glass equation. To read more about the mathematical man behind the magical Carroll, I recommend this article , as well as Douglas Hofstadter's Godel Escher Bach An Eternal Golden Braid . *Alice doesn't revisit Wonderland in Through the Looking Glass . Wonderland is a game of cards; Looking-Glass World is a chess board.
