I read this book when it was published and it haunts me 20 years later. It is very relevant to our lives today! IBM played an integral role in assisting with the destroying of many lives. At the behest of the Nazi regime, they developed the computer in its most primitive form to keep count and manage the entire operation of the Nazi empire. This computer kept count of machinery, necessities like food and most significantly the counting of prisoners of the state. The numbers on those arms were the "files" that were entered into the computer. So many disregard the significance of computers in our lives today, yet nearly every thing we do has a computer operating within it. Have a television? It communicates with satellites to give you access to people and other forms of data (movies, sports, Olympics, news) worldwide 24/7. Refrigerator? It has a motherboard that if not monitoring properly will turn that big metal contraption into a storage box. I know my Brand New Whirlpoo (it is a more appropriate name) didn't work after 3 weeks, it took 4 1/2 months for Whirlpoo to send a new mother board, it died after 5 days. I lost $3000 worth of food and had to buy another refrigerator LG. Whirlpoop will never see another penny from me! That car you drive has a computer that lets it park your car, heat your butt while in the seat, adjust your temperature, defrost your window and stops your car if someone is behind you! Let's not forget that computers monitor traffic signals, tolls, speed of travel, high speed chases, accidents and more. IBM probably had more impact on the events of the 20th century than any other corporation as we also see the rise in purchases made from mega retailers like Amazon and our personal social lives via various social media platforms, its influence is evident in every aspect of our lives. We realize more is coming, where more and more are choosing to mark their hands to have convenience of opening doors and paying for purchases without carrying anything but that chip...after the vaccine passport, what lies ahead? Will any part of our life be a secret. I find it doubtful.
