My intention was to read this entire series last year, but you know how that goes in the reading life. The best of intentions you know where that leads so let’s not go there! These reviews are getting harder and harder to write because of revealing too much of the plot. On Book 6 of the 12 book series, the characters are already well established and as a reader you are either a fan of some or you loathe others. That’s just the way Winston Graham would like his readers to feel about them - caught up in the stories of the beloved Ross and Demelza still creating surprises and shocking events to have to divest 14 years after they wed. He gets so much further into the stories of Demelza’s brothers, Sam and Drake as well as the struggles that they deal with. Morwenna, Elizabeth’s cousin, has the most excruciating experiences to endure while Elizabeth comes into her own. Caroline and Dwight Ennys have some surprising news to share. All of these characters’ lives will be fleshed out as the books continue. It is just so enveloping to sit down to visit the Cornish coast of England and get spun up into the soap opera that is their lives. This is just the type of book that will have you laughing, crying, and screaming at several characters. At other times, you are sympathetic to what they are going through. ’Make no mistake. We none of us come to port without risk of shipwreck.’ Near the bank four swans, almost stationary, moving so slowly that they appeared only to be drifting with the tide….Graceful things. Faithful or unfaithful. Loyal or traitorous. Ross sees these swans representing the four women who have touched his life in some way and they find themselves enduring their own separate heartaches and stresses. These 4 women, Demelza, Elizabeth, Caroline and Morwenna will captivate your heart and cause you to fret at times. You’ll question some of their decisions and champion others. At the same time, you will get the feel for the political atmosphere of Cornwall and of how the French Revolution will affect their lives. I missed cousin Verity in this installment as Captain Blamey is not a central story line. But I will be back for the next one hopefully very soon!
