Not only did this one have the usual BSC nostalgia, but it also brought back so many memories of our trips to New York when I was a kid...although we never went to the Hard Rock Cafe and I wasn't afraid of homeless people and I knew how to pronounce filet mignon . My mom grew up in New York, and her parents lived there until I was around 16, so we took a number of trips back East when I was a kid. I LOVED New York, and I remember asking my mom when I was in elementary school multiple times if she ever wanted to move back, because I had this dream of our family moving there and getting to be a teenager in such a cool place. Probably a good thing we didn't, though, because I likely would have turned into the same kind of snob as Stacey. I mean, okay, yes, the other girls were being ridiculous. They all had believable reactions to the city, but on such an exaggerated scale. And I can sympathize with Stacey getting frustrated with or embarrassed by them. But what did she expect?? These girls have lived their whole lives in little suburbs. Kristy, Claudia, and Mary Anne have always lived in Stoneybrook, and Dawn came from what she refers to as a suburb of Anaheim. (I wonder what town...Placentia? Los Alamitos? Knott's Berry Farm? I kid.) Of course they're going to be over the top about New York. And while pulling your wallet out in the middle of the sidewalk is obviously not a smart idea (c'mon, Kristy!), thinking an eyeshadow sample was the kind you could take with you is pretty understandable (poor Mary Anne, her first run-in with the law!). So I kind of saw it from both sides, and I did appreciate that Stacey eventually realizes she's being a jerk and that she takes a lot of the amazing things in the city for granted. I did also like that even on the day they spend the whole time with ten kids, there was minimal annoying as fuck kid stuff, which is notable for a BSC book. The two girls who take theater classes were hilarious, the little one who was scared of the "monster bones" in the museum was sweet and totally relatable, and even the one with all the allergy and health issues wasn't too bad because she only repeated it twice, rather than five or six times, like usual. Couple little qualms: Mary Anne making fun of Dawn in order to get in with Stacey's New York friends was super out of character for her; the spat between Laine and Claudia was 100% Claudia's bullshit and Laine didn't have anything to apologize for, after Claudia was literally a snot to her in the very first words they ever spoke to each other; and Miss Perfect New Yorker Stacey called Bloomingdale's "Bloomies" which I'm pretty sure is akin to calling San Francisco "Frisco." But I still enjoyed this one and it especially gave me fond memories of eating at the Sherwood Diner, seeing 42nd Street and Guys and Dolls on Broadway, and going clothes shopping with Grandma Lily. (The shopping gene skipped a generation; my mom hated going anywhere near a mall or department store.)
