*Side note* We were in the library this evening, and I told Gwen we needed to review this book before we checked a new one out. (She had told me earlier that she wanted to review it.) Then, as we were passing the children's desk, Miss Laura said, "Philip, I just wanted you to know that we read and really like the reviews you do with the kids." So, that was really nice. Gwennie has been telling me about this book forever. Stinky cheese this, and stinky cheese that. For the longest time I thought she was talking about Diary of a Wimpy Kid (and the cheese-touch.) I'd never heard of this book before. But it's great. And it seems so new. Mo Willems or something. ...I was shocked when I saw 1992 as the original publishing date. Dad: So Gwen, where did you hear of this book? Gwen: School. Dad: Where in school? Like the library? A teacher? A friend? Gwen: The teacher read it to us. In Mrs. Bly's class. In first grade. Now I'm in second grade. Dad:...I know what grade you're in. ... ... Gwen: (As I was talking) I've been in second grade for a long time. Gwen: (Smiling) Yes. I just felt like saying it. And sometimes you ask me things that you don't know. And sometimes you ask me things that you do know. ...Like you ask me what grade I'm in. I was just saying it and making sure. Dad: So you've wanted to read this book for a long time. Gwen: Yes. And now I've found it at the library. Dad: What library? Gwen: The Goshen Public Library. Dad: So what did you remember about it that made you want to check it out? Gwen: Um. That it was funny. Dad: What do you mean? Gwen: Like... That it was funny. Dad: What do you mean? Gwen: (Exasperated): Because it was a real story that people already made... Not real like it was a true story... but aaaahhhhh... This is hard to explain. The stories were already told before, and the author changed it a little, and made it like them, but funnier. ...And sillier. ...And goofier... Dad: Can you give me an example? Gwen: Ok. Say, somebody already wrote a story of Cinderella. BUT I wanted to make a story of Cinderella, but I made it sillier. And goofier. Dad: How would you make Cinderella sillier and goofier? Gwen: I could make her like... pretend she was in her house and her sisters were getting ready for the ball... And... And... Cinderella was really the bad one, and her sisters were really nice. And that was what the author did to this story... And made it a little different. Like instead of The Gingerbread Man, it was The Stinky Cheese Man. And in The Really Ugly Duckling, he didn't turn out to be a swan... He was just a really ugly duckling. Get it. Dad: Got it. So how many stars should we give it? Gwen: Five. Dad: Are you sure? Gwen: YES!
