The Gainesville Ripper is the inspiration for Wes Craven's Scream films. His killing spree left 5 students dead and the way he stalked into their homes and brutally raped and murdered his victims was shocking and evil. I am fascinated with true crime, horror, serial killers and things of that nature and I like to read different accounts. The fact that Rolling was so involved in the production of this version of events intrigued me. It is not a pleasant read, obviously. There were times I was sucked into the story but that is exactly what it felt like - a story. I felt like I was reading a crime fiction novel rather than something that really happened. The introduction immediately had me skeptical about the book's quality. Colin Wilson talks about how Danny Rolling was possessed and that he had three separate personalities with the third being a demon that took over. Wilson explains his belief that it is possible for the serial killers who claim to be possessed by a demon, are in fact possessed as they "have been accustomed to swayed by negative emotions" so "they have opened themselves up to the possibility of being influenced by some of the nastier denizens of the 'spirit world'." It isn't something I believe in and I feel it is an insult to his victims to try and shift the blame to imaginary things. But I am willing to be open-minded and read what Rolling and his fan-girl London have to say. Unfortunately, I am already feeling negative from the outset! After Wilson's introduction, Ms. London has some author notes for us. She is a journalist who got close to Rolling and "fell in love" with him. She isn't exactly neutral so her angle is to make Danny seem less evil. She explains her efforts to keep Danny's narrative voice as close to what he had written as possible - merely editing here and there. It is a bit of a task to indicate which Danny is writing - is it Danny Rolling the nice guy? Ennad the criminal rapist? Or Gemini, the murdering demon? It has me wondering as there are parts that are very confused - is it intentional? Or is this Author Notes chapter merely to explain away mistakes and weaknesses in the text (of which there are many)? I don't want to dwell on this much longer. Yes, Danny had an awful childhood and if even half of what Danny says is true, then his father should have been locked up instead of being a police officer! But it all seemed very extreme and tried to play Danny as a very sensitive soul who was mistreated and so warped into a split personality who grew as time went on. Ennad was the peeping tom, the rapist, the bank robber. Throughout the book, he is referred to in such terms as you'd think he was played by Clint Eastwood or something. He is handsome, with strong muscles and all the women he meets want him. He can take a bullet. He can kick butt. He scared off the African-American convicts who wanted to rape him. It sounds like overcompensating - like he is rewriting what happened to him to make him sound better. It's a contradiction from the weak and innocent image he tries to portray in his early life. The murders are described quite early in the book - they are not for the faint-hearted and I'm sure many readers stop reading at this point. The rest of the book is how he got to that point and is followed by some ramblings, and lovey-dovey messages. It is interesting in terms of hearing the voice of a serial killer but content-wise it seems to be an extension of this killer's delusions as he tries to craft himself into a true American bad boy. It didn't leave me convinced that he was possessed. He was certainly traumatised by his childhood and had mental issues. It's a story with ever-changing narrative voices, a chronology that flits about confusingly and so-so writing with many typos.
