Deep play is really praying. It is finding the holy and sacred in the ordinary. It is using the language formerly used only in religion to describe that transcendent and exhilarating ‘athlete’s high’ or feeling of deepest awe and wonder. I can’t possibly write a satisfactory review of this book, because Diane is the master of language. She is. She knows language inside and out and knows how to write in a way to make you breathless, to make you feel and see what she feels and sees. She is an archeologist, a mystic, a poet, and puzzle solver of human nature as well as a lover of science and how it explains and amplifies what it means to be human. The more time I spend with humans, I love the wonder of nature more. The more time I spend in nature, I love humans more. She knows. “In later years, on expeditions to extraordinary landscapes, I discovered it is possible to enter the mansions of nature so profoundly that time vibrates in a new way. Moments may sprawl for hours or race by in a panic, split into separate photographic stills presenting themselves one by one, or pile up, or whirl breathlessly like a beautiful tornado. In deep play, one’s sense of time no longer originates within oneself.” “There is a way of beholding that is a form of prayer.” “I suppose I try to be a translator of sorts, striving to translate emotion and vision into words, to express the life force of animals and landscapes, to give them voice. I pore over the lustrous details of nature and human nature. How different is this from a monk devoting his life to an illuminated manuscript?” “There are also natural wonders, sacred because they magnetize people, wrench from them profound feelings of awe and fright. What is sacred goes far beyond the religious.” “Consciousness is the great poem of matter, whose opposite extreme is a Grand Canyon. In between, matter has odd fits and whims: lymph, feathers, brass. Cactus strikes me as a very odd predicament for matter to get into. But perhaps it is no stranger than a comb of an iris, or the way flowers present their sex organs to the world. There is something about the poignant senselessness of all that rock that reminds us, as nothing else could so dramatically, what a bit of luck we are, what a natural wonder.” “There would be no canyon as we perceive it-subtle, mazy, unrepeating- without the intricate habits of light. For the canyon traps light, reveals itself in light, rehearses all the ways a thing can be lit.” “ The great lesson from the true mystics, from the Zen monks…is that the sacred is in the ordinary, that it is to be found in one’s daily life, in one’s neighbors, friends, and family, in one’s back yard…to be looking everywhere for miracles is to me a sure sign of ignorance that everything is miraculous.” Maslow “Deep play arises in such moments of intense enjoyment, focus, control, creativity, timelessness, confidence, volition, lack of self-awareness (hence transcendence) while doing things intrinsically worthwhile, rewarding for their own sake…It feels cleansing because when acting and thinking becomes one, there is no room left for other thoughts.” “One of the most surprising facts about us human beings is that we seem to require a poetic version of life. It’s not just that some of us enjoy reading or writing poetry, or that many people wax poetic in emotional situations, but that all human beings of all ages in all cultures all over the world automatically tell their story in a poetic way, using the elemental poetry concealed in everyday language.” “as many have pointed out, poetry is a kind of knowing, a way of looking at the ordinary until it becomes special and the exceptional until it becomes commonplace.” “ we ask the poet to reassure us by giving us a geometry of living, in which all things add up and cohere, to tell us how things buttress once another, circle round and intermelt.” “Every truth has geological strata…” “On the other hand, one can turn bronco riding into drudgery. One can create mildly. One can live at a low flame. Most people do. We’re afraid to look foolish, or feel too extravagantly, or make a mistake, or risk unnecessary pain. One fears intensity. But, given something like death, what does it matter if one looks foolish now and then, or tried too hard, or cares too deeply? A shallow life creates a world as flat as a shadow. In that half-light, the sun never burns, risks recede, safety becomes habit, and individuals have little to teach one another.” “For those future residents of Earth: may their world still be packed with mysteries. May they still grow giddy on the eve of a great adventure. May they become more responsible to one another and the planet. May they keep their taste for the renegade. May they never lose their sense of innocence and wonder. May they live to chase brash and astonishing dreams. May they return to tell me, if such a thing is possible, so that I can know the answer to a thousand scrupulous puzzles, hear of whole civilizations that bloomed and vanished, learn what travel to other solar systems has revealed, and behold the marvels that arose while I was gone. If that’s not possible, then I will have to make do with the playgrounds of mortality, and hope that at the end of my life I can say, simply, wholeheartedly, that is was grace enough to be born and live.”
