THE NECESSARY HUNGER is written by Nina Revoyr. The book consists of 20 chapters; an introduction by Lynell George - an award-winning Los Angeles-based journalist and essayist; an afterword (new) by Nina Revoyr and Acknowledgements. This book is Ms. Revoyr’s debut novel and was first published in 1997. Akashic Books reissued THE NECESSARY HUNGER to correspond with the 2019 publication of Ms. Revoyr’s newest novel, A STUDENT OF HISTORY. I was privileged to receive both books to read and review. Thank you. “THE NECESSARY HUNGER follows two basketball stars - Japanese American Nancy Takahiro and African American Raina Webber - and several of their friends through their last year of high school. For some of them, their senior year will be full of glory, and the anticipation of college. For others, however, stranded in an inner-city Los Angeles neighborhood that promises little in the way of opportunity, it will mark not only the end of their time in school but also the end of their hope.” “It is about sports as a means of salvation, about the nature of competition, and ultimately about various kinds of love.” This book is raw, gritty at times, shocking at times, emotional, tender, and inspiring. It is many-layered with interwoven complexities, attitudes and emotions. There is intense love and admiration (what Nancy feels for her friend, Raina). There is the complex, dangerous and ever-present Los Angeles neighborhood culture. Gay relationships are revealed, documented and explored. There are high school situations - with Nancy, with Raina, with Nancy’s father, Wendell. There is basketball, basketball, basketball - school rivalries, the playing of, the gamesmanship of, college recruiting and scholarships, game day emotions, practice of, pick-up games, sportsmanship. There is friendship. There is coming-of-age. There is community. There is location, a sense of place. There are family relationships. There are racial tensions and identity. The narrative, the writing was superb. I liked reading this book so much. It wasn’t sensationalist or political. It did not ‘pull at one’s heartstrings’. It did not dwell on drinking, drugs, car jackings as ‘problems’ or ‘issues’. It did not ‘judge’; it merely described and allowed everything pertinent to Nancy, Raina, their friends, families and situations to be documented and narrated. I enjoyed the ‘readability’ of this book. I liked the oversized paperback format. I liked the title. I liked the following quotes: p.28 “If there is something to be known about a person, it will become evident on the court, or on the field.” p.29 “Anyone who thinks traders on Wall Street are under pressure should try shooting a free throw in a packed gym with the game on the line.” p.42 “Adolescence in LA was like Russian roulette, and the game would not be over until we were gone.” p.126 “ School was security. School was home.” p.212 Nancy’s comments about playing ‘In The Zone’. I would heartily recommend this book.
