I absolutely adore all of James Herriot's books, and I wanted to learn more about the man behind the pen name, Alfred Wight. This biography, written by his son Jim Wight, does a good job of shedding light on the life and times of his famous veterinarian father, his early years, his work, his literary career, and the Yorkshire region he loved so much. It was interesting to read the real backstories behind other beloved characters from his books as well, especially the one-of-a-kind Sinclair (aka Farnon) brothers, and the other people and animals Herriot brought to life so colourfully and memorably on the page. Alf Wight was a gifted storyteller who was able to craft hilarious, poignant, picturesque, and endearing stories, using simple but eloquent language, and one of his main gifts was that the reader is able to feel his personality shining through every word, and is left with an impression of a warm, compassionate, self-effacing, and humorous man for whom you cannot help but feel affection. In writing this biography, the author freely admits that he is a far less accomplished writer and reader than his famous father, which I'm inclined to forgive, but unfortunately this book is also lacking in his father's characteristic warmth. I believe that the author wrote this book primarily as a labour of love, but it's clear that he also used it as a medium for airing some of his own personal grievances as well, most notably about Donald Sinclair, toward whom the writer seems to harbor a fair amount of animosity, despite his attempts to soften this with rather faint and vague praise. The author also indulges in some personal political posturing, complaining bitterly about the Labour party and celebrating the election of a Conservative government, which I felt was quite unnecessary to the narrative. His father did not seem to mind paying taxes on his wealth nearly as much as his son appears to resent it, and in my opinion the author spends far too much time discussing and flexing about his father's finances, even when they were still very modest. I learned some new an interesting things about one of my favourite authors from reading this book, which I enjoyed, but in spite of my interest in the material, I found it difficult at times to engage and connect with the dry and repetitive delivery. I would have enjoyed this book more if there were more stories and remembrances of Alf as a husband and a father - not just the places they went, but the kind of funny family anecdotes that they will remember - to humanize him a bit more than the author does here. I also think the book would benefit from a little more editing to improve flow, pacing, and length. In all, however, I liked the book, and I would definitely recommend it to fans of James Herriot, the author, who want to know more about Alfred Wight, the man.
