“I refuse to play the condemnation game. Let me make myself clear. I do not tell oppressed people how to resist their oppression or who their allies should be.” [Arundhati Roy, premiazione per il PEN Pinter Prize 2024] Dal taglio più aneddottico/giornalistico che non storico - come comprensibile dato l'anno di scrittura/uscita del libro e come anche ammesso dall'autore, dove - prima di indicare comunque una corposa lista di materiale bibliografico - dichiara " One of the major sources for this book cannot easily be catalogued: my own experience of living through the period described. As this resource, if resource it is, has been drawn upon copiously, I am tempted to invoke Virgil in seeking the reader’s indulgence: Experto credite (Trust one who has gone through it!). More importantly, I should point out that where matters of fact are concerned I have sometimes had to make use of conversations with friends and contacts whose positions do not permit of attribution. I am deeply indebted to such people for sharing their insights with me about matters which were always delicate, and sometimes dangerous, and I ask the reader’s indulgence for not lifting the veil of secrecy any further , The Troubles fornisce una sostanziosa visuale sulle vicende politiche che hanno accompagnato il conflitto. E la politica - sia essa quella londinese (la cui responsibilità morale e storica sulla vicenda è indiscutibile quanto troppo spesso dimenticata) sia quella di dublino - ne esce con le ossa rotta. (Della politica lealista non credo sia necessario parlarne. Una filosofia basata sulla supremazia e sull'oppressione delle minoranze non dovrebbe aver ragione di esistere, e non dovrebbe mai venir concessa alcuna giustificazione ad essa. Non sorprenderà sapere che nel civilissimo occidente le derive fasciste e suprematiste sono sempre di moda) Il gioco tra le parti, l'interessa bieco e personale nel tenersi la poltrona, l'indifferenza per problemi ritenuti lontani, la carta bianca lasciata a esercito, servizi segreti, servizi di propaganda, la complicità di una stampa interessata al rinfocolare l'orgoglio di un impero decaduto o del partito al potere di turno, sono pochissimi gli scorci di luce negli oltre 30 anni di conflitto. E non rimane che ripensare a due estratti riportati da Coogan, all'inizio e alla fine del libro, e pensare che if someone gave a damn tanta, tanta sofferenza sarebbe potuta essere evitata. 1969 [...] Well they failed. They did not completely destroy the school, although they did extensive damage to it. And they did not damage the monastery at all, although they did succeed in getting one fire bomb into our backyard, within two feet of the back door. They did succeed in getting up on a shed, with evil intent of course. But they were repulsed. They failed in their evil design that night. But their failure, my dearest men, was not due to any protection given by the forces of law and order. Let that be recorded. Let it also be recorded that they failed because of the bravery of the local lads who, totally unprepared and ill equipped, and comparatively speaking defenceless, fought against terrible odds, and saved this district from complete destruction. For, let there be no doubt about it, that was the objective that night, complete destruction. Well, my dearest men, there’s the story of the attack, savage, murderous attack made on the Clonard area during these days of madness. I gave you the story as I saw it because I knew you’d be interested. Now a few more points before I finish. These were terrible days, my dearest men, but some good has already come from these attacks on our communities. [...] You have the extremists and you have their leaders, and you have the so-called leaders of this little state who have done nothing at all to deal with those people. That is an abuse which we hope will be remedied. What we are aiming at now, my dearest men, is justice. Justice, no more and certainly no less, certainly no less, my dearest men. So I suggest that is one lesson that we must learn from what has happened. We demand justice, we’re not just begging it. We demand it. It’s our right. We demand it and we’ll keep on demanding it until we get it. We don’t ask for any more. Just a fair deal. No discrimination in housing, or voting power, or jobs, or anything else. So I suggest that you pray, my dearest men, that soon we will have a community where everybody, irrespective of his religious belief, or irrespective of his political ideology, will be able to lead a normal life and will not be unjustly discriminated against, as has happened so often in the last fifty years. So pray, my dearest men, all of us pray, that we will have a society, that Catholic and Protestant will have a society where they will live, as they should live, helping each other out. We must live together. It is a mixed society, but that does not mean that we will not demand justice. We pray tonight that God will give us that justice which is our due. 1994 O’Dowd remembered how he felt going into the historic meeting with the Sinn Fein leadership: I was always impressed with their honesty. Always impressed with their directness. Always impressed that whatever they said, they delivered on. And there were times when it had been very tough. We were really speaking a different language coming from here [New York] in trying to understand where they were coming from. These were men (and women) who had lived in a situation for 25 years where every day could be their last. They were coming from a place where, whatever demonisation had occurred, they had survived everything. They had survived the second most powerful army in the world throwing everything at them. They had survived total indifference and disdain from Dublin. They had survived large sections of their support being eaten away by the SDLP. They had survived death squads and punishment shootings. Everything… They were people whom you knew had experienced something, something very deep and a truly revolutionary thing. Their camaraderie was impressive. Of course there were times when you became aware that they were also dangerous people…
