A Georgette Heyer Regency Romance unlike any other she wrote. It's one of the most hotly debated about Heyer stories because it is hate and loved in equal turns. She, herself, hated it at least in the middle of writing it. Personally, I think it is one of her best and delves deep into the unromantic side of romance, unrequited love, secret love, friendship, class differences, and marriages of convenience all in one. The characters are still colorful and sparkling. There are the witty dialogues if not as frequent and some humor. There is also a bittersweet flavor. A heroine who is a decided underdog in personality, appearance, and ability must find her way against a rival for the affection and respect of a man who married for necessity and resents his situation. I loved seeing shy, awkward Jenny paired with the dashing, disappointed Adam. I read this one for the first time when in my thirties. I point this out because I think it makes a difference where one is at in age and life as to how this book will speak to them. I never was a dreamy romantic teen, but I don't think I would have understood enough about relationships to appreciate this book if I had read it then. I would have liked it because when all is said and done; its a good story. But, I might not have loved it and praised it as one of her best like I do now. It's not light, flirty, and easy as most. It's more akin to her historicals like The Spanish Bride or An Infamous Army of which its a contemporary story set during the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Heyer really put in the time with how a marriage of convenience, particularly with partners from a different class, would work out for them and their families. There are nuances in this one and little bits of discovery. Jenny's motives all along are deliberately kept vague until near the end. Characters on the peripheral like Lord Rockhill and Lord Brough see things so much more clearly than others who are close to the source. The hero, Adam, is so lost, defeated, bitter, and angry. I liked that she brought him along slowly until he came into his own learning his own worth and that of Jenny. The book ends at the place that some might describe as more open-ended than happily ever after. It leaves things at a point where it is easy to see the direction for the future depending on how the reader understood the vague subtleties. Much of the obvious, open conflict is resolved, but yet, it leaves off without making any big, solid declarations about the future as the beginning of something new has started. All in all, I think it shows another facet to the writer's storytelling. This one is a not so obvious gem and great if the reader is looking for marriage of convenience and class difference tropes all in one.
