I like a good time travel story and I love New York City, so this was an ideal novel for me to read. Its narrator, Si Morley, an advertising artist living in New York City in about 1970 (the year in which the novel was first published), is recruited to participate in a secret time travel project run by a government agency. He persuades the agency to allow him to go back to Manhattan in 1882 so that he can witness the genesis of a family mystery that continues to puzzle his girlfriend. As Si travels back and forward between 1970 and 1882, he faces ethical and other dilemmas in both time periods. As with many time travel stories, it's best to gloss over the technicalities of how time travel is actually achieved. The mechanism in this novel is not at all convincing - you can apparently meditate yourself back and forward in time - but that doesn't matter. The real strength of the novel is its re-creation of late 19th century New York city, which is done both through the narrative and also through the illustrations scattered through the novel. These drawings and photographs, despite or maybe even because of their graininess, help bring the words alive. Finney clearly did extensive research into the time period and had a particular affinity for New York City at that time. There are times when he went overboard with the period detail. There are also details that he leaves out. For example, while Si Morley refers to poverty and poor working conditions, the 1882 New York City he falls in love with is highly romanticised, as are its inhabitants. Finney's work allows a contempoarty reader to travel back in time to two distinct periods. 1882 is a long time ago, but these days 1970 also counts as a historical period. This was the year I first visited New York City. I remember some but not all of what I saw, so it was as much fun for me to read about the city as it was in 1970 as it was to read about its 1882 incarnation. It's fair to say that the novel will appeal most to readers who love New York, have some familiarity with its geography and an interest in its history, because the plot and the characterisation are the weakest elements of the novel.
