To me the most beautiful and striking aspect of this haunting and haunted novel is the hesitantly built and fragile trust between Ged and Tenar. Without this trust, without each other’s help, neither of them could get anywhere, could even survive. In her retrospective afterword, Le Guin writes that at the time she wrote the novel she could not imagine a woman being truly independent, and her resolution emphasises interdependence between men and women. She makes the gendered interpretation of this interdependence explicit, but although gender is very salient in the novel, I did not feel, for example, that Ged need necessarily have been male for the story to work. Of course, I am living in a different socio-political era. In any case, I was moved by their relationship, intense but not at all sexual, and the moment when Ged hands over his name is a worthy payoff for the many dreary chapters my co-reader and I had ploughed through to get to it. What also struck me reading the afterword though, was Le Guin’s insistence that the fantasy world of Earthsea had to reflect real-world patriarchy to have any political resonance. This contrasts with her treatment of skin colour in Earthsea and in other areas of her fantasy world, where protagonists are often dark-skinned but white supremacy seems simply not to be a thing. To me this, shall we say, fantasy colourblindness seems a nice strategy compared to the disturbingly all-white or worse universes produced by some fantasy authors. Le Guin reproduces patriarchy in order to critique it, but although suspicion of strangers or foreigners exists in Earthsea, it has nothing to do with melanin. Fantasy colourblindness functions like colourblind casting, suggesting that while racism is a major structuring element of the world we know, it is absurd and artificial. White readers like myself can learn something from our own surprise when a character we've already identified with is described as dark-skinned. Tenar, the supposedly reincarnated First Priestess of the Tombs bears the name Arha, which signifies that the Nameless Ones, creatures related to the shadow Ged invokes and is pursued by in A Wizard of Earthsea, have eaten her soul. Ged reassures her that this isn’t possible; that she is not evil, not corrupted or corruptible in the way she fears. The soul, he implies, cannot be eaten. This reminded me of Ishiguro’s Never Let Me Go , where the clones are made to produce art in the hopes that this will demonstrate that they have souls. What was so clear in that book, so incontrovertibly evident, was that the soul as it’s felt in my culture at least, is not something magical that could somehow be missing in someone conceived by artificial methods, but an emergent and dynamic phenomenon, relational, cumulative, arising from will, memory, emotion, contact with others, something no demon-invoking ritual could cancel out, something indestructible.
