I would have put a spoiler warning for this review, but even just looking at the pictures included in the middle of the book you can guess the outcome of the story, which also ultimately was a big reason why I didn't enjoy the book as much... Betty's story of growing up while trying to survive as a Jew during WWII is gut-wretchingly sad. Though Holocaust-themed literature and movies abound, reading a personal story of someone who was forced to endure a death march, as well as one of the horrifying concentration camps and managed to survive is a perspective not often encountered. Even rarer is finding out what happens afterward, including being a refugee in Germany for years after liberation and attempting to quell inner-demons for decades after re-settling in the United States. I can't help but agree with another reviewer, however, in the fact that the flow of the story did grind on me quite badly sometimes and the protagonist seemed extremely self-absorbed at times. It was also almost unbearable for me to read the last quarter or so of the book, when she keeps describing over and over how unhappy she is and how much she absolutely does not love her husband. I know those were different times and she had her reasons for staying in the marriage, but at some point I started to feel so badly for the real Otto... how were those deep seeded confessions and intimate details of their relationship (now made public) not extremely embarrassing for him?? I could have spit in her eye for ultimately not choosing Richie over Otto, especially knowing how much Otto manipulated her to stay with him. The one real chance she had to finally be truly happy and she shut the door on it. Even if she did "stay together for the kids", those "kids" were at that point adults and should have understood that their mother was a grown woman, able to make her own decisions and finally not have to cater to them and what they want all the time. After such a youth of hardship, depression, desperation and sacrifice I was extremely disheartened to know that she didn't do the one thing she had yearned for and wanted more than anything in life... to finally be happy with her love.
