*revisited for PHIL5245* After returning to this work for my Nietzsche class and coming back to it with a much more well-rounded and developed view of Nietzsche and his legacy, I have had to move this book into my favorites list. It is both extremely profound and prescient and I think now I was able to appreciate his view of history and the movement through time as art and play in a way that I didn't before. His attempt to break out of a positivistic, scientific world view and lay the groundwork for an artistic impulse to life is so impressive and commendable. Overall I think my favorite of his works so far. *read for my thesis* This is a really great work. I read a lot of reviews that said it was a good introduction to Nietzsche's thought, which I think is pretty accurate and I would say it is a good starting point. One can definitely see the origins of some of the ideas that come up in Genealogy of Morals expressed in this work such as the importance of forgetting and some early strains of the master/slave morality. It is very dense, but I wouldn't say it is necessarily the most difficult of his works that I have read. This work was incredibly prescient and accurately predicted pretty much exactly how we view the instruction of history today. Nietzsche expresses a view that is fundamentally opposed to essentially everything we are taught in school, and if one can get over that and try to empathize with what he is saying, I think there is a lot of good to be found here. It's pretty incredible to me how he perfectly predicts the democratic party of today's use of history. A part I particularly liked: "Also leaving out of account those quite unreflective people who, as historians, write in the naive belief that just their age is right in all its popular opinions and that to write in accordance with the times comes to the same thing as being just; a belief in which every religion lives and concerning which, in a religious context, nothing further is to be said. Those naive historians call measuring past opinions and deeds by the common opinions of the moment 'objectivity': here they find the canon of all truths; their work is to make the fast fit the triviality of their time. One the other hand they call 'subjective' all historical writing which does not take those popular opinions as its canon." Perhaps the most interesting piece of this work is its exploration of justice. There certainly is something to be said about the view of history as progressively leading towards an endpoint, or apex, in contributing to the notion that our current morality or understanding of things is the "objectively right one." I will need to ruminate on this more.
