This is going to be a review of the series as a whole, not just this book. When I was nine years old I fell madly in love with my first musical, Kristina från Duvemåla. I learned every song by heart, sang all parts aloud in the car on road trips (listening on my walkman), and finally got to see it live with my mother with the original cast (minus one) on the original stage. It was amazing. I also read the books it was based on. Yes. I was nine or ten and I read these books written in the late 40s/early 50s about the lives of some 19th century farmers emigrating to America. What was wrong with me as a kid? Nothing I guess, I was just a lil baby fangirl who liked history. When I was an adult I found my way back to the musical (turns out I still knew all the songs and my heart rejoiced at the first few notes of the Prologue) and eventually I tried to read the books again. I failed. I think about halfway through the second book I was so so bored. But, I never let go of the musical again. I even managed to get my hands on two petticoats from the original production run! Let’s just say it will forever be my favourite, and every now and then I feel like listening through it all from beginning to end (it’s a long one guys) a few times. That happened about a week or two ago. And this time it made me finally want to reread the books. And not stop until I reached the end. So… it turns out that wasn’t actually hard. Probably helps that I decided to listen to them on my commute this time, but that too is weird cause I’m used to English audiobooks and the Swedish narrator is a bit weird. But I just couldn’t stop. Now, I think that if you’re a fan of the musical, the books have another dimension. Cause tbh, to a modern reader they are pretty stilted sometimes. Not just in terms of wording but they’re often very dry and simply account for events rather than try to engage the reader. It’s also just a story about someone’s whole life, and not a super exciting one either. But there is just something about it… it pulls you in. You truly get invested in the lives of the Nilsson family. From Karl-Oskar asking for Kristina’s hand in marriage in a stony, starving Sweden. To him dying an old man, surviving his wife by 25 years, while looking out over prosperous fields in Minnesota. And all the hardship in between. You’re definitely annoyed by some characters, and love others. But most are an inbetween. And while I love Kristina, her blind faith in God does sometimes annoy me. Ulrika doesn’t start out as a great character because the story is told from Karl-Oskar and Kristina’s point of view and there is no one Kristina despises more. But you absolutely love Ulrika eventually, as does Kristina. Now, as a fan of the musical I always love Ulrika cause she speaks her mind and takes no shit and I know she’ll be kind as well eventually. But wow, basically all the hardcore Lutherans are just horrible. The Baptists are so so much nicer. The last book suddenly got hella brutal with the Dakota War of 1862, but I do really appreciate that Moberg doesn’t vilify “the reds”. He simply gives us the history and describe some serious atrocities that were committed by the Dakota/eastern Sioux, but he also gives us the reason for it which in the end is the same reason that Karl-Oskar brought his family across the Atlantic. And racism. I said that as a fan of the musical you appreciate the books more. But the knowing the full story makes the musical grow as well. For example, Robert’s death by the stream has so much more meaning for me now (cause let’s face it. I didn’t remember anything from the first read through all those years ago) It isn’t just a nice reprise of his first song and a call back to that sense of adventure. It’s so much sadder. And while on the musical… wow, reading the books really makes you see how insanely dedicated Björn and Benny were when writing it. Normally you’d read a book and go “yes, this story is a good foundation for a musical” and then just go from there. Make sure to hit the major points and write some good songs around the theme. Not in this case, oh no. Mostly they have taken scenes form the books and turned them into songs. Using many of the same words. There were points where I listened to certain bits in the care and even had to half sing the next few words cause they just tracked so well. Of course the timeline is a bit fudged with to make it flow better, and a lot is ignored cause it’s not important for the overall story being told in the musical. I was wondering how much of the beginning of the musical (Kristina is waiting for Karl-Oskar and singing about his way to her, and then later they sing about their courtship) was simply made up to give us a nice entry point for the story, as it isn’t dealt with in the first book. Turns out nothing. It’s just what Karl-Oskar thinks about at the very end, missing his wife, and tracing an old map of his home parish. Funnily enough the two songs that don’t really use a lot of words from the book are the two most famous ones. One (Gold Can Turn To Sand, readily available in English for you all to listen to) deals with Robert telling Kristina the story of his and Arvid’s journey towards California (and Arvid’s demise). He never actually tells her that story in the book, but rather we as the readers are told and not with those words. Kristina doubting God is also very different. The reason isn’t even the same. Sure, it happens but we don’t get a lot of the wording either. Unlike most other songs. Also… in the musical we all pretty much assume Robert did make it to the gold fields and that he made it big. We as the musical audience never know the truth, just as Karl-Oskar and Kristina never do. I was dubious when I set out on this mission to finish all four books. I didn’t think I’d make it, or rather I thought it would be a struggle but I’d get to the end cause of sheer determination. That wasn’t the case. I ended up really enjoying this journey, and I finished so quickly too. I don’t even know what to do with myself now. I guess I’ll put on my petticoat and listen to the musical over and over. The story of Kristina and Karl-Oskar used to be just songs and a few picture in the CD booklet to me. I didn’t even remember the stage production. Luckily they revived the musical for the stage and I went all the way to Helsinki for that, and later to Gothenburg when it traveled there. So I have the visuals from that. And now I have the full story forever in my heart as well.
