Quick reading but no shortage of a good story; in fact, as I got closer to the end, I grew concerned for the main characters ... even though I knew they would survive and succeed in their trials and tribulations. That's an example of how well Leonard Tourney has written this book that starts with a young man trying to get home. When he doesn't arrive, and no further word is heard, his brother comes to Matthew Stock and Stock travels to London to try and solve the disappearance, or at least find the boy alive. While he struggles against different stories and opinions, the young Thomas comes home and pours out his misadventure to Stock's wife, Joan. Concerned for her husband's safety, she then travels herself to London. While its a bit unrealistic that a wife would do this during Elizabethan times, in fact, it would be dangerous for her to do so ... Joan's travel is the beginning of the real drama of this story and soon I found myself wrapped up in this mystery of murder and intrigue. Remember this is Elizabethan times, when many people disappeared never to be found. It was very easy in those days and that expectation that they could locate a young man in the teeming narrow, convoluted roadways of London. So many things could have happened and did to many, from being robbed and killed and the body never to be discovered, to an individual thrown into prison for nothing more serious than not having money. And then there is the intrigue that Stock soon uncovers ... a little too easily for reality but none the less, that is what ultimately makes the story interesting because indeed the "low treason" referenced in the title is nothing less than turning England and its monarchy on its ear. It seemed so fantastic that I turned to Wikipedia and learned that such an incidence (instances, would probably be more accurate) did indeed happen during this period. That also drove me to read and not stop reading this until I was finished. So while I wouldn't say this was AMAZING (which would certainly earn a five star rating from me), I will say it is darn good reading. I look forward to reading more about the good Stocks and their investigations.
