Oh, boy, these stories. The vivid power of them, the nuclear-bomb imagination, the intelligence, the depth. These are stories that fully transcend the genre... which is a problem with SF as a category: how can you even compare “Star Wars” to Silverberg ? And yet, they both fall in the SF bucket, even if Star Wars is to Silverberg what “Fifty Shades of Grey” is to Ian McEwan or Philip Roth. There, I said it, and I’ll say it again: as far as science fiction stories go, Star Wars really sucks. It’s so, so bad. If you like speculative fiction and you haven’t read Silverberg yet, I kindly suggest you drop everything you’re reading and dive into his entire body of work. That’s what I intend to do in the coming months, anyway. I’ve read maybe 5 or 6 books of his so far, ALL of them diamonds. I found this 1975 anthology in a used bookstore in LA, nice and yellowed with that great mystical old-book scent. It includes 10 of the best stories written by Robert Silverberg from 1958 to 1971. Two of them are Nebula award winners, one is a Hugo award winner, and the other ones were nominated for one or the other. 1. Road to Nightfall - In a city of starving people only a certain kind of merchant is still in business... yep, it’s about cannibalism. 2. Warm man - A new neighbour appears, with the magnetic powers of a bizarre confessor. 3. To see the invisible man - A future where the punishment for some crimes is “invisibility”, even though people can still see you: they will see the mark on your forehead and avoid you. A story that was made into an episode of the “Amazing stories” TV show. 4. The Sixth Palace - A variation on the theme of the enigmatic Sphinx. A robot guards a vast treasure - you need to answer his questions correctly if you want access to the treasure. Very amusing. 5. Flies - Aliens save an astronaut and send him back to Earth ... only, something is not right with him. 6. Hawksbill Station - Those accused of sedition , in a right-wing government of 2010, are sent back in time to the Pleistocene, with a time machine that works only one-way. I loved this story especially for the main character, he was so alive and vibrant and sprung out of the pages. 7. Passengers - Invaders whimsically take over men and women, body and soul. 8. Nightwings - My favorite story (and the longest one) of the lot. The epic journey of the Watcher and the characters around him. The core of the story almost sounds like a dream or a hallucination. (Silverberg expanded it into a novel later on). 9. Sundance - A team of scientists exterminate “pests” on a new world without trying to learn their true nature. Echoes of “Downward to Earth”. 10. Good news from the Vatican - The story of the first robot who was elected Pope.
