The Icelandic sagas have much in common with the legends of the American West, albeit with different props. Instead of horses and wagon trains you have longships; instead of Lakotas and Apaches you have “Lapps” (Sámi) and “Skraelings” (a term applied to both the proto-Inuit of Greenland and the inhabitants of Vinland/Newfoundland); instead of the closing of the frontier and the taming of the West, you have Christianization and the consolidation of royal power. Both genres are concerned with the dialectic between authority and the romantic freedom of outlawry, the pursuit of honor and justice in a place where the commission of crimes and the punishment thereof are nearly indistinguishable, and the yearning for new lands where one can live without the interference of politicians and businessmen from back east. Both involve interminable family feuds, dangerous levels of alcohol consumption, gratuitous violence, and plenty of facial hair. Egil’s Saga begins not with the life of the eponymous Egil Skallagrimsson, but with that of his grandfather, Ulf Bjalfason, nicknamed “Kveld-Ulf” (“Evening Wolf”) on account of his tendency to become temperamental in the evening, which led some to speculate that he was a shape-changer. Kveldulf marries Salbjorg, the daughter of his best friend and Viking companion Berle-Kari, and settles down on his Norwegian farm. While Kveldulf is ugly, brutish, miserly, and unyielding, Salbjorg is exceptionally beautiful, open-hearted, and likeable. Their union initiates among their progeny a kind of dichotomy between “light” and “darkness”; between the attractive, lawful, magnanimous descendants who take after Salbjorg’s side of the family, who gravitate toward the service of the Norse kings after Harald Fair-Hair becomes ruler of a more-or-less unified Norway, and the homely, misanthropic, and fiercely independent offspring who take after Kveldulf and make bitter enemies of the ruling house. It is by no means clear which side of the family ultimately fares better. Kveldulf has two sons: Thorolf (light) and Skallagrim (dark). Thorolf enters the service of King Harald against his father’s advice; and while he becomes fabulously wealthy and powerful, his nobility of character ultimately leads to his downfall, attracting jealousy, slander, and the paranoia of the King, which creates a self-fulfilling prophecy that comes to fruition when Thorolf is ambushed and struck down by Fair-Hair’s own hand. When Skallagrim, like his father, rebuffs the King and refuses to serve him, Harald endeavors to have him killed, but Skallagrim and Kveldulf slaughter the King’s enforcer Hallvard and his men and make for Iceland. When Kveldulf dies along the way, his body is placed in a coffin and thrown overboard. Skallagrim arrives in Iceland to find the coffin washed ashore and decides to build his farm nearby, becoming one of the first people to settle on the island. The same duality repeats itself among Skallagrim’s sons, Thorolf (who is named after his uncle and has similar qualities) and Egil: a gigantic, feral, irascible man, but also resourceful, gifted in poetry and rune magic, and occasionally—perhaps owing to the residual “light” part of his ancestry—tender-hearted and honorable. But only occasionally. Thorolf befriends Eirik Bloodaxe, Harald’s son and heir, and tries to bring about a reconciliation between the two families, but Egil becomes such a nuisance to Eirik, and to most other people, that this becomes impossible. At the age of six, Egil kills another boy with an axe during a ball-game. At the age of twelve, innocent horseplay turns deadly when Skallagrim slams Egil’s friend Thord on the ground so hard that he kills him; an act for which Egil takes revenge by casually killing his father’s steward before sitting down for family dinner. As a young man, Egil crashes a party at which Eirik is present, gets uproariously drunk, and kills one of the King's closest friends, making him an outlaw and earning his entire family the enmity of the Norwegian court. Eirik’s wife Gunnhild sends an assassin to kill the brothers, but they are warned of the threat beforehand and kill him first. Egil and Thorolf become an inseparable pair, going on Viking expeditions in the Baltic and Denmark. During one Baltic raid, Egil is captured and imprisoned on a local estate. At night he escapes from his bonds, freeing the rest of his party along with other captives. While the group makes their escape with a great deal of loot, Egil worries that he is being dishonorable for sneaking off, so he returns to the estate by himself, sets it on fire, and kills everyone who tries to flee before reuniting with Thorolf. Unable to return to Norway, the pair travels to England and fights for King Athelstan against the Scots and their Welsh allies. The English prevail, but Thorolf falls in battle. Athelstan gifts Egil two chests of silver: one for Egil, and the other for Skallagrim as payment for the life of his son. Egil never shares the silver with his father, and near the end of his life he buries the chests in a secret place, killing the slaves who accompany him so that the whereabouts of the treasure would never be disclosed. Egil marries Thorolf’s widow Asgerd, and in the process of securing an inheritance he believes is being wrongfully denied to her (and thus to him) he kills two of her relatives—one of whom he fells in a duel by biting through his throat—and Eirik’s son Rognvald. Despite his truculent ways, Egil lives to an ignominious old age, and when we last see him he is in such a pitiful state—blind, feeble, and being ordered about by his housemaids—that one wonders whether it would have been more fitting for his life to have ended earlier but on more glorious terms. The saga ends when Egil’s remains are discovered under an old church soon after Iceland has become officially Christian, and his skull is found to be so thick that the local priest makes a sport of trying to split it apart with the blunt side of his axe—to no avail. Egil makes for an interesting antihero. Most of his problems are self-created, and he needlessly sows discord, death, and destruction wherever he goes. But at the same time one comes to appreciate his independent spirit and his ability to outlast his enemies. And at times we get intriguing glimpses of another side of him: when he remakes rune carvings to heal a young girl who has been hexed by a spurned suitor; when he defends a family from a Swedish berserker named Ljot by hacking him to pieces in a duel; when he comes to grips with his grief over the deaths of his sons Bodvar and Gunnar through the composition of his greatest poem. One gets the sense that through him the family dialectic has begun slowly working toward a resolution.
