" I picked up this book simply for some light bedtime reading and promptly lost a full night's sleep because I couldn't put it down. Alexander's painstakingly reconstructed narrative of the iconic mutiny is absolutely spellbinding. One has to admire the stamina of any historian who pours through thousands of pages of two-hundred year old letters, transcripts of courts martial, popular accounts in contemporaneous circulation and standard historical books on the subject. This is an achievement which is sure to oust Sven Walhrous's MUTINY AND ROMANCE IN THE HIGH SEAS as the definitive account of the Bounty misadventure. What I find most remarkable is Ms. Alexander's convincing conclusion that the folk tales of Fletcher Christian's return to England have a firm and almost inescapable foundation in fact. This amounts to an historical bombshell, yet she presents it concisely, logically and authoritatively Most of us are well acquainted with the popular accounts of the mutiny. One of the first real novels I ever read was Nordhoff and Hall's MUTINY ON THE BOUNTY. One of the first campy pieces of cinematic dialogue I ever committed to memory was Charles Laughton's "I'll live to see you - all of you - hanging from the highest yardarm in the British fleet" speech. The whole story seems at once familiar and simple, like a morality play. This book refutes almost everything we thought we knew about what happened on April 28th, 1789. I won't spoil it all for you. The details in this book are plentiful and captivating. The characters are beautifully developed and richly portrayed. The author spends a great deal of time reconstructing the motives and actions of Peter Heywood (Roger Byam in the Nordhoff and Hall book; Franchot Tone in the 1935 movie). The family connections in the British gentry and their dynamics in the mutiny are examined in depth. When THE BOUNTY was released in 1984, it was praised for its verisimilitude. Ms. Alexander's book makes that film seem like the Reader's Digest version of the event. The reality was far more dramatic and much less simple than any bromance-gone-wrong between Anthony Hopkins and Mel Gibson. I don't know how to rate this delightful book except to say that I plan to read it again immediately. It is THAT excellent
