★★☆☆☆½ Before you go casting aspersions on this review, please note that I'm not a big fan of short story collections, and I only read this for the Dark Tower tie-ins, which the first story delivered in spades. In Wolves of the Calla , Father Callahan shared some of his story with our ka-tet. Part of which involved his travels down highways in hiding and the relentless pursuit of the Low Men in Yellow Coats . So I was eager to learn more about these mystery men through the first story in this collection. What better way to kick things off than with this perfect little time capsule of 1960, and those sublime childhood days at the start of summer vacation with a couple of your best friends in tow. Where there are seemingly new and exciting adventures waiting to be discovered, around every corner, and those friendships are sure to last forever. Everything’s just peachy until a mysterious old man moves in upstairs, and those Low Men in Yellow Coats come sniffing around. Sing it now . . . ♫ It’s a cruel (cruel), cruel summer, leaving me here on my own. ♫ Such an awesome short story that drew the curtain back on the Low Men . Easy 4+ stars. Next, we fast forward to 1966 for the titular story Hearts in Atlantis with the addition of some funny new characters. We follow along as these freshmen struggle to adjust to college life, during a period of great turmoil in the US, only to end up mired in the Hearts tournament from hell. The story started off strong enough, but then slowly devolves into a hippy drippy diatribe railing against the Vietnam War. Sadly, once this can of worms was opened it became quite evident that this was to become the main focus of the rest of the stories. I get it, brother, war is hell. Especially ones we should have never gotten tangled up in to begin with, and doubly so when they're drafting unwilling participants into the shit-storm. Live and let live, put John Lennon's Imagine on an endless loop, that’s my motto. So please forgive me while I bury my head in the sand, but I don’t care to spend so much time mulling over a war that could have/should have been avoided, and all the lives lost to it. This story fell to a low 3 stars, for me. The last three stories are all extremely short in comparison to the first two, and, excluding a couple of scenes with minor Dark Tower relevance, there's nothing too noteworthy. Therefore, I’d rate each of these 2 stars. There are a few reoccurring characters that tie all the stories together nicely, making the book much more interesting than it would have been otherwise. Nevertheless, my overall average for the entire collection adds up to a paltry 2.6 stars. Loved that first story and parts of the second, but I could have done without much of the rest.
