* ੈ♡‧₊˚ “𝐼 𝒶𝓂 𝓃𝑜𝓉𝒽𝒾𝓃𝑔 𝓈𝓅𝑒𝒸𝒾𝒶𝓁, 𝑜𝒻 𝓉𝒽𝒾𝓈 𝐼 𝒶𝓂 𝓈𝓊𝓇𝑒. 𝐼 𝒶𝓂 𝒶 𝒸𝑜𝓂𝓂𝑜𝓃 𝓂𝒶𝓃 𝓌𝒾𝓉𝒽 𝒸𝑜𝓂𝓂𝑜𝓃 𝓉𝒽𝑜𝓊𝑔𝒽𝓉𝓈 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝐼'𝓋𝑒 𝓁𝑒𝒹 𝒶 𝒸𝑜𝓂𝓂𝑜𝓃 𝓁𝒾𝒻𝑒. 𝒯𝒽𝑒𝓇𝑒 𝒶𝓇𝑒 𝓃𝑜 𝓂𝑜𝓃𝓊𝓂𝑒𝓃𝓉𝓈 𝒹𝑒𝒹𝒾𝒸𝒶𝓉𝑒𝒹 𝓉𝑜 𝓂𝑒 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝓂𝓎 𝓃𝒶𝓂𝑒 𝓌𝒾𝓁𝓁 𝓈𝑜𝑜𝓃 𝒷𝑒 𝒻𝑜𝓇𝑔𝑜𝓉𝓉𝑒𝓃, 𝒷𝓊𝓉 𝐼'𝓋𝑒 𝓁𝑜𝓋𝑒𝒹 𝒶𝓃𝑜𝓉𝒽𝑒𝓇 𝓌𝒾𝓉𝒽 𝒶𝓁𝓁 𝓂𝓎 𝒽𝑒𝒶𝓇𝓉 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝓈𝑜𝓊𝓁, 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝓉𝑜 𝓂𝑒, 𝓉𝒽𝒾𝓈 𝒽𝒶𝓈 𝒶𝓁𝓌𝒶𝓎𝓈 𝒷𝑒𝑒𝓃 𝑒𝓃𝑜𝓊𝑔𝒽..” ٨ـﮩﮩ٨ـ♡ﮩ٨ـﮩﮩ٨ـﮩ٨ ˗ˏˋ ★ ˎˊ˗ 𝔸𝕝𝕝. 𝕋𝕙𝕖. 𝕊𝕥𝕒𝕣𝕤. ˗ˏˋ★‿︵‧ ˚ ₊⊹ In The Notebook, we follow the story of Noah and Allie who meet and fall in love as teenagers in the 1940s. They are separated when Allie’s family returns home and after writing letters for two years that go unanswered, Noah decides he needs to move on. Fourteen years later, after seeing Noah in the newspaper for building his house, Allie decides to leave her fiancé at home while she goes to visit Noah in secret. When Noah and Allie meet again, sparks fly and the romance and passion they shared is still there but how can Allie choose one man over the other without someone getting hurt? The story is told by an old man living in a nursing home with his wife. She has dementia and he reads her the story of Noah and Allie. How they met and fell in love, what happens after Allie leaves and the lives they go on to have in the future. I can't believe this is the first time I'm reading the book lol. I've been a really long time fan of the movie- this is one of those stories that has been with me and comforted me in some pretty terrible times, and some really wonderful ones. This is such a love letter, in the purest rawest form. The way that these two love each other and are connected is so freaking beautiful I can't help but get all choked up. It really makes you believe that true love never dies, that it endures and it survives. It's so tender and steadfast- yet also passionate and fiery when they were younger. It's one of my all time favorite love stories. The Notebook is ultimately an epic love story, where the underlying and most lasting message is that true love never dies. I highly recommended you to both read and watch this enchanting love story and get lost in the competing worlds of both language and imagery. Both are sure to impress. “𝒮𝑜 𝒾𝓉'𝓈 𝓃𝑜𝓉 𝑔𝑜𝓃𝓃𝒶 𝒷𝑒 𝑒𝒶𝓈𝓎. 𝐼𝓉'𝓈 𝑔𝑜𝒾𝓃𝑔 𝓉𝑜 𝒷𝑒 𝓇𝑒𝒶𝓁𝓁𝓎 𝒽𝒶𝓇𝒹; 𝓌𝑒'𝓇𝑒 𝑔𝑜𝓃𝓃𝒶 𝒽𝒶𝓋𝑒 𝓉𝑜 𝓌𝑜𝓇𝓀 𝒶𝓉 𝓉𝒽𝒾𝓈 𝑒𝓋𝑒𝓇𝓎𝒹𝒶𝓎, 𝒷𝓊𝓉 𝐼 𝓌𝒶𝓃𝓉 𝓉𝑜 𝒹𝑜 𝓉𝒽𝒶𝓉 𝒷𝑒𝒸𝒶𝓊𝓈𝑒 𝐼 𝓌𝒶𝓃𝓉 𝓎𝑜𝓊. 𝐼 𝓌𝒶𝓃𝓉 𝒶𝓁𝓁 𝑜𝒻 𝓎𝑜𝓊, 𝒻𝑜𝓇𝑒𝓋𝑒𝓇, 𝑒𝓋𝑒𝓇𝓎𝒹𝒶𝓎. 𝒴𝑜𝓊 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝓂𝑒... 𝑒𝓋𝑒𝓇𝓎𝒹𝒶𝓎.” “𝒴𝑜𝓊 𝒶𝓇𝑒 𝓂𝓎 𝒷𝑒𝓈𝓉 𝒻𝓇𝒾𝑒𝓃𝒹 𝒶𝓈 𝓌𝑒𝓁𝓁 𝒶𝓈 𝓂𝓎 𝓁𝑜𝓋𝑒𝓇, 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝐼 𝒹𝑜 𝓃𝑜𝓉 𝓀𝓃𝑜𝓌 𝓌𝒽𝒾𝒸𝒽 𝓈𝒾𝒹𝑒 𝑜𝒻 𝓎𝑜𝓊 𝐼 𝑒𝓃𝒿𝑜𝓎 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝓂𝑜𝓈𝓉. 𝐼 𝓉𝓇𝑒𝒶𝓈𝓊𝓇𝑒 𝑒𝒶𝒸𝒽 𝓈𝒾𝒹𝑒, 𝒿𝓊𝓈𝓉 𝒶𝓈 𝐼 𝒽𝒶𝓋𝑒 𝓉𝓇𝑒𝒶𝓈𝓊𝓇𝑒𝒹 𝑜𝓊𝓇 𝓁𝒾𝒻𝑒 𝓉𝑜𝑔𝑒𝓉𝒽𝑒𝓇.” ⋆✴︎˚｡⋆ Connect with me on Instagram ˗ˏˋ★‿︵‧ ˚ ₊⊹
