EPIC HISTORICAL ROMANCE Raphael Flamenco travels to Boston on business, from New Orleans. It is there he first meets Deborah Manchester, the daughter of a rich Bostonian banker. Deeply attracted to Deborah, but unable to court her, as his family and his rigid creole upbringing will prevent him marrying a Yankee. But they get lost out in a rain storm for hours alone, and honour dictates he do the right thing. But it's no hardship to him. As Deborah tall willowy with silver hair, has captivated him. His Moonflower. Deborah is enamoured with this tall dark and handsome creole aristocrat. Now married to him, and returning home with him to New Orleans. Deborah is nervous and worried how his family will react to his Yankee wife. Deborah was right to be concerned, Raphael's parents were horrified at her appearance in their home, and made it very clear that they would never accept her. Deborah tries hard to adjust to this new life. But was reviled by the family's use of slaves. The idea of enslaving any human being was totally abhorrent to her. At home in Boston, although her father was a rich man, she was still expected to live a productive life. Deborah was active in her work with many charities helping those less fortunate. But here as Raphael's wife, she was expected to merely shop and be at Raphael's beck and call. Then she's makes a horrifying and distasteful discovery about her husband. Knowing she can never accept his way of life any longer, she runs away to start a new life in Texas. Raphael is furious that his wife has had the audacity to leave him. And decides to follow her and bring her back home. Dragging her by her hair if necessary. This is an extremely well written and researched story. What I enjoyed the most was the characterisation. Especially the H/h. Raphael or Rafe Fleming as he calls himself now. Was a mere spoilt 22 year old when he married Deborah. But his experiences as he searched for her in Texas, meant he had to grow up and get tough fast. Through his many adventures, including being sold as a slave to the Comanches, he is a changed man. In fact it is six long years before he and Deborah are reunited. But she has altered as well, she has carved out a new life for herself in Texas, posing as a widow, and running a boarding house I have to be honest and say that my own preference does not run to romances where the two leads are apart for such a big chunk of the story. But it would be churlish of me not to give this any less than five stars. This is not a hearts and flowers romance, but it is sensuous and earthy. I thoroughly enjoyed it. Show more
