You have to have faith my ass. This is a story with a moral, but I’m not in the mood to accept it or to enjoy it. The couple have been married for 15 years and are going to divorce, at the end of an argument the heroine runs away and has a terrible accident where she needs almost one year to recover. She’s lost the memory of the accident and the previous days and she’s got ugly scars. The lil town where she decided to live is somehow too good to be true, everyone is nice and pleasant and good and welcoming. She will stay with her soon to be ex for a couple of months then they will divorce as planned. Basically the man is a ruthless businessman that forgot to have a wife and did all he wanted in his life, not caring about what she wanted. She was reduced to a trophy wife and had no children because it was what he wanted. They quarreled all the time because he was never home, never. He never ever gave up anything for her. And eventually he also cheated on her with her so-called bff. A married ho. When the heroine found out she crashed her car. In the weeks the hero is staying with her he will understand she’s what matter most for him and he will have regrets about what he did. After all he was the reason for her accident. They basically fall in love again but I did not buy it. He didn’t deserve her and there was the nice doctor that I wanted her to be with. But no, she had to take back the cheating asshole again: But why I wonder. He’s been nasty to her for years beside the cheating, so why does she still want him. Some women are really not able to turn pages and are always there because they are afraid of the new. Because it’s easier to stay in the hell you know than to go to a new and unknown adventure. Sad, very sad. I don’t think he ever loved her. Any other woman would have done. He cheated repeatedly with her bff it was not even a ons. He hurt her. He admits he wanted what he had in his life while the poor heroine didn’t get what she wanted, any of it. And then the topping on the cake. There’s an angel that was sent to save the heroine and shove her back to her asshole hero. But thank you very much I can do without some angels. Eventually I was pissed and annoyed and I know some people could enjoy this book because it’s not bad written but I’m sure my safety friends would hate it. Because this man deserved nothing good.
