Well this was a very quick read. Finished it in a day or 2. This book was on my wish list for quite a long time and finally bought it. I like to read survival stories and there are very good ones out there like Adrift by Steve Callahan and Jungle by Joshi Ginsberg (I hope I wrote the correct names) They are excellent. First of all this is about survival on the sea but it is indeed more an emotional story cause this lady had enough supplies to last her for a long time. I am not going to say what happened but I will say what I liked. I liked that this is not another book where the person in need finds God and the whole book is about that. What I also liked that she was not shy to tell us how stupid she acted and how she swore. it did feel honest to me. What I did not like was that it was so short, that she jumped from what was happening on the boat to how she met her boyfriend and such but that is still not a problem. What I really disliked is the way she spoke about Richards family especially his parents. In the beginning of the book she says something mean about his parents, and I immediately thought, hey why did you have to do that? It felt mean and unnecessary. My feelings were right cause in the end she wrote about his parents who are English....That they were cold because they did not show their emotions in front of her"That pissed me of to no end. American people are known for letting their emotions out and say quite quickly and easily to others that they love them which is fine. A lot of British meanwhile were brought up with the stiff upper lip. You do not show your emotions in public. Apparently she expected to be hugged plus that there would be lots of tears and she was also saying that it was weird that his parents did not cry. (This was quite a while after the accident by the way) and to me she suggested that his parents were very cold which I am sure they were not. I can't stand people that judge so quickly. If you loved him so much you could have shown a bit more respect to his parents Tami!!! Later she wrote how pissed she was that Richard's brother in law did not want to sell his boat or the price she wanted so apparently there is some bad blood there. Now what to give this book. How many stars. This story would be interesting no matter who wrote it and it could have been much better. Plus adding the false attacks I am not giving it 3 but 2 stars. it is just okay. Nothing much,
