Martin Bell’s In Harm’s Way is an exhaustive, and often exhausting, account of the Bosnian War in the 1990s. It is the ultimate for news anoraks, as the BBC war correspondent reveals many technical details of how reports from the front line make it to our screens or not, with Bell’s dispatches sometimes losing out due to the death of some minor royal or other pieces of such trivia. It provides a fascinating insight as to his jockeying for airtime, sometimes just 90 seconds to camera, with the powers that be in London. What comes across is the broadcasting veteran’s absolute commitment to the cause and his desire to let the world know the horror that was unfolding on our doorsteps in Europe, when the world was often looking the other way, particularly the UN peacekeeping force. In fact, the UN and Nato receive most of Bell’s ire since they singly failed to keep the peace in the first years of the war, with its many atrocities making it the bloodiest such conflict in the region since the Second World War. He is so committed that Bell risks his life daily to bring viewers the news, getting injured by shrapnel in the process. Fortunately for him it is a wound he dismisses as “superficial” and after a period of recuperation goes back to the front line for another 2-3 years. This leads to a period of reflection, with these latter musings on the war and his role in it the most revealing. Bell, then in his mid-fifties, concedes he is very jaded and too tired to be galumphing around war zones yet he somehow stays the course until a shaky peace breaks out. The Daily Mail newspaper quipped that Bell in his later dispatches looked “very tired”, an epithet the author agrees with but I was left feeling jaded at the end too. Books by journalists tend to be spare and incisive, yet In Harm’s Way seemed to meander before getting bogged down in a war that went on and on. It is odd that a man with such a way with words in a 90-second clip becomes tongue tied in book form. Television is certainly his medium.
