One of the reviews on the back of this is from Library Journal, which called the book "filled with grace." They're absolutely right. Sometimes, Christian fiction can be so heavy-handed, but this was just beautiful. Having gone to a church in small-town Indiana (and also having actually been to the real Harmony), I could totally appreciate the characters who hated change, the characters who wanted change more than most other things, the characters who loved all the weird crotchetiness but wouldn't admit it for fear of being thought provincial. These people were so real, from the ways they made you want to bang your head on the wall to the ways they made you hope for humanity. And one thing I really loved was that, though it all, Pastor Sam (who is in first person, which can be tricky to pull off without sounding terribly folksy and ridiculous) keeps admitting that he has so much to learn. He lies, he judges, he screws up just like "the rest of us" and has to say, yes, that is what grace is about, that is why we follow this God who creates people that make us want to hibernate until they retire to Florida. This a book quietly overflowing with grace, with love, with patience and a recognition that just because you fall down doesn't mean that you get to hate yourself or the people around you. I have a lot of friends who are either pastors or in some theological role--this book made me want to hug all of them for what they do (and what they don't), but it also made me realize how crazy-stupid-God-awful-annoying-lovely-beautiful-broken-redeemed this family of Christ is. It also made me want to go find the next one, because I've been told this is the first of a series. I look forward to it very much. Notes from the Second Read Okay, wow, time and life situation do a lot to a thing. So it's been a while and I picked this up again because I now am a pastor myself (yeah, 2011 me didn't see a lot of things coming) and am looking at this with a completely different lens and...well, the shine has worn off. That five-star rating is now three because I still do appreciate everything I found in the review above but Lord, does this book do a lot of terrible Nice Christian things. The small-town beauty of grace remains, and that's awesome, but "grace" gets used to paper over a lot of behavior from the cast of characters that's deeply problematic. People are allowed to be spoiled, petty, mean, and controlling to the main character because he's a pastor and therefore supposed to love them through everything--but y'all, I am here to tell you that love has to come with accountability. It has to, otherwise it's just abuse with Hallmark language. I've met these people in my own congregations and yes, yes, yes to the grace of being with people in their best and worst hours but absolutely no to the idea that people "are just like that" and "set in their ways." There is one moment this gets acknowledged when the pastor does let someone leave when they've worked themself up to it. "You try to win people over with love and patience, but some people don't want to be won over. All they want is their way" (87). And I felt that deeply and appreciated Gulley's willingness to acknowledge it--but there's so much here of small-town distaste for anything that isn't theirs, anything "newfangled," and that just isn't something I have patience or heart for these days. When I finished this book the first time, I had such a renewed sense of love for the Church. When I finished this book this time, I was so frustrated that this is the culture that creates folks who tell me they've outlasted other preachers and they'll outlast me and until I preach what they want, they're not going to tithe. (Two different people, but yes, both of those things have been said to me.) And it made me so, so sad. Don't read this if you're clergy in the 2020s, I guess. It has too much rose in its lenses to take it seriously when you've seen what this looks like in real time.
