I wasn't particularly crazy about this the first time I read it. It's an odd book with some slightly bizarre humor. I knew that he wrote this because the other books he was writing got too intense but I was intrigued by the afterword. Apparently his goal with this was to combine a supernatural thriller with screwball comedy. This explains soooo much. This book is the sole reason that I always hesitate over bringing an unknown package into the house, even though I read it over 15 years ago. Tommy Phan is a Vietnamese-American who wants nothing more than to be as American as possible, to the great dismay of his mother. At the start of the book he's just bought a Corvette and he's talking to his mother on his car phone. She berates him for being a bad son and tries to force him into coming over for dinner. She complains about his detective character in the book that he's just sold and accuses him of eating too many cheeseburgers and chasing blondes. He manages to evade going over for dinner and in a fit of rebellion he orders two cheeseburgers at a local diner. Later that night Tommy hears someone on his porch and goes to check it out. He finds a gingerbread shaped rag doll on his porch and he brings it in the house . Hence my paranoia because the thing comes to life and then spends the rest of the night trying to kill him, which it must do before dawn. Ticktock. It's a fun book but it's not one that I can get deeply attached to. It's perfect for whiling the day away with a few laughs. However, whatever you do, do not use the audio!!! It was beyond atrocious! The narrator was the same guy that I loved so much in Night Watch , but good god! It turns out that where, to my ear at least, his Russian accent is quite good, he totally freaking sucks at Vietnamese. Seriously. He sounded like an American with a mouth full of marbles trying for a Chinese accent and calling it Vietnamese. Truly. Freaking. Terrible. It's a bit difficult to get truly absorbed in a book that sounds like a slushy version of Joy Luck Club. Did I mention it was absolutely awful ? To top it off, there's a great deal of banter that is of the screwball comedy variety. But instead of deadpan comments that show that Del knows more about what's going on than Tommy, the narrator constantly adds inflection that makes it flirtatious or smug or whatever . Anything but straight and perfectly serious. So... read this when you need a laugh but nothing deep. And don't.... Oh, am I repeating myself? And because the quote made me laugh: "You steal my son," said Mother Phan. "No," Del said, "I stole a Honda and later a Ferrari, and then we borrowed the Peterbilt that the demon stole, but I didn't steal your son."
