So what the dickens is all this bleakness about? If not about the weather, atmospheric and dreary which plays its part from the opening pages, then it must be about the prolonged court case, played out through the book, of Jarndyce v Jarndyce. Perhaps it is the story of the two central female characters Esther and Lady Dedlock. Or maybe it is the timeless themes that run through all Dickens novels; the corruptive nature of power, redemption for the wicked, sacrifice of the good, and the undeniable force of class differences and wealth. Well dear reader the bleakness comes from all of it. The emotions and drama that runs through all the individual plots and themes just spills out into the pages. The atmosphere and ever present sense of tragedy and sadness that cloaks a lot of the characters, most of whom hold a dark secret or they want to expose it. Whilst the book creates a sense of hopefulness, as a Dickens novel, you know lady ‘fate’ will have her way and it’s tragedy for someone. Jarndyce v Jarndyce is a probate case, involving the Jarndyce family who challenge each other in court clocking up legal fees that might one day outweigh the value of the estate. Nevertheless, it is greed and fortune that can turn the eye blind to the inevitable. Alongside this legal thread, are the stories of Esther, orphaned and cared for by her Godmother, and Lady Dedlock who possesses a melancholic air and who must at all costs hide her past transgressions to save her reputation and that of her husband Sir Leicester Dedlock. However, both lives become entwined as Esther finds herself a ward of Jarndyce and letters reveal some of the details of Lady Dedlocks secrets which fall into the hands of the notorious Tulkinghorn. The story is long yet full of intrigue as we read our way through the deceptions, greed, revelations, loves and losses. Review and Comments What I loved about this book was the characterisation. Dickens is one of the best at developing his characters to the point the reader can identify with each one, their traits, their flaws and purpose. The Plot and the exposés were probably easy to work out part way through once the enquiries started into Esther, but what you could not foresee is how we arrive at the ending. Whilst the writing in some of these great novels may not flow easily for the reader, I find the writing, descriptions, choice of words, and story telling superb. If you sit back and reflect on what you have just read, you can appreciate the sheer brilliance of Dickens. Because “A word in earnest is as good as a speech” In some cases, Dickens conveys the emotions in other cases he hints at them. In some instances, he will reveal the plot and motive in other cases, he will leave it up to the reader to uncover the message, the connection, and the intention. Dickens is the master of suggestion - with perfectly timed comments, and subtle statements that come back later in the book and prove to be significant to the story. I found the disreputable and dishonest characters more fascinating than Esther, a central character, who felt too good, too safe, and more like the poor but angelic little girl. I felt she lacked grit and real substance and felt too good to be true. I enjoy a bit more spice. Although intriguing the story was not sufficiently complex to warrant a book of this length. So it will feel a bit long, unless you just want to savour Dickens writing. Excellent and although not my favourite Dickens novel, it is a timeless classic written by the master of character development who captures the immutable truth about human nature - perfectly. An author who writes beautifully, and can mix tragedy with love, honesty with deception but most of all an author who creates the drama and will leave you wanting to read more of his books. Dickens is so good at penetrating your thoughts, that you find yourself reflecting on his stories, the plot, themes and messages a while after reading. Very memorable, often bleak but timeless.
