“[W]e want to offer you a job. An acting job…The biggest part you ever had in your life, the most demanding, the most difficult, surely the most dangerous, and surely the most important. And I don’t mean money. You can have money galore, no problem, name your figure…The part we have in view for you combines your talents, Charlie, human and professional. Your wit. Your excellent memory. Your intelligence. Your courage. But also that extra human quality to which I already referred. Your warmth. We chose you, Charlie. We cast you. We looked at a big field, many candidates from many countries. We came up with you and that’s why you’re here…” - Martin Kurtz, in John Le Carré’s The Little Drummer Girl The spy novel is a very particular genre with a very particular audience. Generally, I don’t count myself a fan. When my book club read Alan Furst’s Spies of the Balkans , everyone loved it. As in, really loved it. They talked about it for hours. And I just sat in the corner with a fake smile on my face, wondering: What the hell did I miss? There is nothing wrong with spy novels. For the most part, there is nothing wrong with me. It’s just not my thing. Thankfully, John Le Carré’s The Little Drummer Girl is far more than a spy novel. Oh, to be sure, there is espionage galore. But it is also a morality play, an exploration of belief, and a serious glimpse at both sides of the seemingly-endless conflict between Israelis and Palestinians. This is a novel that hooks you from the first lines and never lets go: It was the Bad Godesberg incident that gave the proof, though the German authorities had no earthly means of knowing this. Before Bad Godesberg, there had been growing suspicion; a lot of it. But the high quality of the planning, as against the poor quality of the bomb, turned the suspicion to certainty. Sooner or later, they say in the trade, a man will sign his name… That man is Khalil, blamed for a series of bombings, including the one in Bonn that opens the proceedings. Hot on Khalil’s trail is Kurtz, an Israeli operative who cooks up a plan to find him. Kurtz is a very familiar character, the ultra-smart and utterly dedicated spinner of webs, entirely confident in every action he takes. Yet Le Carré draws him indelibly, so that though he feels an archetype, he is also inimitable: Everywhere [Kurtz] went, he had been squaring things and checking out results, gathering help, persuading people, feeding them cover stories and half-truths, overriding the reluctant with his extraordinary restless energy and the sheer volume and reach of his advance planning, even when sometimes he repeated himself, or forgot a small instruction he had issued. We live for such a short time, he liked to tell you with a twinkle, and we are far too long dead. That was the nearest he ever came to an apology, and his personal solution was to relinquish sleep. In Jerusalem, they liked to say, Kurtz slept as fast as he labored. Which was fast. Kurtz, they would explain to you, was the master of the aggressive European ploy. Kurtz cut the impossible path, Kurtz made the desert bloom. Kurtz wheeled and dealed and lied even in his prayers, but he forced more good luck than the Jews had had for two thousand years. The plan Kurtz devises, with the help of a younger protégé named Joseph, is to recruit an actress into the “theatre of the real.” That actress, a young Englishwoman named Charlie, will be convinced to portray the girlfriend of Khalil’s brother, Salim. The Israelis will then use her to get close to their prey. To tell you more would be – well, it would be a couple things. First, a spoiler. Second, impossible. The plot here is dense, multilayered, a maze overlaid on another maze. Twists and turns are all well and good. What makes the unraveling worthwhile, though, is the characters. No matter how farfetched things get, no matter the number of crosses and double crosses, Le Carré grounds everything in his creations. Kurtz, of course, is unforgettable, but it is Charlie that must bear The Little Drummer Girl ’s moral weight. She begins as a stereotype, a flighty actress with superficial left-wing politics. When the Israelis quiz her on her worldview, she has only glib responses with which to answer. As she sinks deeper into her role, however, she comes to see the Middle Eastern struggle firsthand. This is what separates the good from the great; this is what makes The Little Drummer Girl an enduring book, a relevant book, 35 years after it was first published. On its face, Le Carré’s story is boilerplate: heroic Israelis track down mad Arab bomber. And to be frank, Le Carré stacks the deck in favor of his Israeli characters, especially the charismatic Kurtz, who gets the most reasonable speeches. Despite this, Le Carré works hard to present the Palestinian viewpoint as well. To give some insight into their plight, their worldview, their reality. In one sequence, Charlie goes to a refugee camp to train: There is a terrible, yet pastoral peace that comes from living for a long time among the world’s real victims. In the camp, Charlie experienced at last the sympathy that life till now had denied her. Waiting, she joined the ranks of those who had waited all their lives. Sharing their captivity, she dreamed that she had extricated herself from her own. Loving them, she imagined that she was receiving their forgiveness for the many duplicities that had brought her here. The farther she goes in impersonating Salim’s girlfriend, the harder it becomes for her to distinguish the simple binaries she had been taught. Who is right ? Who is wrong ? She becomes mired in a Dimmesdale-like quandary, losing track of her two faces, “bewildered as to which may be true.” It is worth noting that Le Carré was friends with the American freelance journalist Janet Lee Stevens. She was sympathetic to the plight of Palestinian refugees, and visited the camps with Le Carré at her side. She was known, in the camps, as “the little drummer girl,” because of her passion for their cause. Stevens wrote powerfully about the massacre of the Sabra and Shatilla camps, perpetrated by Christian militias while the IDF looked on. Le Carré certainly makes an effort with The Little Drummer Girl to show both sides of a bloody coin. If he doesn’t find a perfect balance, it might be that that balance is not attainable. There is a place in this world for the trashy novel, the guilty pleasure, the beach read. This is something I truly believe. As Kurtz would say, life is short and death is long, so you should enjoy it where you can. But it’s worth mentioning – and celebrating – the rare novel that can do both. A novel that can entertain and teach; that allows you to escape into false worlds, but also understand this one a little better.
