The White Mughals: Love and Betrayal in Eighteenth-Century India by William Dalrymple is a tour-de-force of historical writing. Packed with the results of an unbelievably enormous amount of research and detective work, it is highly detailed, yet it flows like a good novel. It gave me great pleasure reading it. Until the first decade of the 19th century, Europeans living in India had no difficulties with cohabiting and having sexual relations with the local Indians, whom they encountered. Many of them often abandoned their European habits and adopted the oriental lifestyle of the people with whom they were living. This interracial mixing and cultural interchange is the subject of Dalrymple’s masterpiece. The author centres his study on the life and loves of James Kirkpatrick (1764-1805), who became the British Resident at the Nizam’s court in Hyderabad. Having already had one child by the mysterious ‘Dark Girl’, Kirkpatrick was clearly attracted to the Indian female. One of these females of aristocratic descent became attracted to the young Resident. Kirkpatrick reciprocated Khair un Nissa’s amorous interest in him, and by 1801 not only had they married, but also he had become a Muslim. They had a son and a daughter. Kirkpatrick’s marriage to an Indian and his ‘going native’ was not an isolated incident. Many of his peers in the East India Company started multi-racial families, as well as adopting wholly or partially the Indian ways of life. At first, this was not much frowned upon by the Company officials in their headquarters in Calcutta, but with the arrival of Richard Wellesley in Calcutta as Governor General at the very end of the 18th century things began to change. He was concerned that Kirkpatrick’s amorous liaison with someone so closely connected to the Nizam’s court in Hyderabad might damage the Resident’s loyalty to the Company, especially at a time when the Company was struggling to gain control of the Deccan, the part of southern India in which Hyderabad is located. James Kirkpatrick’s life ended soon after his happy marriage to Khair un Nissa began. He lived long enough to oversee the construction of his magnificent Palladian Residency* in Hyderabad and its zenana in which his Moslem wife could live separated from men as her religion dictated. Dalrymple traces the tragic life of Kirkpatrick’s widow, who lived in exile in a coastal port on the east coast of India with her mother but bereft of her two children. They had been sent to England to live with Kirkpatrick’s father, and later his brother. Their fate during a period when the British began to develop their prejudice against their Indian subjects is also described in the book. This review only touches a tiny part of the tip of the iceberg. There is so much more to this encyclopaedic book that only by reading it can one truly appreciate its greatness. Some have criticised the excessive use of footnotes, claiming that they distract the reader from the flow of the book. Far from it: not only is each and every footnote fascinating on its own, but also they enhance what is already an excellent account of the history of the relationships between two dramatically contrasting cultures. * See http://yameyamey.blogspot.co.uk/2012/... for pictures of this wonderful building. PS: I can fully understand Kirkpatrick’s attraction to Indian women, having married one myself!
