[4.5 stars] A nasty little sf novella in which Joanna Russ gleefully explodes the trope of the spaceship that crashes on an unknown planet, after which the survivors must form their own new society. Her unnamed main character is not down with this, and declines to go along. Violence and death follow. So to start the eight survivors are all civilians, no scientists or brilliant engineers among them. One is a 12-year-old girl, and an early hint of Russ' mindset is when the main character (a woman in her 40s) asks, what happens when her wisdom teeth come in impacted? Ha. No ignoring of inconvenient realities here. (Another example: they have food for six months, and no means of testing whether anything found on the planet is safe to eat, other than eating it and hoping for the best.) Well, except most of the other survivors are doing just that, and already talking about colonizing. Which will naturally involve repopulating... As the main character notes, two days and already the patriarchy's here. A key exchange, between her and one of the men: "Civilization must be preserved." "Civilization's doing fine. We just don't happen to be where it is." She wants a death with dignity, no more. And for the others, if they disagree, to just leave her alone. One problem though, is that our heroine is rather a pill. Not at all ingratiating, and that matters. There is another, younger woman, Nathalie, who seems as though she'd be a natural ally, also intelligent, no b.s., sees reality as it is. But no effort is made along those lines by either of them, and so it ends up one against seven, and things go south fast. I loved this, and loved that it's a lean 118 pages with no filler. And while stark and direct, it's not simple. It's not like you can blame the others for not wanting to die, or for hoping against very long odds. Things could have proceeded differently, but as is often the case, personality clashes can override more reasonable options. Things weren't so messy when it was Captain Kirk vs. the Gorn. Note: this edition has an introduction by Samuel Delany, worth reading but don't read it until AFTER reading the book. It spoils the shit out of the story. Fortunately that's what I did. Shout-out to mark monday, whose review enticed me to read this. mark didn't like it so much, but the premise was enough for me to want to check it out. Thanks mark, I'd heard of Joanna Russ for years but never read her until now. I'll definitely read more of her stuff.
