I felt much better now that I could see the situation so clearly in black and white I wish... Or not... The truth and the most exquisite aspect of the book was that you can't decide what to think about characters and their decisions . It was disturbing because who doesn't prefer stability. The idea of a few narrators is intriguing. It can allow seeing a bigger perspective, knowing more facts. But, it can also do what Susan Howatch did - she showed me, that even after finishing the novel I am still not certain what happened and who was right/good. It was priceless. I don't remember any other book that did it. Everyone was interchangeable. Black and white no longer existed Another thing that needs mentioning, is the historical background (e.g. the lot of Ireland) and all those details that were said as a side note, like when you write a letter to someone and say that you met someone or that the weather was bad. In historical fiction, such details are especially precious. Now that chignons were no longer worn low on the neck it was harder to dress one’s hair even if one had been accustomed to doing so Prostitutes aren’t allowed to solicit on Broadway but walk along very fast with their eyes on the ground—a most curious sight. They’re called ‘Street Walkers,’ and if they can get a customer they beckon him into a side street where the police don’t interfere During the great hunger of the Forties all the wildlife had been killed for food, and although the animals were said to have returned they kept themselves well hidden And, of course, there was a deep understanding of human nature (or perhaps an example that we aren't able to understand each other) . the most important thing of all was that I should be myself. “ If you try to be someone other than yourself you’ll never be happy, ” he had said. “You’ve got to be honest with yourself so that you can be honest with other people.” The only side I had to take was my own The story was immersed in the river that we all are in (who lived, who live and who will live). [The river through time that E.H. Gombrich talked about.] It was the past, the uncomplicated past seen far away at the end of the golden corridor of nostalgia It was the beauty of a thousand yesterdays and perhaps of a thousand tomorrows Must-read for every fan of the genre. Splendid, remarkable, memorable . “You did what you felt to be best,(...). You couldn’t have done more. “It’s not enough to do one’s best. One should do what one knows to be right"
