In a way, Betty Schimmel was a very lucky person. As a girl, her father moved the family from Czechoslovakia to Budapest, Hungary, in order to flee the Nazis. But eventually, the Nazis invaded even Hungary, and it was then that Betty and her mother and siblings were sent to a concentration camp. What makes her lucky is that the invasion didn't happen until March of 1944, so the family didn't have to endure years and years of starvation and overwork like the Jews in Germany. Also Betty's mother was an extremely strong woman who kept her kids going even when they felt they had lost all hope. As a result, not only Betty but also her mother, sister, and brother all survived the Holocaust. But Betty did lose her true love Richie thanks to Hitler and the Nazi regime. After she and her family were liberated from the concentration camp, she tried so hard to find Richie but ultimately came up empty. Eventually she gave in to a young man who was also a survivor and desperate to replace the family he lost with one of his own with Betty, and they were married. But Betty never forgot her true love, and ached for him every day of her life. The horrors in this book are really awful. And what makes it almost worse is that Schimmel records them in such a dry, matter-of-fact voice, though you know it's totally breaking her heart and soul to witness these horrific things. The reading is difficult at times, to know that the Nazis could so easily murder someone just because s/he was a Jew. There were several times I was nearly moved to tears, reading about the awful things Schimmel witnessed during these terrible years. I can understand why she had a difficult time with her husband Otto. He wasn't the one she wanted, and she always held out hope that Richie was still alive. It is true that she does come across as a bit self-absorbed throughout the book, since she could have realized that Otto was even more damaged than she was by his time in Auschwitz, considering he was the only surviving member of his family. I understand having a soul mate, but at the same time, she did agree to marry Otto on her own, and she could have decided to treat Otto better much earlier in their marriage, while still loving Richie in her heart of hearts. I applaud the decision she ultimately made, as it was the mature and right decision. Highly recommended, though some of the situations can be graphic.
