What is humanity? Who is human and who is allowed to be human? I actually enjoyed reading this book, having in mind that it’s more on the technophobic side, with me being on the completely opposite end of the spectrum. But I didn’t perceive it as just that. The story is about something grander. It’s about how the modern human has completely removed themselves from the environment they’re living in, purging and destroying everything in their path only for the sake of progress with no end point. It’s about the fact that while machines and technology can add comfort to your life, you’re left blind to so much more that’s out there in the universe. In this book, once the majority of humans are purged off Earth and only a handful are left, once society crumbles down and and they’re back to basics, they discover that they have abilities they’ve never expected to possess, them being “parapsychic” (ability to feel, read and talk to surrounding life) and ability to travel in space only by thinking about the destination, something that the humans dispersed on other planets never achieved due to their highly technological societies. The robots that were humanity’s trusted servants are also left on Earth with a small group of people and they encounter a paradox of their own - if they’re made to serve, and there’s no one left they can serve, what is the purpose to their life? Can they turn to religion? Is this blasphemy as they’re pretending to be human? The story in itself is nothing special - a bit mundane dare I say. The beauty of it appears only when you read behind the borderline magical and paranormal scenes. While it may be perceived as an anti technology work, it includes a main character who, although society has fallen and he’s the only one, among a few others, left on Earth, is still bookkeeping and has gone out of their way to collect all written works of art and document the events happening so as future societies not to develop myths based on their misunderstanding. This fact on its own disintegrates the whole rhetoric of the author being anti-technological as he rather clearly stipulates that knowledge is important, however it’s how you wield it that makes the difference. There is also a very cleverly written Native American tribe that’s only trying to preserve their way of life that they’ve gone back to after the “Disappearance”. It’s quite interesting to ponder the fact that historically the Natjve American tribes were forcibly indoctrinated by the western mindset “for their own good”, however given the chance, they will revert to their customs and traditions. They never gave nor were they asked of their consent. All of this, along with the characters with parapsychic abilities, the robots that are only now finding their way of life, and the humans from other planets finally finding and going back to Earth and trying to reclaim it, creates an astonishing dynamic which is actually not too far behind us - slavery, forced assimilation, end stage capitalism. This is one of those stories that gets told in your head only after you have finished the book. Highly recommend.
