THE DEFINITIVE SKEPTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE BERMUDA TRIANGLE LEGENDS Author Lawrence David Kusche wrote in the Preface to this 1975 book, “The Bermuda Triangle has received much attention in the last decade… According to all accounts, there is something very strange going on out there. My interest in the Triangle began in 1972 when, as a reference librarian at Arizona State University, I was frequently asked to help someone find information on the subject… A new reference librarian … [and I] spent several months advertising in journals and writing letters to various government agencies, research organizations, and libraries along the east coast to see if anyone could suggest any sources… Nobody, it seemed, had been able to find much on the Bermuda Triangle… I realized that the Bermuda Triangle mystery was much more than just an account of the strange disappearance of a large number of vessels… New incidents were continually being incorporated into the tale… I decided to investigate the mystery further; to collect all the information that could be found on each incident, to see if there might not be an answer here and there.” (Pg. xi-xii) He recounts ‘The Legend of the Bermuda Triangle As It Is Usually Told,’ with statements such as: “[the] geographic characteristics of … the Bermuda Triangle that make it an ideal path for rocket launchings might also make it an idea channel for landing approaches by vehicles from outer space. Perhaps a power source or signal device left in the area many centuries ago by a scouting party from another planet continues to send signals into space, showing the followers of the earlier explorers the best landing approach to this planet. The device might operate only occasionally, which would account for the fact that most ships and planes that traverse the area do so without incident.” (Pg. 14-15) He notes, “No account of sea mysteries would be complete if it did not include the Mary Celeste… So many stories have been told about the famous derelict … that it is almost impossible to determine what is fact and what is fiction. Dozens of solutions to the mystery ranging from the very simple to the bizarre had been proposed, but no one knows, and no one will ever know, what actually took place.” (Pg. 31) He admits, “today the fate of the occupants of the Mary Celeste is as much a mystery as the day the ship was found deserted at sea.” (Pg. 35) Of the 1921 disappearance of the ‘Carroll A. Deering,’ he acknowledges, “What took place on the Carroll A. Deering between the time it passed Cape Lookout and when it was found, stranded and empty, several mornings later? Could it have happened as the Coast Guard assumed, that the captain and crew abandoned what they felt was a doomed ship, only to be lost at sea in their lifeboats? The story of the Carroll A. Deering is unique in maritime history, and it can truly be said that the more that is learned about it, the more mysterious it becomes.” (Pg. 73) Of the 1946 case of the City Belle, he states, “[It] was found deserted at sea on December 5, 1946. She was perfectly seaworthy, and everything was in order, even to the lifeboats still hanging in their places in their places… Had the case been pursued it might have been found to be as baffling as the Mary Celeste or the Carroll A. Deering… the [newspaper] coverage was adequate to show that the incident… was inaccurate and sensationalized. The newspaper reports also contradict the frequently stated observation that the weather has never been bad during an incident, and that there have never been survivors in the Bermuda Triangle.” (Pg. 123-124) Of the 1948 disappearance of the airliner the ‘Star Tiger,’ he comments: “The disappearance of the Star tiger thwarts all explanations as each of the suggested solutions seems too unlikely to have occurred. It is truly a modern mystery of the air. Although the reason for the plane’s loss is unknown, the failure to find any trace of it cannot be considered a mystery. The weather was deteriorating during the latter stages of the flight, winds were increasing… and the sea was growing boisterous… The Star Tiger could have gone down as many as five hours before the radar-equipped Fortress arrived in the area…” (Pg. 137) Of the KB-50 plane in 1962, he observes, “The missing KB-50 is another case where a long delay in beginning the search may possibly have contributed to the lack of its success.” (Pg. 182) Later, he adds, “Like many … disappearances, such as the Star Tiger, the Star Ariel, and the Marine Sulphur Queen, a long delay in starting the search may have contributed to the failure to find any traces of the missing planes. Of the three planes that disappeared in the ‘black week’ of January 1967, the crash scene was found only in the case of the Chase YC-122, in which a search was initiated minutes after it became overdue.” (Pg. 214-215) Of the 1967 disappearance of the 23-foot cabin cruiser ‘Witchcraft,’ he notes, “the weather was rather rough and continued so for several days. The wind was strong enough to form whitecaps a mile out at sea, and the waves were forecast to be as much as six feet high. Without the use of engines the boat would have had no power for maintaining the proper heading into the waves, and could easily have been swamped… It is not likely that the Coast guard would announce that the boat was ‘presumed missing, but not lost at sea,’ after having searched in vain for it for five days. Many of the statements attributed to the Coast guard and the Navy in accounts of the Bermuda Triangle have proved to be untrue in the cases where the accident reports are available.” (Pg. 218) He explains, “The Bermuda Triangle is not the only area where ships and airplanes disappear at a rate well beyond the laws of chance. Southeast of Japan is the treacherous Devil’s Sea, which has long been feared by the Japanese because of the many strange disappearances that have occurred there.” (Pg. 251) He points out, “The writers of the Legend do not know the size of the Devil’s Sea or even where it is located. Some say it is 70 miles off Japan’s east coast (which part of the coast?). Others place it near the Myojin Reefs, which are about 300 miles from the coast. Still others place it near Iwo Jima and the Bonin Islands, or about 750 miles from the coast… It appears that the Devil’s Sea, known in the United States as a counterpart of the Bermuda Triangle, is virtually unknown in Japan. The story is based on nothing more than the loss of a few fishing boats twenty years ago in a 750-mie stretch of ocean over a period of five years. The tale has been repeated so many times that it has come to be accepted as fact. No one, until now, ever took the trouble to ask the Japanese about their Devil’s Sea. It was hard to find anyone who could remember ever having heard of it.” (Pg. 259-260) He argues, “There is no possible way that vague, estimated input can lead to precise, accurate answers. How, by plotting the estimated positions of a number of vessels that disappeared in unknown locations, would it be possible to compute lozenge-shaped areas, all tilted up at the same angle and evenly spaced around the world?... the Atalanta … might have sunk anywhere on the 3,000-mile voyage to England. Was it assumed that it sank in the Bermuda Triangle?” (Pg. 264) He concludes, “After examining all the evidence I have reached the following conclusion: There is no theory that solves the mystery. It is no more logical to try to find a common cause for all the disappearances in the Triangle than, for example, to try to find one cause for all automobile accidents in Arizona. By abandoning the search for an overall theory and investigating each incident independently, the mystery began on unravel. “The findings of my research were consistent. 1. Once sufficient information was found, logical explanations appeared for most of the incidents. It is difficult, for example, to consider the Rubicon a mystery when it is known that a hurricane struck the harbor where it had been moored. It is similarly difficult to be baffled by the loss of the Marine Sulphur Queen after learning of the ship’s weakened structure and the weather conditions as described in the report of the Coast Guard investigation. 2. With only a few exceptions, the mishaps that remain unsolved are those for which no information can be found. In several cases important details of the incident… are fictional. 3. Disappearances occur in all parts of the ocean and even over land… Although the disappearances that took place in the Bermuda Triangle are the ones that have been widely publicized, some losses that occurred elsewhere have been ‘credited’ to the Triangle… “If all the locations of ‘Bermuda Triangle’ incidents were plotted on a globe … they had taken place in an area that included the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and most of the North Atlantic Ocean. The Bermuda Triangle is hardly unique… 7. Contrary to the Legend, the weather was bad when many of the incidents occurred. In several cases highly publicized hurricanes were responsible… 9. Many of the writers who publicized the events did no original research but merely rephrased the articles of previous writers, thereby perpetuating the errors and embellishments in earlier accounts. 10. In a number of incidents writers withheld information that provided an obvious solution to the disappearance… “The Legend of the Bermuda Triangle is a manufactured mystery. It began because of careless research and was elaborated upon and perpetuated by writers who either purposely or unknowingly made use of misconceptions, faulty reasoning, and sensationalism. It was repeated so many times that it began to take on the aura of truth.” (Pg. 275-277) This book will be “must reading” for anyone seriously studying the Bermuda Triangle, the ‘Limbo of the Lost,’ etc.
