This is Hesse's first novel and even though many would recommend it as a starting point in discovering his wonderful work, personally I would say to read this after some of his famous works - and boy, he does have many masterpieces in his repertoire: Siddhartha, Steppenwolf, Narcissus and Goldmund, and ofcourse The Glass Bead Game. It is his most autobiographical work, no doubt about it, and it's really great to experience his feelings, principles and beliefs so early on that can be found in his later works. Richard, Peter's friend, tells him: "Look, I always thought you were a poet and I still think you are, not because you write for the literary journals but because there is something beautiful and deep alive in you that will break out sooner or later. That will be genuine poetry." This gives you a great feeling, since you already know that Richard's words turned out to be true, since you've already read Hesse's wonderful works. This is one reason that makes me not to recommend this book as a first read. He speaks about his feeling that he wasn't born to live a domestic live, among people, but for wandering through foreign lands, for traveling the seas: "Shortly after noon on a bright windy day, my arms resting on a broad parapet, my back to the brightly colored city, I beheld for the first time the swell of the great blue flood, the sea. Tossing darkly with unfathomable yearning, eternal and immutable, it hurled itself toward me and I sensed something within me fashioning a friendship for life and in death with this foam-flecked surge. The unlimited spaciousness of the horizon affected me as deeply. Once again, as in childhood, I beheld the soft blue of immeasurable distances beckoning to me like an open gate. And the feeling swept over me that I was not born for a normal life at home among my people or in cities and houses, but my fate was to wander through foreign regions and make odysseys on the sea. Darkly, the old melancholy longing rose up in me to throw myself on God's mercy and merge my own pitifully insignificant life with the infinite and timeless." and in contradiction with that his self-questioning: "What was the meaning of my life? Why had so many joys and sorrows passed over me? Why had I thirsted for the true and the beautiful and why was my thirst still unquenched? Why had I been in love and suffered so much for these women -- I whose head was bowed again in shame for an unfulfilled love. And why had God placed the burning need to be loved in my heart when in fact he had destined me to live the life of a recluse whom no one loved? His desire to express his feelings and beliefs so that everyone could understand better the essence of nature: "As I learned to love nature as if it were a person, to listen to it as if to a comrade or traveling companion speaking a foreign tongue, my melancholy, though not cured, was ennobled and cleansed. My eyes and ears were sharpened, I learned to grasp nuances of tone and subtleties of distinction. I longed to put my ear nearer and nearer to the heartbeat of every living thing, so as to understand perhaps, perhaps one day be granted the gift of expressing this heartbeat in poetry which others would awaken to. This pulse would send them to the springs of all rejuvenation and purification." Furthermore: "Nothing is nobler or more joyful than an unspoken, constant, dispassionate love, and if I have a heartfelt wish, it is that a few, or even one or two, of my readers be brought to learn this pure and blessed art. " And: "So I peered more and more greedily into the abyss of things. I listened to the wind sing in the trees, listened to brooks roar through gorges and gentle streams glide through the plains, and I knew these sounds were the language of God: if I understood their dark, archaic, beautiful language, it would be the rediscovery of paradise. " Another reason why I said that you shouldn't read this in the first place: It is remarkable how this can resemble with an excerpt from The Rainmaker - The Glass Bead Game , fourty years later: "If this melancholy enveloped me at night, I would lie for hours by the window gazing down upon the black lake and up at the mountains silhouetted against the wan sky, with stars suspended above. Then a fearfully sweet, overpowering emotion would take hold of me -- as though all the nighttime beauty looked at me accusingly, stars and mountain and lake longing for someone who understood the beauty and agony of their mute existence, who could express it for them, as though I were the one meant to do this and as though my true calling were to give expression to inarticulate nature in poems." It is a resemblance of feelings and vision not necessarily of description. Another belief that's reflected in Narcissus and Goldmund : "Wise and frugal, life remained silent, however, and let me drift. It sent me neither storms nor stars but waited so that I would become aware of my insignificance again and in patience lose my obstinacy. It let me perform my little comedy of pride and knowledge, ignoring this as it waited for the lost child to find his way back to his mother." And I don't think that I'm mistaken when I say that this belief can also be found in Siddhartha, in a way or another: "I wanted to teach people to listen to the pulse of nature, to partake of the wholeness of life and not forget, under the pressure of their petty destinies, that we are not gods and have not created ourselves but are children of the earth, part of the cosmos." I'm aware that I've used more quotes than my actual words but they do speak better. A book full of emotions, just like Stefan Zweig said in his letter to Hermann Hesse, in 1905: "I love this story, emotional and wonderfully crafted, for its humanity that permeates in every page of it.There are feelings in it that I've experienced in my boyhood and then lost them. And then the two love scenes: they have become events from my own life." As a final reverence to him: "And in my drawer lie the beginnings of my great work. "My Life's Work" I might call it -- but that sounds too pretentious. I'd rather not call it that, because, I must confess, its continuation and conclusion seem highly doubtful. Perhaps a time will come when I'll start all over again and see it through to the end. In that case, the yearning of my youth will be proved right, and I will turn out to be a poet after all." It did turned out, it really did. And, God, what a poet you were!
