This reads like the script of a talking-heads adaptation of an Iris Murdoch novel. The main characters are friendless and damaged, but intriguing, and there’s a Svengali-figure manipulating things. It’s broadly chronological, with protagonists taking turns to give their account of the next bit of the story - which often differs subtly but significantly from how the others describe it. They know the others are also talking to the reader (viewer?), but don’t know exactly what they’ve said. “ Memory is an act of will, and so is forgetting. ” Name and pronoun changes (including debate of singular “they”, in 1991), forgetfulness and deliberate deception (they all withhold vital information), the metaphors of picture restoration (you can uncover secrets, but reversibility matters too), wearing (and not wearing) make-up, coupled with different narrators, create an intriguing, tangled, and often contradictory story. Whose narrative would you trust the most? • Stuart : “ I remember everything. ” • Gillian : “ Just because I don’t have a confessional nature doesn’t mean I forget things. ” • Oliver : “ I remember all the important things. ” It’s a triangle from the start, so aspects of the plot are obvious - jealousy and guilt, especially - muddied as they shift roles. Image : Karpman’s Drama Triangle of Persecutor, Rescuer, and Victim ( Source ) There is occasional input from a few peripheral characters, but it’s mainly Stuart, Gillian, and Oliver’s story, told by them. Oliver is insufferable, with something of Boris Johnson’s style of pompous, esoteric, demeaning, buffoonery: “ Gillian’s rebarbative quotidian motor-car ” is typical. The portrayal of the fear of AIDS is, thankfully, rather dated, but it’s an enjoyable read about largely unlikeable people, with an ending that went in slightly unexpected directions. In Oscar Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest (see my review HERE ), Miss Prism famously tells Cecily: “The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily. That is what Fiction means.” Miss Prism might be shocked by aspects of this story, and I’m not sure she’d class it as fiction. Quotes • “There’s no ‘real’ picture under there waiting to be revealed.” • “The only Darling I can trust is a Darling I’ve paid for.” • “I’ve gone away, they’ve gone away, but it’s not over.” • “You can’t just ‘be happy’; you have to manage happiness.” • “Love is just a system for getting someone to call you Darling after sex.” See also • I’ve reviewed a few Barnes books, HERE . • I’ve reviewed more than a dozen Iris Murdoch novels, HERE . • Alan Bennett is the master of the Talking Heads format, though usually just one person's viewpoint. See my review HERE . Reading friends' reviews of this, I discover there's a sequel, Love, etc , but I'm unsure about whether to seek it out or not. I think I prefer to leave things as they are - and I'm not sure I have the stomach for more of Oliver.
