The soft, more or less for the time, child friendly, today possibly not so much anymore, variation of Twains´ interpretation of the Middle Ages that is more realistic hardcore dark in his underrated masterpiece A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur´s court. https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1... Especially the contrast to this one is big, it´s so white- and greenwashed that it´s exaggerated and unrealistic happy go lucky elements are in stark contrast to the darker tones that are somehow described not too extreme, but actually self- satirizing. Especially the dynamic of the prince, later king, seeing the horrible reality and inhumanity his father loved to form, just changing it without his ministers working against him or rebelling or that he helps the people who helped him by making them part of the elitist nepotist monarchy. So now just 99,999 percent of the people have to suffer except the ones who completely unrealistically decided to help a spoiled, arrogant brat like him they thought of as mentally ill in a predator dog eat dog world. He inexplicably thought that he had to reduce the equality and sharpness of his writing to be appropriate for the younger audiences the work aimed at, but he fails by creating a weird hybrid of very serious topics and plotlines with illogical outcomes and actions of the main characters. He should have written a completely harmless children´s book in his own style and humor avoiding any too serious topics, not with this strange, unusual use of language one isn´t used from him. And it´s not at eye level for the appreciation of the intelligence of kids. Twain would have had the potential to become a kind of early Rick Riordan, Eoin Colfer, Jonathan Stroud,… because of his inherent humor and understanding of human society could have enabled him to make similar works, avoiding both violence and too bold criticism. Or he could instead have written a kind of prequel or sequel to the Connecticut Yankee, possibly with third person view. This could have made one of the founding fathers of Sci-Fi, because many of the ideas were already there, he could have become more primitive and drawn an earlier ancient or Stoneage version of his idea or gone all Verne and constructed future tech. So it´s more of an unnecessary, strange exception in his otherwise brilliant writing, nothing great for the adults and too explicit for the kids it was aimed at, filled with far too much melodramatic, bittersweet, dramedy fairy tale elements that make it an eye rolling overload. Especially the dissociative identity disorder of the arrogant and unsympathetic royal snob, who arbitrarily switches between degenerated, unfriendly dictator who treats everyone like trash and friendly philanthropist who at least doesn´t want his slaves to be tortured and executed, just oppressed, takes the pleasure out of the reading, because it seems so improbable. It could, of course, also be that I am so used to his sharp feather that I can´t deal with a downgraded version that still does a great job at opening the eyes of larger, hardened kids and teens for injustice and epic failing facepalmy societal systems. But wait, no, let me please recapitulate once more, little flag in opportunistic winds that I am, it´s really just unworthy to be associated with Twain's´ name, maybe he had writer's block, needed money, or just thought that kids weren´t clever enough to get that this thing isn´t written with heart blood, just a poor reduction of his main topics. Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
