Holy...! What did I just read? Why did I read it? Who the hell thinks of this stuff? One thing I can say for sure, THIS is one forgotten gem. Why I don't hear more about this book discussed in horror and thriller circles, I'll never know. This was one of the most intense and brutal 80s paperbacks I've ever experienced. Scratch that... This is one of the most intense and brutal books I've EVER read. No, I don't mean it ranks up there with sick, worthless perversions like "Cows," or other writings marketed purely for the extremity of their content. There is nothing too gory or gross here. But I warn you this is very disturbing. It gets under your skin. Think "We Need to Talk About Kevin" or "The Girl Next Door," not "A Serbian Film." "Mother's Boys" manages to consistently subvert your expectations. Just when you think they wouldn't possibly go there, they do. As such, it is very difficult to talk details about this book, as you really will get the best experience going in completely blind. The only detail I will give is to explain why the book loses a star for me. I just couldn't buy into the set-up that leads into the third act. The author had to do some clumsy plot maneuvers to get this whole thing to work. I never could completely believe the whole situation, which involved some beyond-thoughtless family decisions on the part of multiple characters as well as some ridiculous contrived helplessness that was necessary to make the plot move forward. The believability of the characters was not at fault, it was the situation. I must say that the portrayal of the juvenile sociopaths and dysfunctional family dynamics at play felt most chillingly real, far better than most "evil child" thrillers. But because I could not fully suspend my disbelief regarding the actions of certain characters that led to the grueling final third of the book, part of the impact was lost on me. I kept myself too distant emotionally, being too aware that this was fiction. Perhaps not everyone would feel the same way, but that's what happened to me. This is otherwise a perfect example of the horror genre, as it gives you the true horror experience. Bernard Taylor knows how to craft each page with mounting tension so that you feel tight in the chest and your gut feels like you ate too many nuclear chiles with your Thai food. Some of you may be wondering, "Well then, Warren, you masochistic consumer of all literary mayhem, who on earth besides you would want to subject themselves to something that sounds that stressful?" If you are asking yourself anything remotely like that question right now, this is not the book for you. You would be far better served watching the watered-down 1992 Miramax version starring Jamie Lee Curtis. But if I've intrigued you, and if you are the type to test your grit, you will love this 80s paperback classic and can rest assured you are truly among us incurable horror fanatics.
