Sixteen children are held hostage on a schoolbus, and three teens will determine their survival. Kate wasn't meant to be the bus driver that day, she was just filling in for her uncle. Ben wasn't meant to be there either. He got involved because his father is a general in a secret government organization. And Miro - well, Miro meant to be there. It is his mission. He doesn't expect to survive the day. His death will help the cause. I need to start keeping track of those blog posts where these books are recommended to me! The description of this one sounded intriguing, a little like Ransom by Lois Duncan. But it is quite different, because it's clear in this case that the hijackers of the bus are Middle Eastern. There are sections in first person, which seem to be Ben's diary, alluding to past events of the bus hijacking on the bridge. Ben is distraught about how the day turned out and is considering suicide. Then we get the third-person narrations of Kate and Miro. Kate is focused on survival, even though she is the most likely to die. In fact, Miro was supposed to kill her immediately, but because she is a young woman instead of the older man they expected to be driving the bus, they allow her to live to care for the children. Miro is presented yes, as a terrorist, raised to be part of this movement. He has known no other life. He is accustomed to women who wear burkas, and Kate's American style of dress makes him suddenly aware of sex. The tension is great throughout the story, leading up to the end which surprised me somehow. As always with Cormier, gray areas are explored. Who is good and who is bad, manipulation is key for nearly every character. I had to check the copyright date on this one - 1979. There has been unrest in the Middle East for a long time, and I knew that these hijackers were not ISIS but were likely instead Israeli or Palestinian, and yet it felt so current. It's rare when a vintage YA novel holds up so many years later, because so many deal with "trendy" topics. This was more about the psychology of three different characters in an intense situation, and that will always stand the test of time.
