Luciano Bennett, a British ex-pat known simply as Bennett, loves his stress free life as a house sitter in the small French village of Saint-Martin. He once had a career in film production, but he is a man without ambition and does not look forward to giving up his present easy going life and returning to that cut throat world. It is all too tiresome. But after a failed investment scheme in which his partner disappeared with his savings, his credit has dwindled precipitously so he must find a way to generate a revenue stream to continue his current lifestyle. Bennett places an ad in the local paper offering his services and is soon contacted by a man name Julian Poe. Poe is a wealthy man who is determined to avoid the heavy French income taxes he is forced to pay. He offers Bennett a job impersonating him, living at his high end penthouse in Monaco overlooking the shimmering Mediterranean. The job allows him to use Poe’s luxurious Mercedes and provides him with a generous account to dine at high end restaurants. The idea of an all-expense paid life in Monaco is very appealing and Bennett quickly accepts. As Poe points out, the scheme is no worse a crime than the many creative financial adjustments practiced everyday by big corporations to increase dividends and satisfy shareholders. Poe convinces Bennett that it is a harmless deception, the only one to suffer would be the taxman. Bennett is not aware of Poe’s secret plans to use him as the drop off man for the arrival of a secret package to be delivered to his door. The package contains all the information required to cultivate black truffles, an item considered to be France’s national treasure, a market which reaps millions every year. The truffle is a sensitive plant that grows at random on the roots of hazelnut or oak trees and so far every effort to cultivate it and guarantee a consistent supply has failed. But for years Poe has invested in the research which he believes will now allow him to grow this sought after gourmet ingredient, allowing him to wrestle control of the truffles market from the French, produce tons per year and reap an annual income in the millions. When Bennett arrives in Monaco, he easily assumes the role of a rich loafer. He smiles secretly to himself as motorists easily give way to Poe’s Mercedes in heavy traffic. It was a very different experience when he was driving his dusty Peugeot, when the same drivers fought his little car every inch of the way when he tried to cut into traffic. But Bennett’s wonderful new life comes to a halt when the delivery of the package containing the information required to cultivate the truffles is interrupted and seized by the Sicilians. Poe then forces Bennett to retrieve it, devising a plan to ensure the package ends up in Bennett’s hands and ultimately in his own. Bennett begins a chase across France pursued by gangsters and the French police. He is assisted by Anna Hersch, a former girlfriend of Poe’s who is assigned to Bennett to make sure the job gets done. As they run from their pursuers, there are constant reminders that they have been caught up in a rough game involving mean tempered men with guns who are not afraid to use them. And Anna is beginning to make her own plans for the secret case, plans which do not involve Poe and which she is reluctant to share with Bennett. Anna and Bennett begin living a life on the run. At times they are forced to sleep in a stolen car while at the next turn they sample a delicious gourmet meal. And Bennett gradually evolves from an amiable, uninvolved companion to a true partner in crime, enjoying himself as he morphs from an unwilling fugitive to a man with a mission. Anna and Bennett gradually begin a relationship, ultimately finding a way to subsidize a new life for themselves. This is a charming and amusing story with an outrageously predictable plot. It is a light, enjoyable read filled with the details of French life, food and the landscape that have helped make Mayle’s other novels so successful. The reader cannot help but cheer Bennett on as he tries to get away from his angry pursuers. And one cannot help but think it would all make a good light film, with its amusing characters, Peter Sellers-like comedy chase and the wonderful landscape of France and Monaco as a backdrop.
