motorway/cleft/instrument panel/wound/windshield glass/vulva/chromium/flesh/bonnet/anus/grills/scars/flyover/nipple/collision/orgasm Reassemble the above as needed with growing tension, increasing pace, and obsessive circular repetition. A sense of intimacy being separated from humanity; an insertion of clinical sterility into the most personal and social; a disconnection; a speeding carnival of horrors and depravity. A voyeuristic, sado-masochistic de-evolution. A mind jolted askew and accelerated towards a self-destructive culmination of consuming fanaticism. The star-structure doesn't really apply here, I did not "really like it", but I really appreciate it. Reading this put me in mind of William S. Burroughs and Chuck Palahniuk , as well as perhaps Bret Easton Ellis , but while Naked Lunch could likely have been influential, and both Fight Club and American Psycho might have been influenced by Crash in one way or another, none really hit the same chord. Ballard's writing is precise, every word seems chosen with purpose, with great intention, while Burroughs especially tended more to messiness and an organic style spilling forth. BEE may be the closest in it's combination of shocking material with clinical exactness, and I might add that for me both have a numbing effect when they continually assault the reader. With this book you get a sense of unraveling and a journey towards chaos, but at the same time it is an unavoidable destiny, not the helter-skelter hellish meandering of the aforementioned Naked Lunch . They do all seem to point towards ugliness in culture, but the styles of revealing the under side of the rock, or the truth in the mirror, point to very different mind-sets and perspectives. Ballard is showing a disconnection and callousness between people with the intertwining of our lives with technology, in this way perhaps his book, being published in 1973, was prophetic. Does not the tragic scene of Princess Diana's own death seem like the natural scene predicted by this book?
