This book took my whole life on a wonderful new path; doing what I love every single day. It can transform your life too if you let it. My wife is an interior architect and a psychotherapist. She is also dyslexic, dyscalculic, dyspraxic, and ADHD. She hated school as a child, and even as an adult she really struggled with simple arithmetic. She could read, but it was laborious and slow. When she was in her late thirties a friend told her about this book and she got me to read it, in the hope that I would follow the instructions in the book and help her overcome her dyslexia. I read the book and was intrigued, but I thought it sounded too good to be true. It claimed that I could transform in my wife's dyslexia from a burden into an asset in less than a week! It didn't help that the author was American - a lot of snake-oil has been "invented" in the USA. So I DIDN'T follow the simple instructions in the book - not until my wife took me to a public lecture by the author Ron Davis, and I had the opportunity to ask him all the hard questions the book had raised in my mind. He responded to my scepticism with the simple and humble authority of someone who KNOWS from direct experience. Ron Davis is an autistic and dyslexic genius, who didn't learn to speak in sentences until he was 17 years old. He was functionally illiterate until his late thirties, when he discovered the key aspect of what is now known as the Davis methods. This enabled him to read his first ever book - cover to cover - in one night. His life was instantly transformed, and ever since he has been on a mission to empower others to do the same. These methods have now transformed the lives of tens of thousands of dyslexic, dyscalculic, dyspraxic, an ADHD children and adults all over the world - including mine and my wife's. You see, after seeing my wife overcame all her learning challenges I decided to join Ron Davis on his mission; I trained as a Davis Dyslexia Facilitator, and I have been fortunate enough to spend my every working hour transforming lives and raising awareness about this amazing method of learning. Apart from marrying my wife and adopting my daughter, this has been the best decision in my life. In my training I discovered that I "have" ADHD. This explained why I had always been late to every appointment I had ever made; why my life was full of unintended consequences, despite my best efforts to think things through; why school was so easy for me (yes), and why I preferred to learn hands-on. Why I am so creative and curious. Every single piece of my life made sense when I came to this realisation. Even the choice to leave my psychotherapy training to become a Davis Facilitator was due to my ADHD. Like so many with ADHD, I love instant gratification, and that is what a Davis programme gives me every single day - instant results, constant sense of achievement and making a difference. Thank you Ron Davis for your huge gift to humanity - the Gift of Dyslexia.
