This is a powerful must read. It makes me wonder how many other diaries like this were written during the war that were lost during the holocaust, destruction of cities, purging of Jewish living spaces, etc. It is amazing that this narrative on life in hiding made it through and can represent all those who were in hiding and whose voices were never heard. I knew the story of Anne Frank before reading this book. In fact, I may have read some or all of it back in high school, but I cannot remember for sure. Back around 2006 or 2007 I took a trip to Europe and had a chance to visit the Anne Frank House. Unless you get a chance to visit in person, it is hard to understand exactly what the conditions were like and the size of the space. Anne Frank did a good job describing, but seeing is believing! Another interesting thing about reading this now is that we are in the middle of the Coronavirus quarantine. While many of us get a bit of cabin fever being asked to stay home, reading Anne Frank’s words about being trapped in a small space for two years because of fear of death if found really puts it into perspective. But, at the same time, this might be a good time to revisit or read it for the first time because her frustrations with her family and situation may be a bit more understandable for those who have barely left the house in months. When the book first started, I wondered how accurate Anne’s descriptions were. She was an angsty and outspoken teenager which made me wonder what was true and what was just her perspective. For example, the first few chapters are mainly her complaining about her parents, other adults, and people she did not like from school. However, I think this part of the diary is important because it shows her growth throughout the story as the situation becomes more dire and she is forced to mature before her time. I cannot say that this book will be enjoyed by everyone – especially if biographies are not your thing. Also, the subject matter and the situation the Frank’s are in may be difficult for some to handle. But, it is an important document from World War II history and is worth reading no matter who you are.
