I found Country Chronicle amongst the thousands of books crammed two rows deep on each of the shelves that line one long, high wall of a hallway located either in the Wysox Merchant Center, or the Wysox Vendor Mall in, surprise, surprise, the town of Wysox. I can never keep the two establishments straight in my head until I am actually inside one or the other. I have such adventures with Stillmeadow books. It's been so many years now that I don't remember how I got hold of Stillmeadow and Sugarbridge, by Gladys Taber and Barbara Webster, but I do remember almost losing my copy. I had just donated a box of books to the local library, which operates a used bookstore in its back room, when I found I simply could not locate Stillmeadow and Sugarbridge anywhere in my home. I had been in the midst of reading it. I called the library to see if I might have accidentally donated S & S along with my other books and a very disgruntled and impatient person at the other end of the line basically told me that if I had, too bad, so sad for me. I continued my search at home, still couldn't find the book, and called the library again. This time the one male employee at the time--or ever, I think--a man who had always been very pleasant and helpful, answered the phone. He must have trundled back to the library's bookstore and checked the shelves himself because, sure enough, he called me back to tell me I could come in and pick the book up. He didn't even charge me the $2 that the library normally charges for the books in its store. I don't know if I ever knew his name, but I still think of him fondly and with gratitude. He has long since retired. He was at least my age, possibly older, so he may no longer be living. All this says nothing about Country Chronicle, which was a good read overall. However, everyone ages differently, physically and, sadly, in other ways as well. Gladys Taber's prodigious talent for description suffers in this later work. And also I am disappointed that in this tome she displays a decided bent toward Conservatism, the kind with a capital C. For example, she can't abide those horrid women's libbers, abandoning their homes for a career. Women might better concentrate on womanly things, leaving men to do manly things. She expresses this opinion (essentially; that's the gist) without a single shred of self reflection, she whose own career spanned much of the 20th century. It was with the income from this career that she--though undeniably a woman--supported herself and her child and paid the bills at Stillmeadow. She died in 1980 just prior to the election or, based on a few opinions she let slip, I fear she'd have voted for Ronald Reagan. Had she still been living in 2016 she'd have been 117 years old and that was never going to happen but, oh horror of horrors, would she have voted for Donald Trump? I am so glad I will never know. I may give her recipes for corn pudding and Mexican coffee a try. She includes instructions in the text. I made her recipe for orange delight the other night. It's a weird and messy dish but it was tasty and well received.
