First, I must dispute some of the claims made by other reviewers. They claim that this series is sexist, mainly because of the character of Hattie Durham. That is ridiculous, not only because such women exist in the world, but especially because there are other female characters (Chloe, for example) who do not behave in this manner. Additionally, there are male characters who have impure sexual motives as well. So, calling this book sexist is utterly unfounded. Secondly, they have called this book "racist." Now that I didn't get at all, since race is not even mentioned in this book... so I can't fight fire with fire when there isn't any fuel. And lastly, they claimed that this book is "offensive to anyone who isn't a born-again Christian." Well, I'm not. I'm Catholic, and I'm not offended. But I also have more than half a brain to think with. The authors' theology does come on a bit strong -- but really, consider the source. Both are established Christian writers. What did you think they would write about? Some sort of philosophy in which God doesn't really care about our ultimate fate? That seems to be the popular idea nowadays, but still not one everyone embraces. These authors are writing from their ideas and their life experiences, which surely are different from mine or yours. Additionally, if you are trying to compare this fictional work with the text of the Bible, this series will come up short every time -- it is FICTION for a reason! It is someone's idea of what COULD happen, not a definite foretelling of what will happen. I enjoyed this book because it is a fascinating look at what COULD happen at the end of time. How the "Rapture" will effect the global economy, politics, and families. How easily people can be deceived and killed with kindness. It makes the reader reflect on what he or she would do in that situation. It was a very easy read, and very entertaining. I will absolutely be reading the next in the series. My only real complaint with this book, which to me was a noticeable step down from the first book, was that about 100 or so pages were devoted to Buck's and Chloe's relationship, which was filled with bumbling dialogue and halting narration. Clearly, romance is not the authors' forte.
