I love the color of the feather on his wrist! I worried I wouldn't like these illustrations though. I prefer realistic-looking. I like the Cherokee letters as soon as you open the book, which says "They say this was the way it was...a long time ago..." -'One day long ago, when souls could still return from the Land of the Spirits, the Sun looked down upon the Earth.' She tells her brother Moon that People of the Mountain don't like her, because their faces twist when they look up at her. I like that they're called People of the Mountain. Her brother Moon says they love him, they smile when they see him and make music and dance, and send him songs. The Sun talks to her daughter& plans to send scorching hear to the land.who is her daughter? Of course the crops no longer flourished, and the children didn't laugh, the old women didn't gossip, and the river, Long Man, was drying up. There wouldn't be water to drink. Dancing Drum noticed this suffering, and went to the Shaman. He called the sun "Grandmother Sun." I liked that the shaman was a woman, because that's never done, and I found out there were women shamans recently. The shaman said a woodpecker came to her in a dream and told her to go to the little men in the wood. I like the patterns of both their clothing. Like I said, I wish they were realsitic though. Slits for eyes. No mouth. I didn't like how quickly it captured his finding the little people. I wish it had showed his journey through the woods& how you find the little people. They told him to go to the Land of the Sky People and kill the sun before she destroys them. And to take the snake rattles and tie them to his moccasins. He turns into a snake and they tell him he'll be human again when his task is complete. He has to follow the path to the house of the Sun's daughter. When the sun comes out in the morning, he should bite her. He goes up the tallest mountain, through the mist to the clouds themselves. There again, it skips the journey. It makes it sound so easy to just travel to the sky. There's a domed house of mud and cane. He hid behind pots outside the door, ready to strike the sun in the morning. When the door opens, she rushed by him so quickly he didn't have time to strike. How is it possible for the sun to rush past him? He says "forgive me, grandmother Sun" and bites her ankle. It turned out to be the daughter, who lay dead on the ground. I thought oh no, this isn't good. I was surprised dancing drum turned into a boy, because technically he didn't complete his task; he didn't bite the sun. Over sadness of her daughter, the sun didn't leave her house. The People were cold and in the dark. Dancing Drum said he was the cause of this, and that he'd go to the Land of the Spirits and bring the Daughter of the Sun, so their grandmother would smile on them again. The adults had these weird X's on their faces, going from their ears to their nose. The shaman told him to get 6 others and a large basket and find the Dayghter of the Sun dancing with the ghosts in Tsusgina'i. They each had to touch her with a sourwood rod. When she falls, put her in the basket and bring her back. The 6 warriors looked too much like Dancing Drum, as in I thought it was him. They've got the same lock of hair falling to the right, the same hairstyle. the exact same clothing. It would have been nice to see different hairstyles and colors of clothing. I like that he chose 6 of the swiftest stickball players in the village; another aspect of their culture. When they leave the Darkening-land, the Shaman said not to lift the lid. -'For days, the runners followed the path to the Land of the Spirits.' here again, I'd like to know how they're doing that. They see the ghosts dancing around the fire. Those ghosts were gross-looking, like aliens. Blue, with big black eyes and their ribs showing. Wish they hadn't been so ugly. The sun's daughter still looked normal though. She says she can't breathe, and afraid she'll die he cracks the lid and a cardinal flies out. When the shaman said he disobeyed and that "for this, souls can no longer be returned from the Land of the Spirits" I felt bad for Dancing Drum. He just wanted to do the right thing, and almost tried too hard. The Sun hears and cries so much the river runs over. Dancing Drum plans to sing, so the People put their most beautiful clothes of embroidered buckskins on, necklaces of deer and panther teeth, and painted their faces white. They lifted their faces to the sky and chanter to Grandmother Sun. They drummed and kept rhythm with their gourd rattles. I like the way they look with their white faces, clothing and jewelry on. Dancing drum goes back to his lodge for his own drum, fills it with water and dampens the groundhog skin. Returning, he played his own song. Grandmother Sun heard the new music, stopped crying and looked down to see her beautiful ppl smiling up at her. She saw them offering their special dances, and heard their special song. -the picture from the cover is on this page. I love those blue feathers. The blue diamond design, the blue claws on his neck. He played from his heart for his ancestors, for his people, and for his land. Grandmother Sun came out of the house to once again smile down on her Children of the Mountain. I like that term. I like on the page how it's him alone, with his drumstick held up to the sky, honoring the sun. But the sun just looks flat and red. She visits her daughter, leaves through the door, I expected it to look real. It's just a flat, 2-D ball. I wish it had a face at least, and was smiling down, like the last line said. The book had info on the Cherokee at the end: The villages were surrounded by palisades, consisting of 3 rows of upright poles. A large round council House occupied the center; and was located near the chief's dwelling. These were surrounded by the dozen or so domed houses belonging to the rest of the people. Several families occupied each house, which was circular and 25 ft across. Walls were made of mud and grass, topped by a basket-woven roof. In the winter, mats of cattails, branches, and cornhusks were added to the outside walls for extra protection. -it's amazing that the ones who escaped or avoided capture hid in their taints and were later able to purchase land and establish the Eastern Cherokee Band, and those r who we see today. Cherokee chiefs wore cloaks of turkey feathers and headdresses of Sean and white crane feathers only for special meetings or occasions. -The Cherokee were farmers. The men worked the soil, while the women and children planted, tended and harvested the crops. Important occupations for a Cherokee male were ball player and warrior. Ball play was an important way for Cherokee men to show their speed and endurance. Each player used two sticks to catch and throw the deerskin ball. Some games had over a hundred players each. -the people had great respect for nature. With the help of their shamans, they looked for guidance from the spirits of the sun, moon and stars, as well as plants, animals and elements. Each year, several festivals were held to celebrate planting and harvesting of the corn. The People made drums and rattles and painted their faces. White, for example, showed happiness. Good! Like the story we just read. The Cherokee were known as one of the "Five Civilized Tribes." This is because of their early adaptation of the ways of the European settlers. -the pic shows a Cherokee woman in traditional deerskin at Oconaluftee Indian Village in NC. Boy, you don't see that now! That's how I want to see them. They relied on wild fruits like grapes, berries, crapapples, persimmons and maple sugar. Like today, favs were corncskes, corn mush, parched corn and roast turkey. Cherokee men and boys wore deerskin breechclouts and moccasins. Women and girls wore short, deerskin skirts. In cold weather, everyone wore rabbit fur capes, or shawls tied over the left shoulder. They decorated their clothing with dyed porcupine quills, and wore jewelry made of bones and teeth. Shows a woodchuck fur mask. Many Cherokee masks were originally used for hunting. Many today work in tourism, timber, farming, art or oil. Choctaw was also one of the 5 civilized tribes. Tsusgina'i means "the ghost country." In 1799, they had log cabins instead of thatched houses. 1924: NA's born in US declared citizens. I can't believe it took so long!! 1968: Indian civil rights Act gives NA's the right to govern themselves on their reservation. This was pretty good, but not what I expected. When I read a title, I assume the book is going to be about one thing, and it turned out to be a very different story. Based on the title, I thought this would be a story about a drum, maybe the first drum. The cover makes him look like a giant, too. He was just a boy, so I don't know why he's so large on the cover. What wasn't so great about the story was that the parts that weren't realistic, like how easy it was for Dancing Drum to find the little people and travel to the sky, and how the sun could walk in someone's house, that the boy was expected to bite the sun, and how the sun could have a human daughter. However, this is for kids, so they'd find it more believable and might not question the story. This was a lot more involved than I thought it would be, with more words on the page than is typical for a children's book. I also wasn't expecting the info at the back, but it's nice if you don't know much about the Cherokee, you can learn more about them after reading this legend. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
