The third volume of the Ultimate X-Men is Mark Millar’s modern take on the classic Proteus story by Chris Claremont. The changes by Millar take advantage of the rich X-Men mythos since Claremont’s story. In this new form, Proteus is now Charles Xavier’s son with Moira MacTaggert. Moira is still the award-winning gene researcher and Xavier takes on the role of the absentee father. This is not out of character for Xavier; since in the classic X-Men stories, he is also an absentee father to Legion, a mutant with a massive multiple personality disorder who inherits his father’s vast mental gifts. Both sons even share the same first name, David. Betsy Braddock appears in this story as a SHIELD agent. She still has her Asian looks, despite being British and her formidable mental powers. She’s no ninja, like her classic incarnation, but she’s no wallflower either. She is resolute in bringing down the Proteus threat permanently and by any means necessary. Millar didn’t change everything. In the end, it would be Colossus that would kill Proteus. But the original Colossus was a farm boy with a heart of a poet, while the Ultimate Colossus is a Russian Mafia enforcer who has no qualms on using lethal force on bringing down a dangerous mass murderer. Unlike in the original story where Colossus faced a gut wrenching moral and ethical dilemma and massive guilt afterwards, it would be the father, whose principles of non-violence and preference for a peaceful resolution, who would face this attack on his dream. Xavier sees himself and mutants as not only the next step in physical evolution but spiritual as well. He believes that mutants have an evolved capacity to do good and advocates a post-human philosophy of taking the moral high ground, shunning violence. He had been an incapable father; would he be fit to run his surrogate children of X-Men? In the aftermath, Xavier makes an important decision regarding his dream of peaceful co-existence between mutant and human. The art is better here than the second volume. I feel that Chris Bachalo’s art is a suitable fill-in with Adam Kubert’s inability to finish a whole arc of six issues.
