In the Case of the Fabulous Fake, the last Perry Mason novel published in Gardner’s lifetime (1889-1970), although two more were published posthumously, Mason is confronted with a client who refuses to give her name or even tell Mason much about her business. She identifies herself only by her measurements (36-24-36), although Della Street, Mason’s confidential secretary, quips that those measurements are fake, particularly the first measurement. Gertie, however, manages to see through a mirror that the client is carrying a purse loaded to the brim with cash, possibly of large denominations. After the mysterious client leaves, Mason bemoans the fact that he did not do his duty to figure out exactly what her situation was before she left and decides he has not done his lawyerly duty to his client. Therefore, he has private detective Paul Drake hunt down the client through an ad the client had placed in the classifieds, using her secret identification. Finding her, Mason goes to her hotel and finally finds out what it is all about. Her brother has gambling debts and she is paying off a blackmailer to the tune of $5,000 and her real name is Diana Douglas, not Diana Deering as she is registered. But Mason deduces that the money must have come from the firm where Diana and her brother, now comatose since an accident, works and urges Diana to go back to San Francisco and account for the money before the auditor blames her. He also has a ringer, Stella Grimes, one of Drake’s operatives, who keeps a gun on a special “working” bra, posing as Diana in the hotel while she is gone. The murder, which is always the centerpiece of Mason’s cases, doesn’t happen until well into the second half of the novel. But it looks as if for all intents and purposes that she’s guilty as sin. Her credit card is found at the crime scene as well as her fingerprints and the murder weapon is found in an airplane lavatory, limiting the number of -people who could have left it there. With the evidence pointing so unerringly toward Diana’s guilt, it would take a Perry Mason to get her off and it does. One again, he puts together minor clues to create a story so crazy it had to be true.
