In Pubis Angelical Manuel Puig effortlessly moves from mocking romance to drama and from drama to mocking dystopia. Dreams and reality… The night after the wedding… She awakes… Everything starts with a nightmare in the style of E.T.A. Hoffmann… The natural eyelashes, so long and arched that they appeared false, shaded eyes inordinately wide open. In her dreams she had just met a grotesquely fat doctor dressed in formal attire who hung up his top hat, proceeded to put on white rubber gloves, then came toward her as she lay stretched out on gigantic wads of cotton, and with a scalpel began to cut open her chest, revealing – instead of a heart – complex clockwork like machinery. It was a mechanical doll, and a broken one, not a sick woman, who lay there possibly dying. The luxurious manor on a small isle… Isolation… The husband is away on business matters… The psychological atmosphere is vaguely pathological… It happened in the distant past… It is Hedy Lamarr’s fantasised marriage… Now it is the middle of the seventies and the heroine, who somewhat resembles the mentioned actress, is in a hospital recuperating after the surgery… She is divorced… She tries to analyse her life… She writes in her diary… It’s frightening to think about certain things, the devil for example, even if one doesn’t believe. Having to leave everything, country, friends, because the devil crosses your path. Divided by time and space, the fantastic life of the actress and disheartened life of the heroine run parallel… Contrasts… Romantic figment and trivial banality… Political situations… Love affairs… Gaining and losing… I beg of you that on our return to Hollywood we visit my analyst. Placing yourself in his care would enable us to uncover the unknown, we could even undertake joint analysis, as a couple, and so from the start we wouldn’t hold secrets from each other. I would know everything, absolutely everything, about you and you about me. Do you promise me you’ll do it? That way you’ll give me positive proof of your love. Manifestations of love may vary infinitely.
