Men of Property; Women of Independence She knew now that she must follow his guidance. She had found her master, as we sometimes say, and laughed at herself with a little inward laughter as she confessed that it was so. […] She had assumed the command of the ship, and had thrown it upon the rocks, and she felt that she never ought to take the captain’s place again. The above passage is to be found on page 774 of the 830-page novel. Hardly a spoiler; all Victorian novels end with at least one marriage, and I am not naming any names. I quote it because of that word “master.” When a successful Victorian suitor says “Dearest, you are mine,” he means it not just romantically but literally; the wife is the husband’s property. Nonetheless, in many respects, this is a feminist book. Intentionally or not, Trollope creates female characters in it who are consistently more interesting than their male counterparts. Three of them, in fact: Alice Vavasor, who cannot decide whether to marry a solid suitor of some standing or her rapscallion cousin; Lady Glencora Palliser, who has been persuaded into marrying the rising politician Plantagenet Palliser (this novel is the first of the Palliser series) but still yearns for her first love; and the wealthy widow Mrs. Greenow, who mirrors a similar dilemma in a more comic key. Alice can be a bit infuriating, but the fiercely independent Lady Glencora is surely one of the most attractive characters in Victorian fiction to modern eyes, and Alice’s cousin Kate is also engaging. Compared to them, the men in the story tend to lack a dimension, especially in Book One, where they are painted in one of two tints: stolid or romantic. Things get a bit more interesting in Book Two, but you sense Trollope manipulating his reader by suddenly pushing them further in the given direction: the upright characters reveal surprising depths of understanding, and the others are revealed as cads or wastrels, even to the point of melodrama. Historically, the novel is interesting as showing a number of women of independent means and even more independent feelings testing the space allowed them by society to assert their independence. Two cheers for feminism. But not three; in the end, society wins—and Trollope does not fight that verdict. The question in the title, Can You Forgive Her?, is asked of Alice, and it is shocking to hear it asked at all. For what is her crime? To break off an engagement (all right, to do so twice). And why not, we say; it is a woman’s right. But in a society that treats marriage as transfer of property, it is like signing a contract with a kited check. Sympathetic though Alice is at the beginning of this overlong novel, she loses stature towards the end of it—fatally, I think—because she comes also to despise herself: ”I shall never cease to reproach myself. I have done that which no woman can do and honour herself afterwards. I have been — a jilt.” With that little pause, you would almost going to think she would say “cheat,” or even “whore.” It’s hardly surprising that the word “jilt” has passed out of our language as a noun, although we still keep it as a verb. So while I admire Trollope for opening out the woman’s point of view, I do regret that he should retreat at the end to the conventions of his time. I certainly came close to losing patience with what I saw as his artificial extension of a 500-page novel into an 800-page tome. And his failure to reconcile the claims of feminine independence and masculine property leads to one of the strangest love scenes that I can think of in a Victorian novel, one that sits very uncomfortably in this age of #MeToo: She knew now that she must yield to him, — that his power over her was omnipotent. She was pressed by him as in some countries the prisoner is pressed by the judge, — so pressed that she acknowledged to herself silently that any further antagonism to him was impossible. Nevertheless, the word which she had to speak still remained unspoken, and he stood over her, waiting for her answer. Then slowly he sat down beside her, and gradually he put his arm round her waist. She shrank from him, back against the stonework of the embrasure, but she could not shrink away from his grasp. She put up her hand to impede his, but his hand, like his character and his words, was full of power. It would not be impeded. 'Alice,' he said, as he pressed her close with his arm, 'the battle is over now, and I have won it.' ====== FOOTNOTE. Three times, characters in the novel stay in the Hotel of the Three Kings overlooking the Rhine at Basle (Basel); it seems the thing to do. Indeed Trollope remarks, "Who has ever been through Basle, and not stood in one of [those bedrooms], looking down upon the father of waters?", which says a lot about his assumptions about his readers. As it happens, my own first visits to Switzerland were with my parents just after the War, when big hotels like this were offering deep discounts to middle-class bus tours like ours, but my taste of 19th-century luxury at a young age was not easily to be repeated. All the same, I have enjoyed looking up old prints of this Basle hotel, the church in Lucerne near which the questionably romantic climax quoted above takes place, and Hawsewater in the Eastern Lake District, near the Vavasor family home.
