This review contains some spoilers as I mention things that happen in the story to make some points Well, let me sum up this book in one gif (and I feel this is really appropriate) Oh, first off I need to say that I'm REALLY CONFUSED about how this is a children's book . I mean, it won the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, among others, and I had to read this for my Children's Literature module. I- well, I would not let my child read this under the age of like 15. It's full of drugs (obviously, and they're going on about how great they are it's like !!), sex, OD'ing/death, rape, attempted murder, theft, vandalism, prostitution, underage pregnancy, homelessness, abuse, domestic violence, prison, it's literally all in this and it's like......woah. Not suitable for a child, that's for sure. Anyway, getting that out of the way with, this was required reading for university that I actually kind of dreaded reading because I don't tend to read things like this. Surprisingly, I quite enjoyed it! It follows two 14 year olds Gemma and Tar who run away from home to be together (although it's not very romantic because the girl is literally like 'I love you' then 'I don't like you' and it's proper frustrating) and they mix with the wrong crowd. As in, some other homeless youths who do heroin and, to sum it up, get them addicted. First, we have David. Tar is his nickname due to his constant anti-smoking 'you'll get tar in your veins' (or something along those lines) which he preached in his pre-heroin days. I actually liked him a lot. At the start he was kind, hopeful, he saw the beauty of the world and his irritating girlfriend Gemma (I'll get to her in a minute..) and I found him to be pure. Sometimes gullible, stupid and weak, but I guess everyone has their weaknesses. Sadly his got him addicted to drugs and he struggled the most to get off it. He took so much shit from everyone, especially Gemma, and I just felt so sorry for him. He had it so bad and I just- *hugs him* Sadly he was a completely different person at the end of the book and that's the harsh reality of his lifestyle. And speaking of, I need to rant about Gemma. This bitch. She was basically some spoiled brat who couldn't get her own way at home so she ran off, became homeless and treat Tar like her little bitch. And basically the main reason I hate her: her need to be accepting started the whole drug shit in the first place! I will forever blame her for the way Tar ended up. It makes me mad that she becomes irritated with him at the end due to his issues with getting off the heroin when it was her fault in the first place , fucking cow. Anyway, I know she's not a real person but still, it really grinds my gears. Anyway, she is always on and off with Tar, not to mention she basically calls him a boring basic bitch before they do the drugs and as soon as they do them, he's all ~interesting. Fuck you. I just- me no like her. Lily and Rob were the bad apples in this, they were really bad influences and reading about them was just like reading about two people who were literally 'gone' and who are past helping completely. Especially Lily. I mean, in real life, she'd scare me because she's just completely bonkers. She loves drugs so much that she even does drugs while holding her baby and then breastfeeds, and injects whilst pregnant. It's just awful. I won't even start on the parents because none of them will get 'Parent of the Year' awards. Especially Tar's, JFC. The POV's in this story are interesting because it's so many people throughout the story, and it's always cool to see what everyone's thinking in specific parts of the book with a topic like this. Parents, each of the heroin kids in the house, people they know who don't agree with the lifestyle, it's all fascinating. Sometimes I'm like 'wait, who is this again?' but that's because I don't always pay attention! My own fault. I also feel like the story is written kind of like a diary? It's really weird, its such an unusual way of being written. Some words were written as if they were saying them like 'mouf' instead of 'mouth'. It's quite a long book but I think it was really interesting. I don't know much about drugs or anything but I do think it opened my eyes to what goes on in the world. Funnily enough when I took a break from reading, I turned the T.V on and saw a documentary from Louis Theroux about heroin addicts and I had to watch. I felt really helped me understand things in this book and get what's going on. Anyway, in conclusion, let me round this off by saying; this isn't a book for children, lots of bad things happen and nobody really catches a break, drugs are bad, this book is not. It was funny at times but kinda depressing to see some young hopefuls throw their life away because of something so horrible. Give this to a teen and it'll be a wake up call, a good example of what they could end up like if they do drugs. Don't do drugs, kids.
