THIS SUMMARY/REVIEW WAS COPIED FROM OTHER SOURCES AND IS USED ONLY AS A REMINDER OF WHAT THE BOOK WAS ABOUT FOR MY PERSONAL INTEREST. ANY PERSONAL NOTATIONS ARE FOR MY RECOLLECTION ONLY Because of the Baby is a novella about husband and wife trying to patch things up...Karen Caldwell, divorced her husband. Thinking he's being just as childish as before. Switching careers, spending his entire inheritance, Bethany is worried he's just like her father. But Matt Caldwell is nothing like Karen's dad. Instead, he's just trying to find the career he wants and will enjoy doing. Neither one expected him to finally find his calling. Then, there's their marriage on the line. Matt is doing everything he can to win back Karen's hand in marriage. However, there's also a tiny surprise that might just be the fix they needed to bring them closer. A baby does wonders... ** This is part of the Midnight Sons series. It takes place in hard Luck, Alaska and in this book Matt Caldwell has used his inheritance to buy a run down lodge with the intention of fixing it up and turning it into a destination vacation place. His wife had left and divorced him a couple of years ago after 4 years of marriage and the way he jumped from job to job. She couldn't handle the insecurity the way he jumped from job to job. His sister is getting married and since his ex (Karen) was close to his sister she was at the wedding. This would be the first time they would see each other since the divorce. Well, they danced, they got cozy when the memories surfaced and wound up in bed. She left the day and after she got back home in California she realized not only had she slept with her ex, she was now carrying his baby. She went to see him at a conference he was attending to drum up business for his lodge and told him. He convinced her she needed to come to Alaska to let him take care of her ** Matt Caldwell has tried different occupations and quiting within a year. He has never found a job that he loves. After he quit his accounting job his wife decided she couldn't take it anymore left him the following morning and then quickly applied for divorce. Even though it had been 18 months since the divorce Matt still loved her. When Karen arrives in Hard Luck to be the maid of honor at Matt's sister's wedding one thing leads to another and a month later when she is back home she finds out that she is pregnant. Then the story continues and other peoples stories and intermingled throughout the story to lead you to the final two books of this series
