3 1/2+ Hm. Tried to resubmit this review earlier and all that happened was that it was posted that I'd just finished reading the play?!? Two years ago! What gives? This is the second review of a Shakespeare play I’ve done. Happily, that means that I’ve read the second of my planned reads of all his plays, over the next ten years. So I’m on schedule. 8) But it’s easy to be on schedule when you’ve barely started. 8/ Naturally, this review is structured a bit different from the first one I did ( https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... ) in which I posed questions about how I should go about this project, and played around with a sort of outline. In this one the outline has changed. We’ll see if it can become more permanent as it goes. The Play Like the first play I read, this is one of Shakespeare’s comedies. Evidence suggests that the play was written between June 1599 and August of the next year. Its first performance is uncertain, with 1603 a possibility. It was first published in the first folio in 1623. Shakespeare took the story from a novel, Rosalynde , by one Thomas Lodge, that was first published in 1590. Rosalynde was the most popular and one of the best of the pastoral romantic tales which were the fashion in the early 1590s. By 1598 the book was in its fourth edition. The story was thus likely to be well known to many in the original audience. Shakespeare followed his source fairly closely, though he added some characters of his own and changed most of the names. As hinted above, it’s sometimes referred to as a “pastoral” comedy, where pastoral refers to a literary genre: pas•to•ral noun. A work of literature portraying an idealized version of country life. As You Like It is one of the prime examples of pastoral literature. Whyso? Well, with the exception of three scenes, it takes place outside. The first two scenes are located in an orchard, and on a lawn. All remaining scenes (seventeen of them) are located in the “Forest of Arden”, near the geographical center of England***. There are actually a couple rather minor characters who are shepherds. And the view of life presented is certainly, if not quite idyllic, at least explicitly said more than once by the characters to be preferable to life in the courts, castles, etc. which are the other choice. Of course this might be partly because several of the characters have been banished (unjustly) from those courts, castles, etc. by the play’s villains. So to some extent, Shakespeare tells a story about making the best out of a bad situation. (***Note: This “Forest of Arden” may be a pun of Shakespeare’s? For elsewhere I see that the play is actually set in France, and if so, we might suppose that this also refers not only to the forest in England familiar to his audience, but also to the Adrennes region of present day Luxembourg/Belgium/France.) The Forest of Arden (1888 - 1897, possibly reworked 1908), Albert Pinkham Ryder But he also makes a case for the country life, especially through the character Jaques, a lord attending the Duke who has been banished, and has taken residence in the forest with his followers. Jaques plays almost NO PART in the play, other than to speak his lines, which offer his philosophical musings and opinions about the pastoral life and other human concerns beyond the mundane. Jaques in fact represents, according to the Introduction in my edition, a break in Shakespeare’s main concern in his plays. “Hitherto he had balanced plot and character. Henceforward he was more interested in character, and he tended to pick out one or two persons in a play and to show their characters from every angle by bringing them into contact with a variety of persons and situations.” This was totally new information to me, and one worth keeping in mind (assuming that it’s valid). The twenty plays prior to As You Like It were: all the histories (ten) except Henry VIII (his last play); seven of the twelve comedies; only two tragedies (Titus Andronicus, Romeo and Juliet); and only one of the six problem plays (Merchant of Venice). The eighteen plays coming after As You Like It: the one history, four comedies (Twelfth Night, Merry Wives, All’s Well That Ends Well, Measure for Measure), the other eight tragedies, and the other five problem plays. The Play and I I immediately realized that I knew absolutely nothing about this play. Despite the title being familiar, I’d never read it, and had no idea that it is from this play (and from the mouth of Jaques) that comes: All the world’s a stage, And all the men and women merely players. They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages. At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse’s arms. Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress’ eyebrow. Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths and bearded like a pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon’s mouth. And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances, And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slippered Pantaloon With spectacles on nose and pouch on side, His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything. What can follow that? Yeah, the rest of the play. But I’ll leave it there. For a synopsis of the play, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/As_You_L... I was surprised at how much I enjoyed the play. I’ve rated it slightly above Midsummer Night’s Dream (well, 3 1/2 to 3 1/2 at present, but 4 to 3 in stars). I’m sure the reason was that I was paying attention to Jaques and some of the other characters for their views on country living, on love, and on man’s rather unfortunate predicament in life (though in the context of the light-hearted play it doesn’t seem so bad). The comedy of the play is comprised partly of the fact that the main female protagonist, Rosalind, is disguised as a man (Ganymede) throughout much of the play; her interactions with Orlando, desperately in love with Rosalind but not of course with Ganymede, are the source of the usual mistaken-identity humor. But much more than this is the repartee that Shakespeare provides between pairs of characters (Rosalind/Celia, Orlando/Jaques etc.) in scene after scene, overloaded to the point of bursting with puns and double entendres. The audience must have been rolling in the aisles. But these dialogues, hard enough for the modern reader to follow with her footnotes explaining archaic meanings and long lost turns of phrase, are impossible for a play goer to get much out of – yes, the smile is there on the face, but the guffaw is missing. (A problem for any of Shakespeare’s comedy writing, of course.) But some of the humor can’t fail to come through. I really did laugh out loud at this exchange. Rosalind implores Celia about information on Orlando, who Celia has just said she’s met in the forest: ROS. Alas the day! What shall I do with my doublet and hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him again? Answer me in one word! CEL. You must borrow me Gargantua’s mouth first. ‘Tis a word too great for any mouth of this age’s size. To say aye and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism. (My emphasis.) Heck, Celia’s reply isn’t even necessary, though it does put a lovely phrase to the preposterousness of Rosalind’s command. The play and thee (them really) My Coleridge book ( Coleridge’s Writings on Shakespeare ) has naught but a bit of marginalia he wrote on Oliver’s speech to the wrestler Charles, as Oliver gives him permission, even an admonition, to kill his brother (Orlando) when he faces him in a match. Coleridge: “It is too venturous to charge a speech in Shakespeare with want of truth to nature. And yet …” I won’t bother quoting the rest, I’m not sure I understand the fineness of the point he makes. Here’s a couple reviews by GR friends: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... (short) and https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... (longer, on Shakespeare’s use of Nature in the play). In the play’s Wiki article, there are adaptations of As You Like It in several media mentioned here . A Movie I watched the 1936 film starring Laurence Olivier as Orlando and Elizabeth Bergner as Rosalind. When I finally finished reading the play and was ready to watch the DVD, which had been at my house from Netflix for months, I discovered that the disc was cracked. I should have taken this as a warning. Instead I searched Amazon and found that I could watch the same movie streaming at no cost (since I’m a Prime member). I happily settled back to watch. How do I loath thee? Let me count the ways. 1. I had trouble understanding the dialogue. Not because of the Elizabethan language, the sound was just bad. 2. It didn’t even approach being funny. All the (admittedly difficult) dialogue that had them rolling in the aisles hundreds of years ago was gone, even the few lines that were quite readily humorous in our own age. 3. All the world’s a stage … was gone! Howso? Must have been a cost-cutting measure, because Jaques had been written out of the script. 4. But almost all of the songs written by the Bard for the play were there, set to insipid music and even crappy dance where that had been indicated in the play. (As You Like It the Musical ) Yup, it was a complete loss. If the DVD hadn’t been already busted I would have been tempted … (Well, not a complete loss. Olivier was good.) My Review As you have already read it, I hope you Like It.
