Please see my review of X Stands for Unknown ([ http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/98... ]) for general comments on Isaac Asimov's science essays. This collection, Only a Trillion , hails from the mid-1950s, and therefore some of the scientific notions are, well, quaint. To me, this isn't necessarily a disadvantage: it is informative as well as intriguing to read about "cutting-edge" science from an earlier time, as it reveals much about how we came to know facts that we now take for granted. The essays herein are not grouped in sets according to a common theme, as is common in Asimov's later work. The first two chapters deal with the quantities of naturally-occurring radionuclides (radioactive atoms), and which poses the greatest risk to us. These are followed by two chapters on amino-acid sequences in proteins, leading up to the Nobel Prize-winning feat of sequencing the two polypeptides in the insulin molecule. Chapter Five, "The Abnormality of Being Normal," applies statistics to the question of whether someone who is average in every way is truly "normal." Chapter Six deals with likely constituents for planetary atmospheres. Chapter Seven is an early attempt to explain abiogenesis; however, the argument still works today against the creationist belief that life is too complex to have a natural origin. In Chapter Eight, Asimov presents the basics of photosynthesis. This is followed by a very nice introduction to molecular evolution, "The Sea Urchin and We." Asimov then takes a surprising turn and in Chapter 10, describes the rigors of carrying out a literature search in the 1950s. (Any scientist or student who uses PubMed on line, and anyone who disagrees with the notion that computers are time-saving devices, should read this essay to gain the proper appreciation for modern technology.) Finally, there appear two humorous vignettes. The first follows up on Asimov's parody paper in Astounding Science Fiction, "The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline," and explores the properties of endochronicity—the tendency of thiotimoline to dissolve in water before the water is actually added. The second, actually a mystery of sorts, asks the reader to deduce the mechanism by which the Golden Goose manufactured gold from oxygen-18 atoms obtained from the environment.
