A mixed bag of sound theory and flimsily backed up practice, The Gift of Dyslexia is an interesting and passionate look at one side of dyslexia's huge spectrum. It begins with a comprehensive explanation of the visual processing differences seen in some dyslexics, namely the almost magical ability to see the world from an almost limitless amount of angles and dimensions. Looked at with Davis's positive slant, the most admirable quality of this elegy to something ordinarily seen as a disability or as simple lack of intelligence, dyslexia is described as something akin to a creative superpower just ready to be unlocked. It's well argued and perfectly visible if, for example, you work as a teacher and see these traits in children who struggle at the more traditional aspects of school life. His focus on the visual and on the stimulus of creativity is something that would seem to me to be beneficial to most young learners and what is refreshing is Davis's refusal to label young learners with weaknesses or to call struggling students stupid. The second half of the book is more problematic. Davis is very confident of the success rate of his 'focus point' therapy, something that, many years later, would seem to be optimistic given that so many dyslexics still suffer under the labels of 'disability' and 'slow learner'. The unfortunate truth seems to be that the meticulously described therapy is not as effective as described or it is only valid for one small section of the dyslexia spectrum - unfortunate as well because it seems Davis falls into the same labeling trap of categorising all literacy learning problems as the same thing, or as coming from the same source. Coupled with the superlative image of dyslexia's superpowers and the vague terminology used to explain the movements of the mind's eye as something almost tangible, the methodology loses weight and persuasiveness. A detailed, heart-felt, useful book for anyone who as worked with children who struggle to learn to read and write, but I think most of those same readers will find gaps in the arguments leaving room to be cynical. 4
