3★ “CHAPTER 1 THE SECRET AGENT The scent and smoke and sweat of a casino are nauseating at three in the morning. Then the soul-erosion produced by high gambling—a compost of greed and fear and nervous tension—becomes unbearable and the senses awake and revolt from it.” It's 1953, and what a start to a brand new series and probably new genre of spy fiction! I read and enjoyed many of the Bond books in my youth, as did a lot of people. I suspect Ian Fleming brought a lot of people to reading in much the same way that J. K. Rowling has with Harry Potter. And if Fleming did nothing else, at least most Americans learned how to pronounce Ian and Sean correctly! Back in the day, my dad was flying somewhere, reading the latest Bond, and he looked at his neighbour and across the aisle, and every one of them was reading a Bond mystery! That’s how popular they were. I was considering re-reading the Bonds for fun, but after this exercise, I’ll leave my memories undisturbed. I remembered Bond as a smart, daring, sophisticated man of action, but with dangerously rough edges. I’m pretty sure that’s how he would have seemed at the time in this now-dated novel, but it’s the films that have kept ‘him’ up-to-date, not Fleming’s writing. He is described as looking like Hoagy Carmichael, a well-known singer (also ‘back in the day’), whose photo I looked up, since I knew the name but not the face. Photo of singer Hoagy Carmichael While I’ve enjoyed several Bonds in films, the real one is Sean Connery. Photo of Bond, James Bond, as played by Sean Connery The first half of the book – yes half – is devoted mostly to gambling, the rules, the odds, the chips, the millions of francs, the nerves, the rules, the odds, repeat. Perhaps in 1953 this was such a novel idea for a spy thriller that people were engrossed learning how to play. There is a fair bit of French tossed around, fancy foods and vintage wine, but no trademark “shaken, not stirred” martini yet, just this unique concoction, which he later names. “ ‘A dry martini,’ he said. ‘One. In a deep champagne goblet.’ ‘Oui, monsieur.’ ‘Just a moment. Three measures of Gordon’s, one of vodka, half a measure of Kina Lillet. Shake it very well until it’s ice-cold, then add a large thin slice of lemon-peel. Got it?’ ” We are introduced to the obligatory beautiful woman, but she is mostly a background figure until much later in the book. “And then there was this pest of a girl. He sighed. Women were for recreation. On a job, they got in the way and fogged things up with sex and hurt feelings and all the emotional baggage they carried around. One had to look out for them and take care of them.” Later, we have this. “He gazed for a moment into the mirror and wondered about Vesper’s morals. He wanted her cold and arrogant body. He wanted to see tears and desire in her remote blue eyes and to take the ropes of her black hair in his hands and bend her long body back under his. Bond’s eyes narrowed and his face in the mirror looked back at him with hunger.” Might have been hot stuff in 1953, but not so much in the era of #MeToo. In fact, the whole book seems pretty juvenile. The very last part, the interaction with the bad guys and the physical danger, is the kind of thing today’s heroes are still suffering, but it’s also the part I least enjoy. All in all, outdated and outwritten by today’s talented authors. I’ll leave you with a line from the opening of the book. “Bond undressed and took a cold shower. Then he lit his seventieth cigarette of the day.” Blech.
