What can I say about a sprawling Michener novel? It's not like I can summarize the plot. There are at least 20 plots. He begins by telling the story of the conflict between the peaceful Arawak Indians, and the more warlike Caribs who wiped them out. He goes on to tell the stories of various Caribbean islands, and their colonization by the Spanish, the French, the English, and the Danes (that the Danes had Caribbean colonies was something I did not know). He follows family lines forward through centuries of history where possible. He tries tying the story lines together at the end through the framing device of an educational cruise. It is ambitious, and not a simple thing to do, since the Caribbean is not one thing, but is made up of multiple geographies, multiple languages and cultures. But it mostly works. Because that's what Michener does. In one of his stories, Michener says of his character, a scholar, that he had trouble deciding whether to major in literature, history, or sociology in college. I thought, well, if that isn't Michener himself. The literature is in the storytelling. I suspect that Michener's novels are not viewed as great literature, but he can paint a vivid picture, and grab your interest, and keep you turning pages to find out what is going to happen, and if that isn't literature enough, then he also makes reference to the great artists and writers of the time period he is describing. His interest in history is obvious. There are battles. There is politics. There is regime change. And there is sociology. Some of the sociological phenomena he describes are: the role of the ball game in Arawak society; the Spanish emphasis on family loyalty, and how it led to nepotism and corruption, and how it did not promote stable systems of government; the phenomenon of zombies on Haiti; a complicated system of race on the English island of All Saints, based on fine divisions of skin color, and about Rastafarianism, exported from Jamaica. I said that Michener ties all these ideas together at the end with an educational cruise, which visits the various islands, and retells the histories and cultures of each. But there is another unifying theme, and that is the croton plant, which grows in different colors, different sizes and different shapes, and yet is always beautiful. In diversity, beauty. Just like the varied islands and peoples of the Caribbean.
