”If ever I forget your name let me forget home and heaven! … But no, no, my love, I never can forget ’ee; for you was a good man, and did good things!” The Woodlanders is an 1887 novel about the many forms of love: unconditional, self, parental, passionate, unrequited. It is an intriguing story where every single part of it has a purpose! I decided to read this book because it is on Boxall’s 1001 Books to Read List . It wasn’t until I switched to the fabulously narrated audio by Stephen Thorne before I fully appreciated the story. Upon starting, I wouldn’t have guessed I would love it enough to add it to my favorites list with a five-star rating. No wonder Hardy claimed this as his “personal favourite” of his works. The lovely and delicate Grace Melbury (~20), the only child of a timber-merchant, has returned home to Little Hintock, England after “being educated.” Her father’s determined to see her married well. Grace hopes to marry her childhood sweetheart, Giles Winterbourne, despite his lack of wealth. However, she would never go against her father’s wishes. Just when it looks like a sure thing for Giles and Grace, competition arrives in the form of an “ambitious young doctor of a good family,” Dr. Edred Fitzpiers. A wealthy and sensual widower of the area is Mrs. Felice Charmond (~28). Her late husband left her with large land holdings in Little Hintock. Easily bored, Mrs. Charmond frequently travels abroad to satisfy her whims. Let’s not forget plain Marty South whose one claim to beauty is her thick chestnut hair. She is the only daughter of a poor man employed by the timber-merchant. Humble, hardworking, and devoted can describe Marty. You’d be right if you think this story has its share of tragedies. We’ve got people who marry the wrong person, people who care about social standing above happiness, people who lose their fortune because of land holding laws. People make flippant decisions that affect their future happiness. The reason I loved this book so much was that everything has a purpose. Actions, events, objects have a domino-like effect on the people. Pay close attention to Grace’s horse, where is comes from and what it is used for. And the tree that worries Marty’s father’s thoughts. This tree plays a pivotal role in the story. No scene or dialogue in the book is for naught. I don’t know what you’d call the geometric shape to describe the love in this book. Marty loves Giles but Giles loves Grace. Grace loves Giles but follows her father’s wishes. Edred loves Grace and Felice and others. Felice loves herself. Nobody loves Marty. While this is a tragic and touching story, I didn’t find it heartbreaking. I felt removed enough from the characters to appreciate the fluctuating emotions they experience without it being a depressing book. In fact, once I finished the audio, I decided to immediately start it over. Now, I hope to locate one of the film adaptations this book inspired. CW: Infidelity, though clean romance; death of a loved one (on page).
