TW: slurs There was a guy from Newark, though, who talked ideas. He thought the war was about democracy. Said he was fighting for that. Most thought he was nuts. Even after the armistice he kept talking. During the peace conference, when any fool could see what was happening, he said Wilson could still do it, if the people would stand by him. This guy was always saying things about a new world where everybody would have food, and a job, where one man would be as good as another, and there'd be no more wars. That sounds good, you said, but you don't know the South, you don't know the South, you don't understand us. We'd never let the Negro into that world and I'm not so sure you up in Newark would either. We'd never let the Jews in, a Swede from Chicago said, not in my town. We'd never let the Japs and Chinks in, somebody from California yelled....And there was such an argument that nobody could remember heads or tails of it, everybody got mad, and one big fat slob kept pounding the table and cursing the Bolsheviks. And well, after a while the talk shifted back to women and things eased down a little. Poor old harmless Carl, she tried to say, as she had said and heard others say a thousand times; but she knew suddenly that the devil as well as God uses fools. It's hard to tell, but I knocked off a half star for Smith succumbing to the eugenicist bedtime story that bigotry can be solved by simply wiping disabled/neuroatypical folk of the face of the earth. Otherwise, I'm glad I gave this one a chance despite my longtime ban on on reading books about non-white people that were (supposedly) composed by white people. I've come to the stage where I'm comfortable with making some exceptions in part because of this book, picked entirely for the sake of a reading women challenge, and save for a few caveats, went as well as it did. Still, had I permitted myself to read it sooner, I may not have had as good a critical handle on it as I do now. I also may not have been as persistent in tracking down black literature as I have been the last few years, and instead settled for the likes of Welty or Wolfe. Thus, I recommend this book to those who respect the fact that the right to read it aloud is demographically confined, as it would not do well to sideline the progress Smith envisioned while writing this by insisting on a bad faith sticking to the letter of the law rather than the spirit. Trouble about going to white folks, they always think you're exaggerating. And Dessie began to see that sometimes folks line up by color and sometimes they line up by other things—like sins, and who is good to them, and where they work. You could hear the soft weeping of women who would face the Judgment Bar of Heaven with their men's unknown sins more willingly than they would face the knowledge here on earth of what those sins might be. Smith writes in a way I hadn't encountered in a while, or perhaps hadn't encountered in such a believable, largely heartrending sense. Many authors try to get under the skin of myriad characters, and in the modern day, few succeed as well as, say, Adichie, or others whose names I can't recall. This means, at times, the narrative is pitifully pathetic, and disgustingly disappointing, and abjectly horrifying, and that's important, as even the most compassionate white person is shown to be useless in the face of the antiblackness that they themselves let ride in the streets. This means that the average white person may see themselves in this book and devolve into self-congratulation, only to see themselves castigated in the next page by a rendering of the interiority of the supposed white savior. It's unfortunately a book that missed its time to be a revelatory motion picture, but looking around the modern day, I feel this book would've done more in the long run than the much lauded, also white authored To Kill a Mockingbird , which may be more palatable than Smith's but only when ignoring the context of 'Go Set a Watchman' and co. All in all, this work was a reminder of literature is capable of when it comes to getting down in the real dirt to show real portraits of real communities. It's a crying shame that the ban on this book was adhered to more religiously than others have been once it came off the bestseller lists, as if one had to pick a white person to talk about black issues, I'd put my money on Smith. But you don't hurry a white man. No, you sit and wait, hat in hand, and watch the clock over the pay window tick away minute after minute after minute of a black man's chance to live, knowing it has ticked away with it your right to decency. Scared. Everybody's scared. Something bad is happening, and they are not going to be left behind for it to happen to while white folks bury their dead. My mood's been taking some heavy blows of late, and I"m hoping getting myself out of the house in ways not simply devoted to making money will give me the fortitude to sail past the rough patches and recognize the fact that situations like these are exactly why I've saved up as much as I've had. My position's a way's away from all those in Maxwell, Georgia in the early 20th century, and if anyone from that era saw me or the people I interact with, they'd likely all be, white and black, be baffled, scared, scandalized, much as how I view most of them, although I'm more depressed and momentarily susceptible to the myth of time passing = progress than anything else. One thing I recognize, though, is the need to get out, the need to unionize, the need to not stick myself down and make myself a target until it's too late to move save to vent forth whatever harm I've received on those weaker than myself. It's as much a vindictive self-solipsism in California as it is in the South, and it is not ridding the world of neuroatypicals such as me that will solve it, but to look out for lives that subsist under a boot to the face, and to remove the boot and lift the face up to the sun. Off topic, I suppose, but that's the lens through which I read this cry from the past, and I can only hope others delve into this and get some of catharsis, untouched by a white savior complex. "Right now, I have some ideas," Charlie said slowly. "If I say here twenty years, I won't have them.["] The moon was rising now behind the dark row of tall old trees, it would soon disclose the body as clearly as would daylight. She made herself stop staring at the trees, made herself stop wanting to go there, as she felt compelled now to do, to see this thing close, this trouble that had been in their lives so long with no naming of it by anyone. It was as if something had prowled through the woods close to you ever since you could remember, sometimes just cracking a twig, sometimes crashing hard against a tree, but you had never quite seen it, or been able to name it. And now it lay there before you—dead. Dead. And you wanted, or something deep down in you wanted, to look at it a long time...
