I found this book incredibly sad to read. The information was nothing new, I am all too familiar with the issues and treatment of Indigenous Australians. Nan was right, don't ever trust doctors, the Government or wealthy people.....very wise. We like to feel Australia has made huge leaps in the treatment and handling of Indigenous people but it's not true. It's what we say to ourselves so we don't feel too bad about the blackfellas rotting away in the middle of outback Australia, out of sight out of mind.....unless of course there is a large mineral supply on their land then it's pack up and move along. They have disgustingly high mortality rates for a first world country, they still suffer and die from illnesses and diseases that have been easily treatable in this country for 50 years! But the 1980's and 1990's are over and it's not too hip to care about Abo's anymore. The rights and well being of (illegal) Asylum seekers and the starving in the developing world are more important to the PC thugs now, so unfortunately for Eddie Mabo out there your time in the sun is over, I'm sure you'll be fine, you've got the Government and public servants to look out for you....poor bastards. Morgan is very kind and gentle with her opinions of white people in this book, most of the appalling things white people have done are only hinted at and she is very careful to never come off as overly angry...just a little hurt. To the people leaving reviews saying this book was proved wrong......... BY WHOM???!!! What evidence do you have that these things were not factual? Because the bigoted slave owner Drake-Brockman family denied those ugly details of rape and incest? Ok well if the people who perpetrated the crime say its not true then it mustn't be true.....wow think of the money the state would save in criminal trials if all the evidence you needed to return a verdict of not guilty was for the accused to take the stand and say 'well it's not true, i didn't do it'. Use logic people.....But i guess the attitudes of old run very deep in the Australian psyche.....if it's a blackfellas word against a white person's word we all know who's word should be trusted. Then there are the allegations that Morgan and her publisher constructed the book and I have read all the webpages and from what I read people have taken it out of context. The editor helped her construct the structure of her story and how she was going to put her family's story into something white people would want to read and not be too put off by in order to highlight Aboriginal issues and suffering i.e don't be too hard on the whites because white Australia is still a little touchy when it comes to admitting the awful things they did'. I am by no means one of those inner city PC thug bleeding hearts that feels we are all special and one of God's creatures or a champagne socialist....no; I'm just an empathetic person who uses logic. And it is still obvious to me that White Australian still holds so much hostility and resentment towards Aboriginal people and I just can't relate to it. This book is an important part of Australian history whether white people like it or not because it is about dealing with the fact that these blackfellas and their treatment are an important part of the Australian identity and we all need to accept their existence and their treatment and get over it. They were and still are treated appallingly, their land WAS stolen, they were used as SLAVES, their women were RAPED by white men and their children were STOLEN from them. Deal with it, accept it.
