Notes: There weren't many colleges in America in those days, mostly tutors. But by the time Lewis finished his two years as personal secretary of Jefferson — reading voraciously from the president's library and dining with the man almost nightly — he was broadly competent in a number of disciplines. Beyond that he was sent to a number of experts in Philadelphia — a botanist, physician, navigator, etc. — to polish his skills. "Jefferson gave his reasons for picking Lewis to Dr. Benjamin Rush of Philadelphia: 'Capt. Lewis is brave, prudent, habituated to the woods, & familiar with Indian manners & character. He is not regularly educated, but he possesses a great mass of accurate observation on all the subjects of nature which present themseles here, & will therefore readily select those only in his new route which shall be new. He has qualified himself for those observations of longitude & latitude necessary to fix the points of the line he will go over.'" (p. 79) The cool dispositions shown by both Lewis and Clark, especially when it came to disobedience among the rank-and-file — theirs was a military operation — evince a patience worthy of Job. Ambrose keeps the non-standard spelling used by both men, but reading it all these years later makes them at times seem deranged. Which was not the case, of course. "Groops of Shrubs covered with the most delicious froot is to be seen in every direction, and nature appears to have exerted herself to butify the Senery by the variety of flours Delicately and highly flavered raised above the Grass, which Strikes and profumes the Sensation, and amuses the mind." (p. 149) Then again it should be remembered our writings may one day be considered non-standard. In Meriwether Lewis's first contact with an Indian tribe, the Otos, he delivers a long speech, which is so condescending it had me cringing more than two centuries later. He repeatedly called them "children" and then commenced to tell them how they should behave with white men. "Lewis did all this with the utmost seriousness. It never occurred to him that his actions might be characterized as patronizing, dictatorial, ridiculous, and highly dangerous. . . . His idea of how to make them [the Indians] into allies was to give them worthless medals and wardrobe trappings rather than the guns and powder they needed. . . . In general, it would be impossible to say which side was more ignorant of the other." (p. 163) Slips at times into hagiographic praise: "His health was excellent. His ambition was boundless. His determination was complete. He could not, would not, contemplate failure." "He turned his face west. He would not turn it around until he reached the Pacific Ocean. He stepped forward, into paradise." (p. 216)
