This is an exquisite coming of age/quest type story where the twist is that the main character is a humpback whale The first chapters describe the birth and early days of Hrun the whale in the tropical waters with his mother and pod. Later, the migration back toward to pole begins, Hrun learns feeding on krill, meets the bull that is his father and is slowly introduced to the whole whale life cycle. The young Hrun is introduced by his father to many different marine animals that live near the poles and taught about many aspects of the ocean. There is a lot of Marine information here that is very good indeed, and of course, the reader learns along with Hrun. Later, as a young bull Hrun goes on The Lonely Cruise which is the Humpback version of a Walkabout and does actually correspond with observed data of young males leaving the pod of their birth and wandering solo. There are whale culture and mythology elements, a LOT of emphasis on whaling and the negative activities of men, whom the whales do not hate, despite their 'senseless' injurious behaviours. On his Lonely Cruise Hrun ends up finding an aquarium, which takes cetaceans, and other animals captive for human pleasure. He then teams up with a fin whale to release the captives among which is a friend from his calf days, who becomes his mate. This book contains GREAT descriptions of the ocean, it's life and seasons. These descriptions are often lyrical, literary, beautifully written and contain a huge number of literary references to novels, songs and stories I am sure I only picked up on some of them. So, a great book it is, what is it not? It is not sci-fi. Berkely publishing did.... not great with the cover. By advertising it as “A novel by Robert Sieger, author of Alpha Centauri" it made me think it was sci-fi/fantasy and it is not more sci-fi than Jack London in. The endorsement by Madeleine L'Engle left the same, equally incorrect, vibe. It is not, in my option a children's book either – children might enjoy it, fine, in the way that a lot of children devoured Jack London's. And, yes, Wiki tells me it was regarded as children's literature but it is far more than that. It is a beautiful book for people who love the ocean, for scuba divers who can not always be underwater or for anyone curious about lives of whales; don't take it as gospel, but there is a lot of accurate data there, very accessibly presented.
