The Histories is the second volume of Tacitus’ magnum opus, outlining the moral degeneracy of imperial Roman politics. Fourteen books are thought to have originally been written; only five survive. These books detail the frenzied Year of the Four Emperors (AD 69): Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian. It is a tale of power in disequilibrium and the rise of a new dynasty, the Flavian. Tacitus laments the bygone idyll of Roman Republicanism that was free from tyranny. As mentioned in my review of The Annals , this review of The Histories will analyse Tacitus’ moral historiography. I begin by providing an overview of moral historiography and how Tacitus uses it. I follow this with three brief critiques of moral historiography from Leopold von Ranke, E.H. Carr, and Keith Jenkins. I then conclude with a defence of moral historiography that partially builds on Carr’s theorisations. If you enjoy my reviews and analyses, you’ll find more on my Substack, where you can also subscribe (no sign-up required): https://callumscolumn.substack.com/ There are two types of moral historiography. First, the historical evolution of morality; and second—which is the focus of this article—how morality influences the study and presentation of history. Joel Alden Schlosser describes it thus: Moral history intends to instruct its readers on living a moral life. This instruction comes through various strategies employed by an author to teach the reader something about the ethical implications of various human actions and behaviours; moral history directs the reader toward specific actions or thought. While these directions speak first of all to the character and choices of individuals, political views follow… [with] historians [seeking] to operate at multiple levels – to entertain as well as instruct. Moral history… contain[s] didactic elements while also delivering other primary content. Tacitus does not present a formal theory of moral historiography. Instead, he interrogates the facts and delivers narrative judgements on those facts. Three edifying themes permeate The Histories. He asserts that Rome had “grown old and rotten” under imperial rule. Galba, for example, was not murdered for incompetence, as Caligula or Nero had been, but because Rome had degenerated into a normative state where murderous power struggles were perpetuated with impunity. Tacitus also evaluates individual actions, suggesting that personal vices or virtues determine one’s fate and that future leaders should learn from their predecessors. For instance, Vitellius’ reign—marked by hubris, avarice, and tyranny—ended in his decapitation and the disposal of his body in the Tiber. Tacitus ultimately concludes that checks on power can restore Roman virtue, hence his yearning for the Roman Republic—particularly a time before Gaius Marius and Lucius Sulla. Tacitus’ interrogative method is echoed in the theorisation of Leopold von Ranke. In The Theory and Practice of History , Ranke famously states that the historian should show “how it actually was.” Like Tacitus, Ranke asserts that factual history can be articulated through critical examination of sources. Ranke diverges from Tacitus by positing that historians can achieve objectivity by sidelining personal biases and moral judgements when analysing facts. By impartially presenting facts within a logical narrative, societies of the past can be judged on their own terms. A historian should not serve a specific agenda but instead represent the “naked truth without adornment.” Through this methodology, Ranke argued that he had created a “scientific” understanding of the past. In The Histories , however, Tacitus reveals the gap between imperial proclamations and reality, showing that history may not be a neutral record but is shaped by interpretation. This implicitly challenges Ranke’s notion of objectivity, a critique later developed by E.H. Carr in What is History? Like Ranke, Carr’s historiography is underpinned by fact-based sources. However, Carr counters Ranke’s claim of objective historicism with an analogy. Historical facts, according to Carr, are like fish on a fishmonger’s slab, ready to be prepared and consumed in the manner deemed best by the purchaser. This fish can be consumed and prepared in multiple ways, with new recipes possibly giving it different flavours. History is therefore “a continuous process of interaction between the historian and his facts, an unending dialogue between the present and the past.” A historian’s interpretation of the facts is contingent on their own time and context; consequently, Carr argues that moral judgments about the past cannot be based on universal principles. Thus, according to Carr, Tacitus’ moral analyses may not reflect a universal measure of right or wrong, but the anachronistic dynamics of power and decadence as he understood them in his own time. Postmodernist historians extend Carr’s subjective lens. For example, Keith Jenkins argues that history is inherently subjective because the ontological past cannot be directly accessed. As a result, no singular meaning or true narrative of the past is possible; history becomes a literary construction where the historian interprets events as they see fit. History is a contested discourse, shaped by autobiographical perspectives that serve the interests of different groups. Ultimately, history is relative. However, Richard Evans, in In Defence of History , pushes back against postmodern relativism. According to Evans, despite the subjectivity of the historian, historical events remain objectively true. If all history is relative, then no historical event can be falsified. Someone’s “history” that proclaims Holocaust denial is theoretically of equal validity to that of Ian Kershaw’s seminal biography of Hitler. Such relativism is inherently a threat to historical scholarship. What does this all mean for Tacitus’ moral historiography? Setting aside the moralistic element for a moment, Carr’s approach, especially when compared to Ranke and Jenkins, offers a more balanced historiographical method. He acknowledges that facts form the foundation of history, yet it is the historian who gives them meaning. This avoids the positivist oversimplification of Ranke and the relativism of Jenkins. Carr argues that historical events are shaped by the societal context in which they are written, and he illustrates this with his mountain metaphor: although one may view a mountain from different angles, it remains the same mountain. Tacitus’ work aligns with Carr’s view; he chose to tell the story of Rome’s moral decline under imperial rule. However, while Carr’s historiography shares common ground with Tacitus, particularly in recognising the historian’s interpretive role, he, like Ranke and Jenkins, refrains from endorsing moral judgement in historical analysis. This seems to be a contradiction in Carr’s thinking. If the mountain represents objective reality, then why not apply the same logic to universal morals? Carr’s refusal to cast moral judgments may inadvertently risk legitimising historical atrocities. While many moral questions involve grey areas, certain actions—such as torturing infants—are universally recognised as unequivocally immoral. In the context of politics, a liberal society is clearly preferable to one founded on terror. The purpose of history, therefore, is not only to understand the past but also to inform the present and guide the future. By sidelining moral evaluation, Carr’s method, despite its strengths, may fall into moral relativism. Although there may be different interpretations of the facts, it is arguably more responsible to make imperfect moral judgements of the past based on reasonable parameters than to avoid them altogether. Without moral historiography, society loses an important tool of ethical reflection, which is necessary for societal progress and reform. Tacitus’ historiography rejects the relativism of postmodernism and implicitly acknowledges the limitations of the historian’s craft in producing an objective account. However, Tacitus’ moralism is distinct from that of Ranke, Carr, and Jenkins; he recognises and promotes a universal morality. Tacitus sought to expose the moral decline of Rome, showing how a political system that normalised terror and murder was inherently more corrupt than one governed by civic decorum and institutional checks. This didactic approach to history—interrogating the facts and drawing moral lessons from past events—is one of the reasons Tacitus is regarded as one of the great historians. By studying the past and making moral judgements, he was better able to assess the present. His strong opposition to tyranny offered valuable lessons for posterity, highlighting the importance of civic virtue and the dangers of unchecked power. If you enjoy my reviews and analyses, you’ll find more on my Substack, where you can also subscribe (no sign-up required): https://callumscolumn.substack.com/
