❝ People sometimes mistake their own shortcomings for those of society and want to fix the Cities because they don’t know how to fix themselves.❞ Issac Asimov's expansion of Robot short stories gave birth to this unique novel which balances itself between hard science fiction, philosophy, religious undertones and a classic murder mystery. In this novel, we are introduced to a highly advanced and a very dystopian New York city which has enwombed the ever growing population of humanity with a disturbing efficiency. The story revolves around officer Elijah Baley and his unorthodox partner, R. Daneel Olivaw's investigation into the murder of a spacer. Unorthodox? Well, the R doesn't stand for Roy or Rambo.... It stands for Robot! This, my dear friends, is a unique achievement in the history of science fiction. The city of future described in this tale excruciatingly reminded me of an over-sized factory with innumerable mechanical moving parts run by precise algorithms. *shudders* But unlike other science fictions of the same sub-genre, humans haven't yet reduced into an emotionless species here. They are still flawed, emotive and some are even aghast and distasteful with all the advancements. The characters introduced are well written and developed, especially Baley, Daneel and Commissioner Julius Enderby. The atypical partnership between Baley & Daneel and their interactions with each other are undoubtedly one of the high points of the story. As a science fiction, the story is spectacular. But.....yes, there is a but. As a detective story, Caves of steel stumbles a bit. The whole investigative procedure of Baley can be summed up with one of the character's quote: ❝ I can’t stop you from thinking, Officer, but thinking isn’t evidence. Maybe you know that.❞ To elaborate, I present to you an abridged version of first 50% of the investigation. Commissioner: Alright, Elijah. It is important that you handle this case very diplomatically because of our relationship with spacers. Elijah Baley: Sure, Commissioner. I am your man. [Later in front of spacers] Elijah Baley: THE GUY ISN'T DEAD. SPACERS ARE DECEIVING US TO CONQUER EARTH. THIS ROBOT ISN'T A ROBOT. HE IS A HUMAN. [Confused Spacers scratching head] Commissioner: umm... Do you have any proof? Elijah Baley: Well, not really. The robot looks very human, doesn't he? Daneel: Well, I can quite assure you that I am a robot [peels his skin] Elijah Baley: oh, crap. Nevertheless, I loved this book's ideas, its characters, and the classy climax.
