Angel Rock is an Australian novel which takes up the theme of "lost in the bush", with two children from an unstable home, left by a roadside to find their own way back. Only one returns, and the search for the lost child touches off a series of quests, self-destructions, and revelations. The novel is very well written. I, personally, am a bit of an escapist, and I am the sort of person who looks at the film list which says "Does the dog die", in order to avoid such stories. Two dogs die in this novel. That is quite realistic, in a rural Australian novel, but it puts me off and makes me miserable. This shows what a sap I am. The novel is set in 1969, and initially has strong references to the era. But as it goes on, I found that it lacked any sense of being in the late 60s. In fact, it seemed vaguely to have the atmosphere of the 1980s or 90s. (For instance, the empty convent in the country town.) The troubled police officer who goes to Angel Rock to investigate a girl's suicide in Sydney also seems to relate to others in a more end-of-the-century way. The character and actions of Darcy, one of a pair of teenage girls who is in contrast to the two brothers throughout the story line, never seems fully convincing. However, in the overall context of Angel Rock, these are small points of criticism, and the novel is a compelling, beautifully described story. Both dogs and lions (caged circus lions) play symbolic and actual roles in Angel Rock. This is a paragraph near the end: "Even as the shock and the pain of the memory began to numb him his head swam and he saw himself again, but much later, as a nineteen-year-old vagabond, standing in the centre of Venice, dreaming of a grand romance, something to take away the pain of his childhood, and looking up at the winged lion of St Mark, and his sister, his beloved sister, was standing there beside him, smiling. He knew then that she'd always been there, ever since she's left him. She's been with him at the side of the road on the night he's driven to Angel Rock, and she was here even now. He knew too that it was a lion he's seen in the rock above the town - not an angel at all - but a winged lion, a queen of her race, her brow heavy, her wings ready for flight, yet caught in the stone for eternity. She was a beast from some age long past and he knew then that some plan did exist, something far greater than him - than anyone - and unknowable into the bargain. He was glad he's glimpsed it an was glad he'd been shown a world beyond fact, beyond evidence."
