Karen and Matt have been divorced for almost 2 years when she agrees to be the maid of honor in his sister's wedding in Alaska. They drink too much at the reception and end up sleeping together, but agree that nothing can come of it, and Karen returns to her new life in California. Weeks later a doctor confirms that Karen is pregnant. Karen tells her ex-sister-in-law who urges her to tell Matt. Matt comes to California on business, looking for investors for the Alaskan lodge he has renovated and is trying to make into a big tourist destination. Karen meets Matt for dinner and tells him that she's pregnant. Matt is obviously shocked so his response isn't romantic or emotional the way Karen envisioned. She gets pissed and bolts and he has to chase her down and convince her to come back to Alaska. Karen agrees to move back to Alaska for her pregnancy, but not to start a relationship with Matt. It's revealed that they were divorced after Karen left him. She didn't like that Matt had four jobs in as many years and didn't seem to know what he wanted to do with his life. Karen was ready to be settled and had emotional baggage from growing up with a father who was constantly in and out of a job. She thinks Matt's lodge is another passing whim, but once she sees that it's truly his life's work, she's able to forgive him for the past. Matt tries to 'woo' Karen into marrying him again by taking her on a camping trip. They have an awful time, Matt yells at Karen, she cries, and he basically tells her to just leave since she's done it before. They REALLY suck at communication still. In the end, Karen is waiting for her plane to arrive so she can leave when Matt shows up pushing her further away. Karen gets really emotional and admits that she never wants to leave him again. I didn't like this book because there were too many side stories. Matt and Karen are clearly still not in the position to get remarried and have a lot more issues to work through. I didn't enjoy them as a couple and I didn't enjoy their characters separately either.
