Weis and Hickman have shown time and again that their major strength is world-building. If the original Dragonlance Chronicles weren't enough, well, the Legends series allowed them to branch out and fill in gaps the original series didn't have time for. They then went on to write the Darksword series and the seminal worldbuilding classic the Death Gate Cycle, in which they create four separate worlds of Earth, Air, Fire and Water each with its own set of rules and political dramas. Having to come back to Krynn again and again must have been tough for these authors since, by the time this book dropped there were, perhaps 50-70 books published in the series, leaving no room for surprises, and whatsmore publishers had forced them into directions out of their control and followed up by inferior writers (Jean Rabe's previous trilogy was a fun enough read, but just not - understandably - what long time fans had wanted). Having had a brief to destroy everything they'd created in Dragons of A Summer Flame, it seems this time the brief was to try and return Krynn to something a little more recognisable. No easy task since the heroes are mostly dead and buried and the next-generation are getting old too. Weis and Hickman are good authors and can see the problems and how to solve them, but they can't create magic from this situation. We get a sprinkling of awesome new characters - I especially like Mina, the very mysterious religious fanatic who seems to be able to waltz in and out of every situation unscathed and comes to lead the Knights of Neraka, but there's also Gerard, who admittedly is just another Solamnic Knight but hey, he's also ugly and can't get along with Tas to provide a little humour along the way, and Silvanoshei a would-be leader of the Elves, somewhat assertive though hopelessly naive. We have a sprinkling of returning characters including Laurana, whose effect seems somewhat muted, Goldmoon who actually now has a personality, Tas who is Tas and, y'know what, he does make me laugh a lot, and Palin who has changed from romantic lead to grizzled and embittered old man. Characters in Dragonlance always dealt in types and here we have them, there's no reason to complain. There are traces of it, but one of the things that make their better novels better is their lack of self-consciousness about how over the top they are. You could argue that Weis and Hickman have grown as writers and the steadiness at play here is an attempt to build a sustained threat to take us through the entire trilogy - and I like it, I really do. Mina's story is certainly compelling, and the idea of the shield around Silvanesti has a lovely visual element to it as well as being a useful plot point on which most of the novel converges. And yet, in an earlier book it would have been a throwaway side-adventure before rattling on to the next and one can't help long for that approach just a little bit. Storylines involving Tas do have a little more forward momentum (this is 600+ pages after all) though mostly involve discovering something and then travelling across the world in order to tell someone else. This is the first book of a trilogy but rather than wowing readers into picking up the next one with a whizz bang opening, I think that our Dragonlance primadonnas decided that people would be along for the ride and they could take their time to build the story they wanted to. It's not full of surprises, it doesn't play to their strengths but I'm certainly still open to believing this Trilogy might yet be as essential as previous Dragonlance tomes. It's still Dragonlance after all, written by the authors who know it the best.
