stacey invites the eighth-grade members of the bsc to new york to baby-sit a big group of kids in her building (while their parents attend a meeting to discuss how to support the neighborhood's homeless population, and this subject brings up a lot of good moments in the book). stacey gets super embarrassed by the bsc members' towny qualities, and the bsc members don't get along with stacey's big city friends (and even end up fighting amongst themselves). then they all learn some lessons. the end. highlights: -I kind of like the homelessness psa. stacey acknowledges her privilege by saying that she sees judy (the homeless lady who lives on her block) when she goes back and forth between her private school and her doorman-guarded building, and she says, "I'm sure you can't completely understand homelessness until you've experienced it." -probably my favorite lines in the book. the baby-sitting chargers natalie and peggie, on their creative theater group: "we express emotions through actions," and "we've learned that the theater is really a stage for life ." -stacey, when she finds the bsc after looking for a while: "where on earth have you been?"...[since I already sounded like my mother, I went ahead and added], "I was worried sick!" -the musical they go to see is starlight express , by andrew lloyd weber and for which the whole cast wears roller skates the whole time. holy moly, that sounds just cheesy enough to be my favorite musical ever. must see! -stacey's journey from being constantly embarrassed by her bumpkin friends to enjoying herself is handled well. when in central park, the baby-sitting charges all sing "for they are jolly good sitters" and at first stacey is embarrassed, but then has a revelatory moment where she gets over herself and her own coolness and appreciates how sweet the kids are being. -this description of future me: "an old man with a flowing white beard was riding an adult-sized tricycle. attached to the back of the tricycle was a kid's red wagon. and riding placidly in the wagon were three fluffy white persian cats. they looked like the man's beard." man. I wish I could grow a beard without having to take hormones. lowlights/nitpicks: -claudia starts the fight with laine, which I guess isn't really out of character (she was a jerk in Claudia and Mean Janine ) but I don't want to be angry at her because I mostly think she's great. also the whole miserable attempt at a party for stacey's ny friends to meet her stonybrook friends is just uncomfortable. also mary anne is a jerk to dawn which is out of character. -mary anne gets caught stealing an eyeshadow sample by accident at bloomingdale's. she thinks sample means it's for taking. this part is really just a bummer, and I feel so bad for mary anne who didn't know any better. -when I was 13, I knew who the doors AND chubby checker were, so I am disappointed by the bsc members who are older than me! -at a "cool" restaurant ( hard rock cafe , LOL) with a cool waitress, kristy orders "fill-it mig-nun" . and stacey is mortified. it kind of sucks that stacey is so mean to kristy here. for the most part I sympathize with stacey, but this is one part where she's really a jerk. -dawn "won't touch meat" - so inconsistent! is she or isn't she a vegetarian? -lox isn't cooked, but stacey says it is. it is smoked cured salmon. NOT cooked. raw foodists can eat it! -dawn is by far the worst character in this book. I HATED HATED HATED HER. see the "why dawn sucks" section for details. why dawn sucks (quotes from this book) -"today I saw a gigantic rat, and a person without a home who picked through a garbage can until she found half a hamburger. she ate it without even washing it off." -"they have doormen here to keep the murderers away." -"I'll have the poppied fruit and avocado salad, please. it sounds so californian." (okay, that one's kind of funny) -after leaving central park, dawn is relieved because she thought she was gonna get mugged there since, "you always hear stories about people getting mugged in central park. and not just at night." then she makes it worse by following it up with, "plus, homeless people live in the park, don't they?" to which stacey says, "just because they're homeless doesn't mean they're going to hurt you." THANK YOU, STACEY. the outfits the girls (bsc plus laine) wear to stacey's crappy party: party outfits: -claudia: "I wanted her to wear this outfit that was sleek and black and covered with silver star and sparkles...And she was wearing her hair simply, for once--brushed back from her face and held in place by a white beaded headband." -kristy: "kristy was wearing a white turtleneck with little red and blue hearts all over it, a red sweater, jeans, and sneakers." -dawn: "dawn had chosen an oversized peach-colored sweater-dress, lacy white stockings, and black ballet slippers." -stacey: "I was wearing a short, short yellow dress that flared out just above my hips, white stockings, yellow push-down socks, and these new shoes that my parents hate." -mary anne: "I had chosen a bright, big-patterned sweater and a pair of black pants for her. She'd looked at them, shaken her head...and put on this other outfit--a ruffly white blouse, a long paisley skirt, and these little brown boots." -laine: "she had chosen a short black dress, black stockings, and simple black flats. on one wrist was a single silver bangle bracelet. on her dress was one of those silver squiggle pins. her fluffy brown hair was newly permed and perfectly cut." no snacks in claudia's room (mostly because this whole book takes place in new york)
