The Riverworld series stumbles to the finish line in a handful of painful, limping steps. Farmer was not originally planning to write a fifth book in this series, but, by his own admission, he left a few loose ends after the fourth book and needed to tie them off. I wish he hadn't done so. Starting a few weeks after the conclusion of "The Magic Labyrinth," the survivors of the trip to the tower are faced with a new mystery. Loga is speaking with Burton on a video call when he is apparently murdered or destroyed. The survivors of the journey to Riverworld determine that there must be someone else in the tower with them and that that person - dubbed "The Snark" - is their enemy. A portion of the book deals with the hunt for the Snark and the rest describes the politics of the humans in the tower. They must decide how they will allocate power, who can use the resurrection machinery and for what purposes, how space will be shared and so forth. At the end of the book, there is another big revelation in which everything we know changes. I found all of this a bit depressing. Much of what Farmer tackles in this book can be summed up in the old axiom, "Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely." The humans are clearly not capable of handling the God-like powers they've been afforded. There is a lot of violence and pettiness and, as usual, Farmer spends way too much time on the nitty-gritty of combat, murder, arguments and rapes. OK. We get it. People aren't moral or ethical or ready to lead each other with civility and kindness. The final section of the book essentially undermines much of what was defined at the end of the fourth volume. This may be what Farmer had intended all along, but it reads a bit like a false ending in a movie where the second ending is not as satisfying as the first. Farmer's dim view of human nature and potential, coupled with what felt like unnecessary plot complications made this an unsatisfying read. I just don't think I am a Farmer fan. But hey, I finished the series, so the completist part of me has been pacified.
