Read it years ago. Remember hating it with a passion, namely the part in which Woody destroys his beloved Swedish movie The Seventh Seal . This book's title was accurately translated into Spanish as Acabemos de una vez por todas con la cultura ("Let's Finish with Culture for Once and for All"), and I get Woody's intention, but I agree with Oscar Wilde more, Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without being charming. This is a fault. , and this book felt to me at the time as Woody deepfucking masterpieces with a secuoya of poor taste, which takes me to Dalí's take on modern artists and critics hating Classicism for considering it corny ( Like any sewer rat worthy of the name ). It's okay to kill your idols... if your take on them is somewhat reasonable (as in, for example, loving Rimbaud's A Season in Hell for its artistic quality and yet being bothered for it being a coming-of-age hysterical diary of an adolescent genius [many people's case, not mine, 'cause I feel for an exceptionally gifted artist who was one the 5 best poets alive in his time and never earned a dime for it, unlike his pseudo-poetic millionaire followers such as... that Nobel Prize... Bob Dylan!]) and not just a distorted transformation of the original for the mere purpose of destroying it, unless you do it (which is not the case here) with some kind of charm whatsoever (as Picasso's recreations of Velázquez's Las meninas [recreations that I don't like a lot, and so didn't Picasso himself, but that are still interesting as a modern take on them [this is not, again, what Woody does here, or, if so, he fails terribly, at least to me, making something deep such as The Seventh Seal to look like a soap opera [Picasso didn't turn artworks of the past into posters]). I personally found this rootless American-doughnout-humor-destroying-truffles really sickening (whereas at first glance my comment may look snobby, I happen to love anti-artworks as well as masterpieces, but this book is not Woody Allen being punk on his own terms [Picasso's case, again] but an obnoxious iconoclast, which is another story and Duchamp's La Gioconda with a moustache on it was and always be enough to prove the point). Television is an excellent system when one has nothing to lose, as in the case with a nomadic and rootless country like the United States, but in Europe the affect of television is that of a bulldozer which reduces culture to the lowest possible denominator. (Marc Fumaroli) P.S. I do like very much loads of Woody Allen's movies, for the record.
