An excellent selection of Poirot's shorts. This collection has a lot of my personal favorites and would be a great place for anyone interested in reading bite-sized stories featuring Christie's famous Belgian detective. I've left links to slightly longer reviews of each individual story if anyone is interested in a particular one. The Adventure of "The Western Star" Cursed jewelry? The famous American actress, Miss Mary Marvell, has been receiving menacing letters telling her that the jewel given to her as a wedding present is about to get repoed. The jewel will supposedly be reunited with its twin (which belongs to Lady Yardly) before the next full moon as they are the stolen eyes of an idol. It's very spooky stuff. Really. The Tragedy of Marsdon Manor A heavily insured man facing financial ruin suddenly drops dead, leaving his much-younger wife set for life. The insurance company wants Poirot to investigate the circumstances surrounding his death before they pay up, though. And so, with Hastings in tow, Hercule takes a trip to Essex to visit Marsdon Manor to see if anything looks fishy. The Adventure of the Cheap Flat When something looks too good to be true, it probably is. Words to live by. When a young married couple dives into the housing market to look for an affordable apartment, they toss that adage right into the trash bin and almost end up paying the ultimate price for it. The Mystery of Hunter's Lodge Hasting gets to take off the training wheels! Sort of. A man contacts Poirot asking for his help in solving the murder of his elderly uncle, but Hercule (still recovering from the flu) sends Hastings in as his proxy. As you can imagine, Hastings gets it all wrong and Poirot ends up solving the case from his comfy chair. The Million Dollar Bond Robbery Did a young bank employee steal a million dollars in bonds? When the portmanteau carrying the bonds is clumsily broken into on a ship bound for the United States, Philip Ridgeway's fiancee goes to Poirot and begs him to clear his name. Could Hercule ever say no to a pretty young woman? The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb I love this one and always have. The tv episode is one of my favorites as well, so this was a win-win for me. The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan Did the French maid make off with Mrs. Opalsen's pearls? Nah. That would be too easy, right? The Kidnapped Prime Minister You will never guess who gets kidnapped! Ok, maybe you will. David MacAdam, the Prime Minister of England, has been kidnapped and it's up to Hercule and Hastings to figure out whodunnit. The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim Never bet against a Belgian! Japp tells Poirot about a case he's working on that deals with a wealthy banker who walked out of his house to go into the town and mail a few letters, and disappeared off the face of the earth. He was supposed to meet up with a man he had some bad blood with, but he never showed back up at this house. Did this man have something to do with his disappearance? The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman Count Foscatini has been coshed over the head! But who is Count Foscatini? And why should we care if he got his head coshed in? Poirot and Hastings get pulled into this murder mystery because they were having dinner with their friend and neighbor, Dr. Hawker, when he got a desperate call from the Count telling him he had been attacked. Help! <--says Foscatini The Case of the Missing Will What good is an education? More specifically, what good is an education for women? <--said Violet Marsh's Uncle Andrew. When she was orphaned at 14, Violet went to live with her uncle on his farm, and they mostly got along very well. However, after defying him and continuing with her schooling, Violet was cut from her uncle's will. Unless that is, she can figure out a riddle that he left her. Turns out, having an education means that you know when to call in Poirot. The next 3 stories were originally only in the American edition - suck it my UK friends! The Chocolate Box Poirot outwitted?! Say it ain't so! But it is so. Sitting around together one evening, Poirot tells Hastings of the one case that he failed to solve. And Poirot tells Hastings to say the words chocolate box if he ever feels that Hercule gets a bit too big for his britches. I'm sure Hastings was tempted to walk behind Poirot with a megaphone repeating those words at the top of his lungs for most of the time they spent together. He didn't. Such is the power of friendship. The Veiled Lady A hot chick wearing a veil walks into a bar... How do you know she's hot, my rotund Belgian friend? Shut up. My mustache gives my little grey cells super-deduction skills. The Lost Mine Poirot visits an opium den. So that shouldn't be boring, right? But it is. I've read and listened to this story multiple times over the years and it's never managed to keep my interest. Recommended for fans of Hercule Poirot.
