Henry Wiencek has made the study of the Founding Fathers' relation to slavery something of a speciality, and this book is another excellent example. I have also read his book about Thomas Jefferson and his slaves, a book equally as interesting, if far more controversial! To his credit, however, unlike Jefferson George Washington did not just talk about his disregard for slavery; he also acted upon it, albeit posthumously. Knowing he would face a battle amongst his own family and hampered by legal constraints, Washington expressly freed his slaves in his will, an act that went very much against the grain of his time. Washington expressed his dislike of slavery numerous times throughout his career, admired many of the black soldiers, slave and free, who served in the Revolutionary Army and drew up more than one plan of emancipation - it is a sad 'what if' to wonder how history made have been different had Washington followed through with one of his plans to emancipate his slaves whilst serving as President of the United States. Slavery is the great leveller in terms of American morality, and for all the emancipation of his slaves in his will, Washington doesn't emerge from these pages with much more respectability than Jefferson did. Unlike the latter, it is highly unlikely that Washington ever fathered children with any of his slaves, but then Washington never fathered children with his wife either, so that doesn't necessarily mean he too wasn't sneaking off to the slave quarters, however out of character it would have been for a man of his iron will and self-control. In a way, books like this are only necessary because of the decades and centuries of mythologising that have come to shroud the origins of the American Republic. For all of their actions, there is no reason why we should expect higher standards of justice and morality from men like Jefferson and Washington just because of their Revolutionary actions. They were products of their time, and that time accepted slavery as a given. We seek to find evidence that men like Washington disliked slavery and fought against it because it makes us feel better about admiring them. But we can respect their actions as the Founders of their country without needing to admire them as men.
