R. W. Johnson's excellent contemporary forensics remain the best analysis of this major 1980s tragedy. While the clinical truth may never be known, Johnson sifted hrough the wreckage of evidence to construct the most likely hypothesis: that KAL 007 was on a secret undercover recon flight orchestrated between the US and Korean CIAs, and things went badly wrong for all involved. While the US recouped advatange over the death of nearly three hundred civilians, the USSR felt the brunt of what was hyped into a major cold war atrocity. Reagan and cohorts sanctified themselves in the blood of the "sacrificed," but what was really involved? Through their protesting-too-much, Johnson found an open political window that let in a good deal of backdraft. As a CIA "cowboy," current CIA chief Bill Casey had a long history of questionable and reckless deeds. As Reagan's campaign manager the allegations of the 1980 "October Surprise" hostage deal with Iran are one clue. His subsequent skullduggery with the contras and Iran grew from this. Add CIA aggression in Africa, Central America, and Asia and the scenario of a planned provocation is not too paranoid after all. The "plot", then, seemed to be a test of Soviet radar defenses at its new Krasnoyarsk station, to "light up" its system in Northeast Asia to display its weaknesses. A civilian craft made the best cover. What was unfactored was the human element of a Korean pilot as reckless as Casey, going the extra mission mile and provoking a Soviet response. In the fog of weather and war the Soviet pilots took no chances. Johnson is clear that the Soviets were in the wrong for shooting down any craft without positive determination. He did not let them off the hook, but neither would he absolve the West from its side of cold war responsibility by the mere fact of mass casualties. The "gain" of the resulting propaganda blitz was obvious: traction for the MX missile/Star Wars program. Seen in this light, the consequence may not have been so unintended after all, like the Brothers-to-the-Rescue shootdown over Cuba for passing the Helms-Burton Act. Johnson does not take his hypothesis that far, nor is there any hard evidence for it. But what he did assemble from the debris of KAL 007's fuselage and propaganda remains damning enough. Definitely worth a read for those seeking a more truthful cold war perspective beyond Reaganite triumphalism. Show more
