Two stories unfold simultaneously in Going After Cacciato , one I was riveted by and another I felt alienated by. The disjointed nature of the novel didn't come as a shock; Tim O'Brien's masterpiece The Things They Carried was a compilation of harrowing short stories penned between 1975 and 1990 on the subject of the Vietnam War. In this novel, published in 1978, O'Brien's attempt to contrast the external experiences of a young army specialist conscripted into the war while taking the reader into his imagination, where the possibilities of walking out of the war all the way to Paris are explored at length, didn't come together for me. The novel begins with twenty-year-old Spec Four Paul Berlin surrounded by death and bad times while serving his Vietnam combat tour in October 1968. Much of his squad have been killed, three in tunnels, including a disliked lieutenant who insisted on obeying SOP. The new leader of Third Squad is Lieutenant Corson, a Korean War veteran though stricken with dysentery, is well-liked due to his adherence to "informal SOPs," permitting the men to destroy the tunnel networks they find rather than searching them. Their medic Doc Peret notifies the LT that a feeble-minded soldier known as Cacciato has left, having mentioned to Paul Berlin that he's headed for Paris. On foot. Paul Berlin joins Doc, the LT and what's left of Third Squad as they head into the high country in pursuit of Cacciato. At point is a pugnacious southerner named Stink Harris. The squad's good humor man is Eddie Lazzutti. Sergeant Oscar Johnson is loved by virtue of his luck, having survived nine combat tours, though his claims that he's from Detroit are not believed by the other men. Harold Murphy is a heavy gunner who wants to turn back almost from the start, even as the squad quickly leaves the war and its dangers behind. They make visual contact with Cacciato, who seems committed to walking the 8,600 miles to Paris. Humping to Paris, it was one of those crazy things Cacciato might try. Paul Berlin remembered how the kid had spent hours thumbing through an old world atlas, studying the maps, asking odd questions: How steep were these mountains, how wide was the river, how thick were these jungles? It was just too bad. A real pity. Like winning the Bronze Star for shooting out a dink's front teeth. Whistling in the dark, always whistling and smiling his frozen white smile. It was silly. It had always been silly, even during the good times, but now the silliness was sad. It couldn't be done. It just wasn't possible, and it was silly and sad. Their mission to retrieve Cacciato apparently over, Third Squad is back in Quang Ngai on the coast of the South China Sea. Paul Berlin pulls arduous middle-hour guard and to occupy his mind, begins imagining the possibilities: what if they pursued Cacciato all the way to Paris? Spending six days marching through the jungle, the men hold a vote on whether to return to the war or keep going after Caccicato, facing desertion themselves. Harold Murphy disappears in the night, but the others keep going. Crossing into Laos, Stink shoots one of two water buffalo carrying a cart with three women in it, a young English speaking refugee named Sarkin Aung Wan and her two aunts. While Lt. Corson wants to leave the women, Sarkin Aung Wan becomes compelled by the idea of traveling to Paris. She attaches herself to Paul Berlin and promises she can guide the squad to their destination. The specialist alternates between flights of fancy to remembrances his past: arriving in Chu Lai on June 3 and receiving woefully inadequate survival training, patrolling the villages of the muddy Song Tra Bong, getting lost in the woods as a child while at Indian Guides camp, his father in Fort Dodge, Iowa advising his son that while at war to focus on the good while ignoring the bad. Paul Berlin attempts this through his elaborate fantasy world. Going After Cacciato is remarkably compelling when it comes to following Paul Berlin through his flesh and blood experiences in Vietnam. A lot of novelists are content to go from Plot Point A to Plot Point B, but what makes Tim O'Brien worth being studied is the vitality in his fiction. There are no straight lines in his stories, which soar and descend like the vital signs on a patient in intensive care. In the afterword, O'Brien maintains that rather than a war novel, he sees Going After Cacciato as a peace novel. Rather than adventure, it is well-calibrated toward the experiences of a soldier, taking us into his world and frame of mind. "How many days you been at war?" asked Alpha's mail clerk, and Paul Berlin answered that he'd been at war seven days now. The clerk laughed. "Wrong," he said. "Tomorrow, man, that's your first day at the war." And in the morning PFC Paul Berlin boarded a resupply chopper that took him fast over charred pocked mangled country, hopeless country, green skies and speed and tangled grasslands and paddies and places he might die, a million possibilities. He couldn't watch. He watched his hands. He made fists of them, opening and closing the fists. His hands, he thought, not quite believing. His hands. Very quickly, the helicopter banked and turned and went down. "How long you been at the war?" asked the first man he saw, a wiry soldier with ringworm in his hair. PFC Paul Berlin smiled. "This is it," he said. "My first day." On page 76 it becomes clear that the walk to Paris exists only in the mind of Paul Berlin and while I could easily relate to why a dream like this would occur to a soldier, I didn't want to read it. I wanted to get back to the story where something was at stake. I don't like reading dream sequences and here too, I glazed over portions that take place in India or Afghanistan. Once the squad hits Paris, I was skipping pages. This concept might have been better serviced in a short story and while I recommend the novel for O'Brien's electrifying prose, as a novel, I think it half works.
