Let me tell you something about Tim O’Brien. Tim O’Brien can write. I don’t mean Tim O’Brien can express ideas well, or that Tim O’Brien knows how to make cogent points using the written language. Hell, I can do that. I can wake up hungover, drink a liter of coffee, and crank out an essay with a title like “Intertextuality in Victorian Memoir: the Solipsism of Affect,” or some such mumbo-jumbo, and it’ll make your average literature professor at The Community College of Seriously Misfortuned Academics swoon. I can also write instructions, technical memoranda, exposition of physical or mathematical theory, love letters, anecdotes, recipes, computer code in any number of out-of-date languages, journal entries, and sometimes – sometimes I can even write a book review. But I can’t write like Tim O’Brien. No way. Tim O’Brien’s got that something you know when you see it. That raw talent to transform the semiotic into the spiritual. That thunderous, sensuous grasp of prose that catches you unawares at a bus station, on your couch, in an airplane, and suddenly your hands are gripped tight at the edges of the worn paperback, knuckles white, and your eyes are speeding down the page and you’re careening through a world so vivid that you would never be able to say that this was not reality itself and believe it. Yes, Tim O’Brien can do that. On the other hand, Tim O’Brien lacks focus. Ah! But surely, you say, if any novel can be excused of lacking focus, this is it, no? This upside-down, down-the-rabbit-hole existential quest for the adumbrative Cacciato, from the death-filled lakes of Vietnam to Laos through to India, Iran, Greece and – finally, absurdly – the streets of Paris. Well, maybe. I mean, it’s clear from the beginning that none of this pan-Asia quest is quite “real.” And as the book progresses, it sort of settles on you that O’Brien doesn't intend to ever really let you know what "real" would even mean. After all, surely these soldiers did not just up and leave their posts and march across Asia in hunt of a deserter who thought he could walk to Paris? Surely not. Rather, we are made to believe that this is some sort of imagining in the mind of the protagonist, Paul Berlin – some sort of exploration of the possible and the impossible, of the region between dusk and dawn where death and war confuse the two in categorical terms. But then again, who is the protagonist? He is just a figment of O’Brien’s, isn’t he? And so now it becomes less clear. The reader is as unable to separate “real” from “unreal” as Berlin is. What is fiction, after all, but an exploration of where the possible meets the impossible? I get this far, fine, but I’m never very sure what O’Brien wants us to do with all this. Not that we have to do anything, mind you, but textual involution is no substitute for a plot arc, you know? And I have to admit, for about the middle 75-100 pages of this, we were deeply into three-star territory. But O’Brien pulls out of it. And you know why? I don’t know if I’ve mentioned this, but O’Brien can write . And so you emerge from the final page, having been suffused in some mystery that you never quite understood, but thankful for its evocation, and unwilling to trade the experience for something so mundane as clarity.
