I don't always read sci-fi, but when I do, I read sci-fi that doesn't resemble sci-fi. I read Joanna Russ. Oh yes it's in a future and on a distant planet. But Russ makes sure that none of that matters because they're stranded. All of those gadgets and gizmos of the future matter not a wit as they slowly devolve backwards into the 21st century, 18th century, something something B.C. Humans, savages, animals. Thus stripping sci-fi of its sci-fi-ness (well, except a few little things... the broomstick was a hilarious touch, I can see Russ still laughing about it somewhere, that witch!), and what we're left with is a philosophical text, an internal monologue, a feminist statement, a reality TV show, an allegorical thriller. A desert island book. One of the oldest age-old quandaries. A group is stuck with no hope of rescue. What is their first response? 'Civilization must be preserved,' says he. 'Civilization's doing fine,' I said. 'We just don't happen to be where it is.'" Survival! And babies! Let's have babies and ensure the human race goes on! But like Bartleby, our narrator would prefer not. And no. No follows from yes. One of the twistiest and most prevalent of human logics, that idea of survival. And that idea of survival being an act of heroism and courage. You hear it all the time from survivors of cancers and whatnot. No disrespect to them. But in this culture we REVERE survivors... to the point of parody. Still, you have to think: does it really take that much courage to go on living? To fight for breath is natural. To hold your breath against your body's insistence, to deny living and face death head on, that is what takes courage. Well, I'm not sure I believe that either, but at least this narrator does. And she's entertaining about it too. She's funny and cynical and witty. Her fellow passengers don't quite agree with her, to put it lightly, but they are no match for her. She's so much smarter than they are. The ironic thing is that she's the one who survives longest. Or maybe the ironic thing is that because they are no match for her the book is less interesting. Or maybe not because it's only fitting that she has no real conflict: she is the best match for herself. Thus her friends come back as hallucinations, knowing all her weak spots and just what to say to her because it's the truth. And because we all have truths that hurt us. At first I thought the narrator started out too convinced of her point. I thought maybe it would be more believable if she were more emotional, not as adamant, and then slowly came to her point as she lost hope of ever being discovered. There was no struggle within her at the beginning of the book. No looking at the situation and trembling just a little, which is just human. But then when she was left alone, I could see the depths of her personality and I knew that it was the right move. She is just such an interesting and fully developed character, and there is development. In fact she becomes less adamant. Or at least she has more shades of moral misgivings, more points of human frailty. Her history is brought to life and you understand where her philosophy is coming from and why. Brilliant. Funny. Insightful. Biting. Thought provoking. All the good book review cliches. Only fitting for such a un-cliche book.
