I loved this little outing into romance. My thoughts on this book were more closely aligned with the thoughts expressed by Stmargarets, Ivy, and Vintage in their fine reviews. This is not a particularly angsty story(maybe the last 30 pages). The hero is not an alpha, but possibly an alpha in training. The story is not dark and maudlin. It is more of a raindrops on roses, and whiskers on kittens OR cream colored ponies and crisp apple strudel type of story. Heroine is 21 year old Katie : She has it bad for the hero. She has loved him since she was 16(but looked 13)and he was 24 dating her 26 year old sister. Oh, she did her best to thwart the H’s attention to the h’s sister Isobel. She needled him any chance she got and succeeded in winning the trophy for best cock blocking by a teen. She was less successful in blocking her sister from the hero’s heart. After her sister married(the H’s brother) she took herself off to Australia to live with her father. She outgrew those pesky awkward years, and this gangly girl is now the belle of the ball! However, has she changed enough to claim her one true love? Obstacle 1 The reluctant, uninterested OW Isobel, sister to the heroine and the H’s unrequited love object. Now she is not in our story physically, but by phone, letter, and is referred to often. We are lead to believe that Isobel is attractive, sensible, practical, and a doctor. She is the whole package. Unfortunately she is too similar to the H. No spark. No frivolity. No impulsiveness. Therefore, when she meets the H’s older, outgoing, attractive brother it is love at first sight for her. She never slept with the hero and it wouldn’t surprise me if she was happy for baby sister’s interruptions. Yet, it didn’t take long for the brother to get her in bed. The H learned to accept this “betrayal”, but he put Isobel on a pedestal and failed to see that she was not his “one”. Hero 29 year old who acts like he is 69 He holds all of his dates up to the vision he has for Isobel, so his relationships do not last long. It doesn’t sound like he is a manwhore. He is currently dating an inferior version of Isobel, but she will represent him nicely as he climbs the financial ladder to success. He agrees to have the h stay at his place in London and look out for her. He hasn’t seen her in years. When she arrives at the train station getting out of a sporty red car he is instantly smitten with the woman stepping out. He doesn’t realize that the woman is his “poisonous pixie” all grown up and starts chatting her up. She lets him believe she is someone else as he talks about the brat who he is there to pick up. Then she spills the beans. Now our story has begun. Will she win the heart of the hero or be relegated to 2nd best status? Obstacle 2: The interested ow Lilian has been dating the H for the last month. She realizes real quickly that the h is going to be a problem, so she does some of her own maneuvering to separate them, however, this is not ott ow maneuvering that we have seen in other stories. She is just trying to keep her claim. It is insinuated that she will make the H the perfect wife/hostess. It is not indicated if she and the H have slept together, it is my belief that they haven’t. That was probably going to change, but the h arrived to spoil things for the ow. There was no sleeping with the hero once the h arrived, no matter what might have occurred before. Things I liked: *This story is told mainly through the hero’s POV, which is rare. It is either the heroine or in the more modern stories the pov is shared equally *The h was a lighthearted little ray of sunshine. She knew how to light a fire under our hero’s tush and boy did he need it. In some ways she reminded me of Dixie from The Spanish Groom I’m not saying this book is as good, but it had some of the same elements. Stuffed shirt hero undone by the “poisonous Pixie” *Everyone likes the h. She has allies everywhere helping her in her quest for the H. (Her sister, his secretary, his roommate…) She likes babies and animals, and knows her way around a kitchen. On top of this she is a professional dancer, although I believe she wants to be a professional’s wife. *The H needs someone like Katie. She makes him laugh, makes him take chances, and even helps him get a beloved promotion that the ow could not cinch for him. Basically, she takes the starch out of his shirt. She is the opposite of her sister. *Our h becomes the victor. I believe her to be the best, not 2nd best in the H’s eyes Ok some things you might not like, but I just let them go as in my mind they are excused since they weren’t with their true love. We know, once they have their true love they wouldn’t dream of pulling this crap! The h’s sister was dating the H and slept with his brother while dating him. He found out the morning after as his brother was lovingly feeling up Isobel. He doesn’t blame them as it was not intentional and you can’t fight love at first sight. The H was dating Lilian yet goes to a cottage with the h, not letting his girlfriend know. It just slipped his mind. He sleeps with the h, while still in a relationship with the ow. However, this ow is not one to hang on. When she found the H had gone away with the h, she moved on herself. Bravo OW, because I get really sick of the ones that will hang on for years and years. She basically cut her losses and went to the next rich fish. Finally, My “I am kind of confused, please explain to me moment” The H tells the h that He fell in love with both of them(the h’s sister and her) in the first moment. So was that when the h was 16 and her sister was 26. Or that he fell in love with the h’s sister at first sight, then when he saw the h get out of the car, he fell in love with her at first sight. I am just not sure!
