Actual Rating: 3.5 Rialla is a former slave dancer turned horse trainer for a spymaster named Ren in a mercenary town called Sianim. It's been 7 years since she's had to dance for any master and she's never had any intentions on becoming someones property again. But when Ren asks her to go undercover to help uncover a plot that may render everyone in the world a slave, how can she say no. Using her powers as an empath and the help of her healer friend Tris, Rialla realizes that she's will always be a slave, the memories and wounds will always be there, but its up to her to overcome the fears and pain these wounds engender, not only for herself but for everyone she cares about. Patricia Briggs has a unique talent in making her readers fall in love with her characters, and even if you don't fall in love with them you are definitely rooting for them and want everything to work out for them. There was nothing different with this book. Rialla , the female protagonist, is strong, brave, clever and willing to fight for something other than herself. She is willing to put herself in a position she fought tooth and nail to get out of just to ensure that the rest of the world wouldn't have to experience the very fate she had to break away from. Tris, the male protagonist is funny, charming, mysterious and supportive. I absolutely adore that about Patricia's male characters. She doesn't make them overbearing alpha males who feel like they have to do everything because they think a female cannot. They are there when they are needed and they step back when their partners or friends have everything under control. Tris is the epitome of that. He recognizes that Rialla isn't invincible but he understands and appreciates that she isn't weak and useless either. I really appreciate that Rialla has a male friend, Laeth in Steal the Dragon and he's JUST that. A FRIEND. There's no threat of a love triangle, or any sexual tension between her and Laeth. A lot of times for whatever reason, authors don't allow a male and female character to just be friends. I don't know if its because of fear of the relationship not being interesting or what, but I see it happen all the time and not only is it unnecessary, its annoying. That isn't an issue in this book. Rialla and Laeth are friends, and I love their relationship, their interactions and I looked forward to scenes between the two of them. What's crazy about this book...this book came after Patricia's first book Masques , which was entertaining but hard to read as far as the writing went. Steal the Dragon didn't have that problem. The storytelling was much more fluid, transitions were used where they were needed and this was definitely a smoother read. However there was a stretch of about 130 pages that I had to bulldoze my way through because the story was simply moving too slow. Which is one of the reasons this is getting 3.5 stars. The other reason is because I think this early on in her writing, Patricia's ability to really execute a full story was a bit weak. The plot in Steal the Dragon was clear, I knew what was going on, I knew what the threat was, but once the entire story came to an end, it lacked a sense of completion. But more than that..it felt like there really wasn't a point to the story because nothing was resolved. I mean there was a chance for the major threat in the story to be neutralized but that chance was thrown away and the threat was literally left in the woods to do whatever it wanted. Overall, I really enjoyed the characters in this book, and that's always a saving grace with any story for me, and I will definitely be continuing on with this series. Fans of Patricia Briggs will enjoy these stories and appreciate the journey that lead to the great stories we get from her today such as The Mercy Thompson and Alpha and Omega series.
