Having just finished Alice in Wonderland, the first thing that occurs to me is that I wish I had read it years ago. I've known the story of Alice for years thanks to Disney and the Mad Hatter on Batman, but for some reason I didn't get around to reading this as a child. While I expected to like it, I never realized what a joy this book would be. Carroll was a logician, so it should come as no surprise that he uses his expertise in that field to create many hilarious logical fallacies. But what interested me the most was the prose; I could talk for a long time of the clean, beautiful concision of Carroll's writing and of the brilliance of his word games and puns, which obviously influenced Vladimir Nabokov (who composed a Russian translation of Alice). The way in which Carroll's narrative voice addresses the absurd events reminded me of Kafka's Metamorphosis. Why some would reject the former's unique literary genius while praising the latter's can be explained by the snobbery of those who would reject a masterpiece simply because it's a "children' book." These things interested the adult reader in me, but Alice is really for children of all ages. Thanks to the animated movie, I knew the characters and I felt like I was being reunited with old friends. I especially felt this during the Mad Tea Party, which I think must rank among the most brilliant comic scenes in English literature. However, Alice proves that books for children need not be dumbed down or sentimentalized. There are some dark undercurrents to the excellent humor (The Queen is obsessed with beheading, to use just the most famous example). And the beautiful concluding paragraph is a startling, Shakespearean meditation on childhood, age, and eventual womanhood. I admit that was a wonderful surprise. And then of course there's the drug use of the caterpillar and Carroll's suggested pedophiliac obsession with young girls. But people who approach Alice as psychedelic literature or a creepy Lolita story, I think, miss the point. However, these questions do add to the depth of the reading experience. Alice in Wonderland is indeed a rare kind of book: one which can entertain and enlighten both the child and the adult. Carroll's glittering novel hasn't been dimmed in the slightest by time, something that can't be said of the works of many of his contemporaries. Alice's adventures will doubtless fascinate us for untold years to come. Now if you'll excuse me, I have to go listen to White Rabbit.
