A richly detailed portrait of ABT under Baryshnikov as Artistic Director. This is the best ballet book I've been able to find to date: the writing is elegant and precise, the photographs are intimate and revealing, and the subject is not too far removed from my personal experiences as a ballet-goer. My favorite chapter was about ABT's grueling travel schedule. ABT is truly a national and international company. 2012's schedule looks like this: Texas, DC, Illinois, California, Virginia, New York, Taiwan, Korea, California again, New York again to finish out the year with The Nutcracker at BAM. In the 1986-87 season, it was rehearsals in New York, a film in Italy, California, more rehearsals in New York, Florida, Illinois, California again, back to New York for the Met season, then two weeks in DC. They really do ship everything - literal tons of massive sets, lighting, hundreds of costumes and thousands of pairs of toe shoes, a complete set of working files and office equipment for the admin staff, down to paperclips and scratch pads. Contemplating a trip to Russia, Baryshnikov said, "Their first reaction was to say it was quite impossible because the Bolshoi Theater is to be closed for renovations. Well, we patiently had to explain that we had not requested the Bolshoi Theater. Hell, we could dance in a sports stadium or Gorky Park. You know, we are American Ballet Theatre. We dance anywhere." The company in this book is one generation older than the one I know but there's a surprising amount of continuity, contrary to the popular belief that careers in dance are fleeting. Julie Kent, only a teenager in the corps when this book was written, is still dancing with ABT at age 43, the mother of two. She's married to Victor Barbee, then a principal dancer, now the Associate Artistic Director. The current artistic director is Kevin McKenzie, who was also a principal dancer in Baryshnikov's company. Ballerina Susan Jaffe is now a Ballet Master. All in all, the book delivers what it promises in the title, an inside look into my favorite company. For fans of American ballet and American Ballet Theatre, this book is a must-read. Show more
