This book was a total surprise. I know that other reviewers call it predictable, in that, once you find out the big reveal, that's it. The big reveal is not a misdirection. That said, wow! For a YA book Monster is dark, brutal, and bleak. I did not expect how far this book would push the boundaries in terms of violence, gore, and dark content. The end of chapter 13 actually left me open-mouthed with shock. Not lying. Lol! This is a book that will turn some folks off pretty quickly. Our female protagonist is not a pure-as-snow good girl. She is pretty ruthless, in fact, and that's before she is changed by what she experiences. There are also chapters told from an adult detective's POV, but he is one of the few likable characters in this book. Officer Nguyen was once a South Vietnamese soldier in the Vietnam War. Sometimes we get flashbacks to what he experienced in the war, and how the current events that are playing out in the book somehow eclipse even the cruelty of Vietnam, and there is a metaphor that links Nguyen's past and present circumstances. Regardless, some teenagers and tweens might not be interested in an adult perspective in their YA books, but I liked Nguyen a lot. Though his books don't always work for me, the thing I always admire about Christopher Pike is that he swings for the fences. He does not write safe, predictable, by-the-numbers books. He always tried to elevate his YA horror and go for a more unpredictable approach, as opposed to RL Stine's Fear Street books, which are usually by-the-numbers. Monster may not have been a total homerun for me. It drags just a bit, and I did not really connect with Angela-she is a hard heroine to like. That said, I will definitely be reading more Christopher Pike books. Thank you, Mr. Pike, for not talking down to your teenage audience and for giving them a YA horror novel with some teeth! Thank you also to the parents of yesteryear, who were not clutching their pearls at the thought of their kids reading something like this. They were just happy their kids were reading at all.
