The more identities a man has, the more they express the person they conceal. What can be said of this compulsively readable, brilliant novel – a thoughtful Christmas present - having finally read it after being coaxed by enthusiastic friends and having both watched the 1979 series with Alec Guinness and the 2011 film twice (a tendency to obsessing one of my many weaknesses )? Likely the first espionage novel since my childhood – only vaguely remembering being engrossed in a manual of spy techniques (creating invisible ink with lemon, attaching hairs to doorposts…) - Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy had the lustre of exploring uncharted territory - the foreknowledge of elements of the plot, the denouement and the demasqué of the mole in the British secret intelligence service – not in the least making the journey less suspenseful and enthralling. The pages are perfumed with the revolting stench of the rottenness at the core – of the secret service, and of the society it has to shield and secure. Steadily and slowly progressing through a delightfully complex maze of bewildering twists and turns, unpeeling layer upon layer of the moral murkiness through which George Smiley and his former colleagues and allies wade, the hunt for the Soviet double agent exposes multiple levels of chilling betrayal - personal, professional and of the country one is deemed to serve. (Illustration Matt Taylor on the cover of the 2018 edition) Look... we're getting to be old men, and we've spent our lives looking for the weaknesses in one another's systems. I can see through Eastern values just as you can see through our Western ones. Both of us, I am sure, have experienced ad nauseam the technical satisfactions of this wretched war. But now your own side is going to shoot you. Don't you think it's time to recognise that there is as little worth on your side as there is on mine? Spiced with his idiosyncratic espionage lexicon (the Circus, the Mothers, the Reptile Fund, the lamplighters, the scalphunters, the tradecraft), le Carré manages to create a cosmos that feels at once outlandish and deceptively similar with the processes and grey, meticulously bureaucratic organisation of ordinary working environments – with little glorious adventure and many hours doggedly plodding through files and archives, marinated in lots of alcohol and cigarette smoke (likely not uncommon in many a work culture in the seventies). He thought of Jim and Sam and Max and Connie and Jerry Westerby and personal loyalties all broken; in a separate category he thought of Ann and the hopeless dislocation of their talk on the Cornish cliffs; he wondered whether there was any love between human beings that did not rest upon some sort of self-delusion. Thematizing duty, integrity, loyalty, friendship and love, Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy also questions whether standards, values and ideals should be safeguarded by playing by the rules and respecting ethical boundaries, or not. With the different responses of Jim Prideaux and George Smiley to the betrayal – both equally and deeply affected by the betrayal – le Carré shows the reader the toughness of making the right choice. He thought about treason and wondered whether there was mindless treason in the same way, supposedly, as there was mindless violence.
