This book was first released in 1977, when the daughter of one of the richest men in the world inherited her multi-billion-dollar company, she also inherited her position at the top of the company and the top of the list of killer victims! This book tells the story of Elizabeth Roffe, the son of a Roffe and Sons company owner named Sam Roffe. From a young age, Elizabeth often received neglect from her father, because at that time, the fathers wanted boys to continue their company. This large company was founded by Samuel Roffe, Elizabeth's great-great-grandfather. This company is in 5 different countries, and it's all thanks to Samuel Roffe with one of his crazy ideas, namely by teaching his five children first in five different languages. People at that time thought, who was the stupidest person in the world who taught their five children words they did not understand each other? There is a big idea of ignorance and madness. Continuing into the present, the owners of the company have fallen into the hands of the children. Anna Roffe, married to Walther Gassner. Simonetta Roffe, the wife of Ivo Palazzi, a womanizer being blackmailed by his mistress, Donatella. Helene Roffe, the three time divorcee who marries Charles Martel. Martel invests in a vineyard by stealing his wife's jewelry, but the money drowns. Alec Nichols, whose mother was a Roffe, whose gambling-addicted and spendthrift wife Vivian, pushes him into increasing debts. And Sam Roffe's father from Elizabeth. This book not only tells the story of Romance and thrillers but also about how the company's rulers start from being crazy, some are being chased by debt, some are playing women, some are stressed, and there are loyal ones. This company is a family company; each share is only owned by family members and is not sold to the public. This is, of course, also the idea of Samuel Roffe; do not put a fox into a collection of chickens; one day, it will be hungry too. Until finally, one day, Sam Roffe was the most loyal and brilliant man, die falling off a cliff while skiing. Elizabeth, her daughter, was forced to replace her father's position on the board of directors. Assisted by Rhys William, his friend, and assistant Sam Roffe, Elizabeth learned about how the company should run, about the drugs they produce, and about how the father with his skiing skills could fall into a cliff. After Sam Roffe's death, another brother pressured Elizabeth to sign a contract about selling company shares because, so far, Sam Roffe had refused to sell company shares because he remembered Samuel Roffe's words not to sell them to outsiders. Elizabeth, who had the soul of his father, insisted on refusing to sell shares; of course, the brothers did not accept it, and one of them thought, oh God. She must die too. Will Elizabeth die? Will Rhys William be with Elizabeth? Who is the mastermind behind Sam Roffe's death? A good book from Sidney Sheldon.
