Imagine the tale of a young man on a quest to discover his paternity, to remove the tag of "bastard" attached to him at birth. Also, imagine a wickedly satirical take on English society, filled with gross exaggerations, and raunchy jokes on almost every page. Can they both be married? They can, if you have a pen with power enough. Apparently, Tom Sharpe does. Lockhart Flawse is the bastard son born to the daughter of the curmudgeonly old Mr. Flawse of "Flawse Hall situated on Flawse Fell close under Flawse Rigg some seventeen miles from the nearest town and on the bleakest expanse of moorland north of the Roman Wall". He is brought up by his maternal grandfather without a birth certificate and no other records to prove his identity; because Flawse senior would acknowledge his grandson only after his father has been discovered and "flogged within an inch of his life". So the boy grows up home-schooled, purposefully kept away from the facts of life, and tutored only in mathematics and hunting. Things would have continued like this - but as in any fairy tale, the prince falls in love with an equally naive princess, Jessica Sandicott of 12 Sandicott Crescent, East Purseley, Surrey, and marries her. Things become complicated when her widowed mother marries Lockhart's grandfather on the hope that the nonagenarian would pass into the great beyond and leave her his huge estate. However, the old man is too clever for her and ties up his entire estate that she cannot inherit it unless Lockhart fails to find his father before his grandfather dies. Lockhart is forced to move into Jessica's house and take up a position in her mother's firm of tax consultants. He proves himself totally inept for the job as he can't make head or tail of the legal robbery we call tax and tax avoidance. Sitting at home without any job, Lockhart decides to make money by selling the twelve houses of Sandicott Crescent that his wife owns. However, since according to the laws of the country, he could not get the tenants to vacate the houses neither raise the rent, he employs some unusual methods of eviction. It is here that the story moves into the region of total hilarious insanity: which is kept up to the very last page, the tempo never flagging, by the author. This is not a novel to analyse. You just have to get lost in it, and ride with the hero as he moves across the landscape, killing giants and dragons (in this case, policemen and tax collectors). And as he finally succeeds in his quest, you just have to put the book aside, with tears in your eyes... ... tears of laughter, that is.
