After finishing The Guns of August , which I thought was a real masterpiece, I was overcome with enthusiasm for Barbara Tuchman ( Tuch-mania? ) and decided to promptly go through her back catalog. Bible and Sword , her first published work, has an unusual (and ambitious focus). The book examines the relationship between England and the Holy Land over the past 2,000 years, and how that relationship led to the Balfour Declaration , a 1917 statement by Britain that it intended for Palestine (recently wrested from the dying clutches of the Ottoman Empire) to be a national home for the Jewish people. Tuchman’s thesis is basically that two driving influences shaped the relationship between Britain and Palestine, religion and economics (or the “Bible and Sword”), but she has a lot of ground to cover with a subject this vast, and the book has much to say on a variety of different topics. Religion It is easy to forget, or at least fail to appreciate, the overwhelming importance of the church in the daily life of Europeans for most of the Middle Ages. For centuries, the Bible was the only book that many people would read (if they could read at all), and they would read it over and over and over and over. Those who couldn’t read would go to great lengths to have it read to them. The end effect of all this was a mystical reverence for Palestine that (according to Tuchman) bored into the British psyche and led to otherwise irrational acts like long (and often deadly) pilgrimages, monotonous travel diaries becoming huge “bestsellers,” and the Crusades. Visitors to the Holy Land, who had read the Bible over and over (and over), often found that they knew the landmarks around Galilee better than, say, Wales. Ultimately, the importance of the Bible meant that Palestine was considered hallowed ground from an early point in English history. Literal interpreters of the Bible believed that resettling the Jews in the Holy Land would facilitate the Second Coming. But even statesmen who took a less-than literal view of the Bible would often approach the “Palestine question” not from a purely rational perspective, but through the prism of a religious upbringing. Without the Bible, the Balfour Declaration (and ultimately, Israel) might never have happened. Economics While religion continued to play a major role in the way the British approached their relationship with Palestine, as time went on economics took on more and more importance. The region was a major trading post throughout the Renaissance, and became a very hot commodity during the Age of Imperialism: the British wanted control to facilitate their connections with India, the Russians wanted access to the Mediterranean, and even Napoleon tried to take it (unsuccessfully). Ultimately, everyone decided the most important thing was that none of the other major European powers had it, and they all let the Turks control it until the Ottoman Empire’s inevitable collapse. Economic interests kept Britain entangled in Palestinian affairs even during periods (like the 18th century) when religious fervor waned, and gave England a major incentive to keep the region under their thumb after World War I, even as a Jewish protectorate instead of a full-on colony. Jewry The Jewish perspective throughout all of this wrangling over the centuries was equally fascinating. Unique throughout human history, the Jews somehow maintained a sense of national identity for millennia without an actual nation to call their own. By the time that a Jewish state became a distinct possibility, many Western Jews were actually strongly opposed to it, to the bewilderment of the gentile community. Many of these men and women had become successful in their adopted countries, and were reluctant to overthrow their lives and move to the Palestinian desert. Instead, they thought the best course was to try and rise above the discrimination and occasional abuses they suffered, attempt to assimilate within the Western nations as best they could, and trust that in time they would be fully accepted. It was the Jews of Eastern Europe and Russia, much more impoverished and victimized than their Western kin (at the time), that carried the banner of Zion and enthusiastically supported the dream of a Jewish state. The book also discusses the failed attempt to establish a Jewish state in East Africa, which was completely new to me and fascinating. Conclusion Tuchman is as good as they come at making history come alive, and even in her debut the writing is razor-sharp and thoroughly engaging. I also thought that the subject was incredibly interesting. The only complaints I had were that (1) this book covers a lot of territory in under 450 pages, meaning that it doesn’t feel quite as focused as Tuchman’s later works, and (2) the book kind of buries the lead by stopping the narrative in 1917. This second criticism is the big one – in hindsight, the Balfour Declaration was ultimately just a stepping-stone to the creation of a Jewish state. It was admittedly a major stepping stone, but the events of the next 30 years (the decline of imperialism, World War II, and particularly the Holocaust) were to play a much larger role. Stopping the narrative at 1917 feels frustratingly incomplete. But ultimately, this book was very interesting, extremely well-written, and I would recommend it to anyone interested in the formation of Israel as a nation or the historical impact of religion on the British state. 4 stars .
