I am really tempted to give this 1 star. So I'm gonna. Generally even with the BSC books I have had issues with on reread, I've felt like a 1-star rating is pretty harsh for a decades-old middle grade book. But YIKES, there is just so much wrong and nearly nothing right with this one. The only somewhat positive thing I could say is that I appreciate the story exploring the difficulties of blending families. My parents are not divorced so it's not my experience, but I had a lot of friends who went through it, and I'm sure it might be helpful for kids to see that reflected in the stories they read. Except it's done so badly here! For one thing, it continues to confound me how and why Mary Anne has morphed into such a bitch. In the early books, she's this sweet, kind, quiet girl. But lately she's just a snotty brat, and in this one, she's flat out nasty at times. She mocks Dawn for not having a date to the dance, she calls her fat, etc. Both she and Dawn act incredibly immaturely for 13-year-olds. I found it so bizarre that they insisted on sharing a room when Mary Anne and her dad moved in, even after they realized how cramped the room was with two beds, two desks, etc. Like, you're not 6, you're fucking 13, and you have to share a room? Living in the same house isn't enough? And then instead of using her words and just having a discussion with Mary Anne about the obvious issues, Dawn continues to act like a dumb child and decides to pretend to be a ghost in the stupid secret passage that connects to their room, so that she can scare Mary Anne into wanting her own room. WUT. Good lord. How are they 13 and yet they still believe in ghosts? And if you did, wouldn't you want to leave the whole house? What, is there a forcefield that means the ghost can't leave the passage, so it's only scary if you're in that room? And then Dawn later has the audacity to call for a family chat where she tells everyone they need to be more honest with each other. What a mendacious little twit. I just don't think either girl was modeling anything close to good behavior for the young readers at whom the series is aimed. Their parents aren't much better, to be honest. Richard's clean-freak shit is honestly pathological, and it's not like he didn't know Sharon was a slob in her home. Why would you marry someone you detested? Also, the whole food thing was so odd. Previously, Dawn and her mom have always been called "health nuts" and all that, and I think the word "vegetarian" had been used on occasion, but it always struck me that Dawn wasn't actually veggie, she just mostly avoided meat. But in this book, they're called vegetarian multiple times, and one of the conflicts is that Mary Anne and Richard are apparently cavemen and need MEAT MEAT MEAT at every meal…to the point of Richard cooking and serving bacon to Sharon every morning. Like, why such a dick, bro? I'm a vegetarian, and if someone kept serving me meat, I'd be like "What exactly is your fucking problem" before dumping the whole plate in the trash. Dawn mentions that it bugs her because Richard knows her mom "hates bacon" but like…being vegetarian doesn't mean you just don't like the taste of meat or something. It's not like someone giving you grapefruit juice but you've tried it and don't like it. Is Richard too stupid to understand what vegetarianism is? (This is possible, trust me, I've had people assume I could eat soup made with chicken broth. Like…bitch, where do you think the broth comes from?) Or is he being a passive aggressive asshole to try to force her to eat meat? Either way, it was handled so weirdly and badly. I was also bored with the Pike family subplot of everyone being sick or injured. Who cares? Those kids are all annoying as hell, maybe some injuries would be warranted. (I promise I don't actually want to cause injury to young kids. I'm not Republicans talking about a 10-year-old rape victim .) JFC I've rambled about this enough. Basically, this is definitely the worst of the series so far, and I don't think it's a good one for kids to read, and so I'm glad that probably 99% of people reading the books now are old fucks like me revisiting their childhood to try to remember what life was like when it didn't massively suck every day. 1 star to reality and 1 star to this book.
