This book is a social satire and was a joy to read. The way Mikes describes the Brits is really humorous. I had no idea that British people are fond of queuing and do it every chance they get. They talk about the weather all the time. That is their favorite topic. And so much more. Here's some excerpts from the book: I think England is the only country in the world where you have to leave your lights on even if you park in a brilliantly lit-up street. The advantage being that your battery gets exhausted, you cannot start up again and consequently the number of road accidents are greatly reduced. Safety first! The English have no soul; they have the understatement instead. If a continental youth wants to declare his love to a girl, he kneels down, tells her that she is the sweetest, the most charming and ravishing person in the world, that she has something in her, something peculiar and individual which only a few hundred thousand other women have and that he would be unable to live one more minute without her. Often, to give a little more emphasis to the statement, he shoots himself on the spot. This is a normal, week-day declaration of love in the more temperamental continental countries. In England the boy pats his adored one on the back and says softly: ‘I don’t object to you, you know.’ If he is quite mad with passion, he may add: ‘I rather fancy you, in fact.’ When I arrived in England I thought I knew English. After I’d been here an hour I realized that I did not understand one word. In the first week I picked up a tolerable working knowledge of the language and the next seven years convinced me gradually but thoroughly that I would never know it really well, let alone perfectly. The easiest way to give the impression of having a good accent or no foreign accent at all is to hold an unlit pipe in your mouth, to mutter between your teeth and finish all your sentences with the question: ‘isn’t it?’ My greatest difficulty in turning myself into a true Britisher was the Art of Shopping. In my silly and primitive Continental way, I believed that the aim of shopping was to buy things; to buy things, moreover, you needed or fancied. Today I know that (a) shopping is a social — as opposed to a commercial — activity and (b) its aim is to help the shopkeeper to get rid of all that junk. When I was young, I heard this joke in Budapest. A man goes to the rabbi and complains: ‘Rabbi, I am in despair. At my wits’ end. Life is unbearable. We just cannot stand it any longer. There are nine of us — my wife and myself, her parents and five children — and we all live in one room. What can I do?’ The rabbi tells him kindly: ‘Take the goat in.’ The man is incredulous: ‘In the room?’ ‘Yes, in the room. Do as you are told. Take the goat in and come back in a week’s time.’ A week later the man comes back, half dead: ‘Rabbi, we just cannot stand it. All of us are going crazy. The goat is filthy. Loud. Dirty. It stinks. It makes a mess.’ The rabbi told him: ‘Go home and let the goat out. And come back in a week’s time.’ A radiantly happy man visits the rabbi a week later. ‘Life is beautiful, rabbi. Lovely. We all enjoy every minute of life. No goat: only the nine of us.’ The same has happened to the British economy. Politically you must belong to the extreme left. You must, however, bear a few things in mind: 1. You must not care a damn about the welfare of the people in this country or abroad, because that would be ‘practical politics’ — and you should only be interested in the ideological side of matters. 2. Do not belong to any party, because that would be ‘regimentation.’ Whatever different parties achieve, it is much more interesting to criticize everyone than to belong to the herd. 3. Do not hesitate to scorn Soviet Russia as reactionary and imperialistic, the British Labour Party as a conglomeration of elderly Trade Union Blimps, the French Socialists as ‘confused people,’ the other Western Socialist parties as meek, bourgeois clubs, the American labour movements as being in the pay of big business; and call all republicans, communists, anarchists and nihilists ‘backward, reactionary crypto-fascists.’
