Not today, Chuckie! Who-eee! Confusion reigned in A Tale of Two Cities. Even with the Cliff Notes, it was hard to grasp what was going on. While some of it can be blamed on the archaic language and the classic American ignorance of history, Charles Dickens is at least partially responsible. Starting with the famous opening line – it is actually part of an insanely long run-on sentence! It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way – in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only. Central to the plot is a certain unnamed family with unnamed characters – some sisters, some brothers, a mother. Then, other characters are somehow related to this situation. Gee – that’s not confusing at all. Philip Pullman, one of my favorite authors, put it this way: “The aim must always be clarity. It’s tempting to feel that if a passage of writing is obscure, it must be very deep. […] Telling a story involves thinking of some interesting events, putting them in the best order to bring out the connections between them, and telling about them as clearly as we can; and if we get the last part right, we won’t be able to disguise any failure with the first—which is actually the most difficult, and the most important.” Daemon Voices A Tale of Two Cities is not clear—it is a sure fire way to induce sleep. Most frustratingly, Dickens is capable of better. In other stories, Dickens will provide additional clues to help remind readers of previous connections and who the characters are and their relationships, but in this novel, Dickens didn’t deliver, and he didn’t do enough to bridge all of the gaps in the story. And while some of the moments could have been spectacularly meaningful, these attempts stumbled and fell just short of the finish line, the full impact lost in the obscurity. Bring back David Copperfield ! ‘Till me meet again, Chuck! The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent): Softcover Text – $? It is the Penguin Classics version. It might be from the 40% off sale when Barnes and Nobles was closing. Electronic Text – Free through Libby Audiobook – Free through Libby Connect With Me! Blog Threads BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango
