I'll state it up front: this book was disappointing. I'm not arguing the whole "Hunter dies in the beginning" point. I actually thought that made for an interesting plot element. Tiernan had started setting something to this extent up in the previous book by mentioning Colm & that ending his job as a Seeker meant that Hunter would be unguarded. It's just that this book is very poor in quality when held up against the other Sweep books. It read more like a fanfiction you'd find on the internet than something by Tiernan herself. This book finds Morgan reeling over the death of her beloved Hunter in a freak ferry accident. Years pass and Morgan has managed to heal, marry one of her fellow witches of Belwicket, as well as give birth to her daughter Moira. The story picks back up six months after the death of her husband, with Moira going through many of the same issues Morgan herself went through as a new dark force threatens their peace & whispers of secrets held for sixteen years. As a standalone book, this wasn't bad. It's readable & entertaining for the most part. However, when I compare it to the rest of the Sweep books, it frankly sucks. The previous books were all of high quality (even when I didn't like them that much), so this one was incredibly disappointing to read. The #1 failure of the book is that it runs through too many plot elements too quickly. Another reviewer stated that the book has Moira going through all of Morgan's issues in the span of a few days, which is the truth. So much happens so quickly that it's really not all that believable & very little of the plot is fleshed out enough to make any of these elements have any life of their own. Moira is pretty much a watered down version of Morgan, with little personality of her own. She's not an unlikeable character by any means, but the book goes by so quickly that very little of Moira's personality shows through. She pines after a boy, she mopes over her father's death, she anquishes over the "is he or isn't he evil" signs. Other characters are trotted out, but are so thinly written that you pretty much ignore them for the most part. If this had been fleshed out more & put into 2-3 books rather than one book, the story would have been far better. It's just that the book is "this happens, oh now this happens & this happens". The ending is frankly ridiculous when you realize how quickly everyone supposedly moves & realizes things. I liked the book enough to give it 3 stars, since Tiernan's writing ability shines through & manages to polish this lackluster entry with as much gusto as she can. I know that the publishing company had an unreasonable amount of control over the series length & plotting, so it is them that I blame for this book. At times it felt like I could really sense Tiernan's frustration over having to cram 2-3 books (600-900 pages)worth of plot into 300 pages. If you are a Sweep fan, I recommend getting it & reading it just so you can finish the series. I just recommend getting this from the library instead & sticking to just volumes 1-14 for the basic story. This book just could have been so much better, which is where this story really disappoints- you know the potential it could have had.
