After penning such a stunning debut in The Process , Gysin set the bar pretty damn high for himself for his second novel. And while this novel is not as polished and doesn't feature the same level of beautiful prose that we saw in The Process , it is entertaining and more macabre a la M. Samuel Beckett. As Burroughs mentions in the introduction, Gysin has written a modern-day 'Book of the Dead' which takes place in the Bardo Hotel or Beat Hotel, where Burroughs completed The Naked Lunch (although much of it was written in Morocco), where Corso wrote Bomb (one of his most famous poems), where Harold Norse wrote The Beat Hotel about the very establishment itself and where Gysin, Sinclair Beiles, Burroughs and Corso collaborate on a cut-up project, which is THE cut-up manifesto called Minutes to Go . Other famous beat writers such as Allen Ginsberg, Peter Orlovksy and Jack Kerouac all spent some time here too. Therefore, in order to memorialize not only this now legendary location, of which Gysin himself was a long-standing resident, but also to put on a pedestal among other historical heritages and relics of our times such as The Parthenon of Greece, PG Six (the main protagonist and the narrator of sorts) is having the Beat Hotel (also known as the Bardo Hotel because the 'bardo' comes from the Tibetan Book of the Dead ) moved slowly piece by piece room by room to his museum in Malibu California (the MOM) as part of his growing collection of historical exhibits. Along the way, PG Six talks with doctors, Burroughs and Dr. Benway (from Naked Lunch) make several appearances, Thai transvestites, dykes on bikes, Sheereefa (who I think is based on the arab lover of Jane Bowles who was bisexual like her husband), various princesses, moguls and heiresses etc. It is such a weird crew of people but they all have on thing in common - they are all already dead and eithe awaiting or trying to avoid rebirth. Like in The Process , the narrative changes course quite regularly and some chapters are a complete 'about face' leaving you wonder where you actually are sometimes. I have only read the first chapter of Finnegans' Wake but it had the same dream-like character to the book about it except that it is much more readable than Joyce's final chef d'oeuvre. To be honest, I didn't especially enjoy the first couple of chapters but the second half of the book is written superbly and is very funny and witty in parts. It's a real shame that Gysin couldn't have lived a few more years. If he had been able to, he could have turned this into a REAL classic. I have heard that the entire manuscript (something like 900 pages) from which this 186-page novel has been culled, is in a library in Georgia of all places. Here's hoping that just like with the original manuscript of Kerouac's first novel, The Town and the City, this will also be published in its entirety one day. Recommended but not for everyone. Oh, I forgot to mention that this book is very sexually graphic in parts so not for the faint of heart or the incorrigible prudes.
