Pretty massive disappointment after the stellar The Long Run , and I can see why Moran ended the series here (although he recently penned another installment). The Last Dancer takes place several years after The Long Run , but this time, features Denice Castanaveras rather than her brother Trent 'the Uncatchable', although he does make a cameo appearance toward the end of the novel. Denice is now 23 and for various reasons, starts working as in aide to Douglass Ripper, a former US senator who is now running for the top Unification slot. The UN's Unification took place roughly 50 years ago and the USA was the last holdout, coming at last to a bloody defeat. Anti UN/Unification sentiments still roil in the US, and each July 4th sees at minimum a few riots. The "Johnny Rebs" constitute the primary 'resistance' movement in the US and the UN treats them as a terrorist organization. The Last Dancer is largely set in 2076, which happens to be the tricentennial anniversary of US independence and also the election year for the UN leader. So, we have lots of politics here for sure, especially as the 'Rebs', along with some other subversive groups, seem to be planning a major uprising on the 4th of July. Not only is this volume more than twice the size of previous installments (about 600 pages of small font text), it lacks the excellent pacing and excitement of The Long Run . Further, it is full of massive digressions. For example, we learn more about the 'Fire People' and their adventures on Earth 50,000 years ago. It seems some galactic race 'uplifted' humanity more than 50,000 years ago and basically made them their servants. Then, during the 'great departure', they left; one day they all went into temples and disappeared. For over 12,000 years, humans continued on the same path, but now are threatened by another alien race, the sleen. Sedon lead a rebellion against the status quo on World and after it was quashed, he, along with about 3000 members of his following, were exiled (somewhat ironically) back to Earth. So, for about 100 pages or so, Moran tells us of the trials and tribulations of the exiles, which in time, came to include their guardians. While this plays a key role in the story, way overblown. Moran, trapped in a 'stasis bubble' for more than 30,000 years, is found by some Alpine hiker and eventually released; he escapes and in 2076, four years later, assumes command of the upcoming US rebellion. One of the guards, known as Shields, has lived on Earth all this time and becomes embroiled in the plot via Denice (long story!). Moran gives us then a long build up to the ill fated rebellion, which in the end was not very exciting either. I almost stopped reading this, but I really liked Denice as a character and that was enough to pull me through. Still, what a let down after the first two installments. 2 meager stars.
