After completing the first book in a reading frenzy, I couldn’t wait to start the next one. And I didn’t. I picked up Tribulation Force without a moment’s hesitation. We pick up with Rayford, Buck, Chloe and Bruce Barnes who are all feeling the weight of their roles. They know what is coming. They know who the Antichrist is. They know they must set themselves against him. But how can they do that when said Antichrist has more wealth than all those left behind combined? He now owns all the media. He is the head of UN and has even gone so far as to rename it the Global Community. He takes things one step to far according to our Tribulation Saints when he proposes a One World Religion. But these Tribulation Saints know what they’re up against; what they stand to lose. So, what exactly are Tribulation Saints? Anyone who converts to Christianity after the Rapture, generally speaking. It is their duty to spread the word of Christ and convert as many people as they can. When the Antichrist asks Buck to head the new Global Community-owned news outlet, Buck is left with no choice but to agree. And who better to fly the Antichrist than good ol’ Rayford Steele. Is this a mere coincidence? Or is Hattie Durham, secretary and plaything to the Antichrist, behind all of this? Faced with the moral dilemma of working for the Antichrist, both men agree they have no other option. To give themselves up believers means announcing that their boss is the Antichrist. Neither can afford to take that risk just yet. Besides…it never hurts to have an inside guy on the job, right? How do relationships work in the world when you know there are less than 10 years left? Is it worth falling in love, getting married and having a child if you know you’ll be subjected to horrifying trials and tribulations? If you know you’ll literally be at war? This is yet another dilemma facing our little group of believers. This was another exciting and suspenseful read that I thoroughly enjoyed. Listen, these books aren’t winning any literary awards by any means. The writing isn’t anything awe-inspiring. The characters tend to be one-dimensional and unwavering. So, what is it that keeps drawing me in for more? The story is fun. I can’t help it. It’s an end-of-times like I’ve never encountered, and I’m intrigued enough to keep turning those pages. I want to see who lives, who dies, what happens, if God actually comes down to Earth for the world’s biggest battle of Good vs Evil. This was a nice follow up to the first one, though the fast-forwarding of the time line kind of annoyed me. All around, I quite enjoyed it and give it a solid 3 star rating.
