What’s art? And what’s its meaning? Why do human beings feel the urge to create? Where does the inspiration come from? Are we all artists? And what makes a good artist? Even though these questions cross my mind on a daily basis, I’m as far from finding an answer now as I ever have been. But then, as I start to think I’m never going to find those answers, I come across a novel like Crash and feel like I’m very close to finally finding the answers I’ve been longing for. Because, ladies and gentlemen, I believe Crash is a work of art. Fuelled by unconventionality, it crosses boundaries, shatters beliefs and breaks taboos. It does exactly what I believe a work of art is supposed to do; it challenges us to see beyond the often ordinary course of our lives. Here, in this hallucinatory novel, fiction and reality collide in such a powerful way that it becomes extremely hard for the reader to draw a line between one and the other. Obsession, addiction and paranoia become as imbedded in the readers’ mind as it does for the characters. The fact that this is a novel written from the point of view of a first person’s narrator named James Ballard definitely makes it harder not to believe that there isn’t at least some autobiographical elements in it. Also, I’ll have to say that there’s quite a bit of repetition (driving around, sex, drugs, more driving around, sex, drugs) but to me it all added to the obsessive and hallucinatory nature of this novel. Some of its imagery is going to stay with me for a long time. Perhaps for all my life. The writing is clear, precise and completely effective. So effective that all the sexual descriptions (and there’s a lot of them) are borderline pornography. Some would even claim that those scenes are plain, ordinary and cheap pornography and I’d be tempted to agree if it wasn’t for the fact that it all led to a final and very anticipated orgasmic thrill. To read Crash is like cruising the highways in a dream of violence and sexuality behind an unwashed windshield and I wouldn’t dare recommend it to anyone.
