Does everyone adore Ingrid Bergman? Donald Spoto certainly does. He knew her in life and was obviously smitten. This book is filled with descriptions of her generosity of spirit, her warmth, her charm and inner radiance. She may have been the most saintly actress ever to exist. In fact such was her extreme goodness that every criticism ever made of her is easily refuted: she cheated on her first husband (the marriage was dead anyway and besides her husband behaved worse than she did); she scandalised America by running off with Roberto Rossellini (actually America had built up – ahem – a far too saintly image of her, and beside, once again her first husband behaved worse than she did); she was not a brilliant mother (true, her view of motherhood was not typical and did tend to take second place to her career, but no mother has ever loved or cared for her children more); making a film in 1938 Germany and joining her indoctrinated Aunt in Nazi salutes showed a great lack of social and political awareness (okay, this is true but Ingrid was an artist primarily interested in her art and not worldly at all, besides she later made up for it by playing Golda Meir). [Interestingly that lack of social awareness is the same justification used for P.G. Wodehouse’s missteps during the war. I don’t doubt it, but do find it interesting that there are writers and actors so wrapped up and cosseted in their work that they fail to notice a little thing like Nazi-ism springing up around them.:] Now I never knew Ingrid Bergman and so maybe she was as wonderful as this biography suggests (certainly men seem to have fallen in love with her wherever she went). But sometimes this book reads like hagiography, and Bergman – for all her patience, grace and wonderful goodness – doesn’t quite feel like a real person in the story of her own life. It’s at its best when dealing with the fall out of the Rossellini scandal, but mostly just moves with a swift and professional lack of excitement through her films, her plays and her love affairs. It does however leave one with a desire to watch some Ingrid Bergman movies, and that can’t be a bad thing.
