(Second Read Update: so relevant, still, with kids in primary school, and I suppose it will be a profitable re-read in the adolescent years, too) A very good parenting book. Balanced, wise, practical, full of common sense, supportive, useful. I had read their main first book, Boundaries, before and found it extremely useful. This one did not fall short. It was what I needed to her and I will probably return to it again. *** Some of the notes I took along the way: *the purpose of Boundaries is to cultivate responsability, autonomy, self-control so that the child becomes able to internalize the real values and own his life. * Parent with the end in mind: you are building character, not fixing short-term problems. * The law of sowing and reaping teaches self-control. They learn they are in control of their life. You do not control the kids (their sowing) but you are in control of their reaping. Let them experience the problem, do not bail them out. Be the boundary, act the boundary (You are in control of the reaping), don’t just lecture (=nag=parent noise). When enforcing consequences: use empathy not “i told you so"s that create hatred/resentment in the child instead of focus on the lesson. The goal is not to control the child to force him to do what is good. The goal is to give the choice and through the stated consequences make it more painful to choose evil. * freedom = responsibilities = consequences = love * Children can handle the known logical consequences of their mistakes like a time out, loss of TV privileges, or loss of a trip to the mall, much better than they can handle relational consequences like anger, guild, shame, condemnation, or abandonment, which distance / deform a child. * Character = Grace (support, resources, love, forgiveness, compassion) + truth (structure of life, how life works) over time * Mental health: adapt to reality; mental illness: demanding that reality adapts to them * The child is responsible for himself. He is responsible to others. He is to care about his family and friends and go out of his way to help them. But responsibility dictates that he refrain from protecting them from the consequences of their own actions. * Functional dependancy (resistance to doing the tasks/jobs which are his responsibility. Do not enable it!) vs Relational dependancy (our need for connectedness which God and others. Good: unburden one to each other, vulnerability) * Way to avoid bad consequences by gaining control of their action instead of avoiding getting caught through deception etc. Honesty (focuses on self-restraint) vs dishonesty (grows character pathology). Make honesty the norm of the house. Strong consequences for deception (stronger than for disobedience) high rewards for honesty (higher than for obedience). He must understand that the darkness of dishonesty is way more painful that the light of honesty * Make failure the child’s friend. Avoiding perfectionism: be honest about your failings, do not be defensive, do not give the impression you love their perfect performing parts more than their mediocre stumbling parts *You child needs to learn to grieve his lost perfection, accept his failures, learn from them, and grow... You either deny your mistakes and repeat you life over and over again, or you admit them and work through them * Fruit of the spirit is SELF-control not OTHER-control * Key: do not need anything from your child can give (respect, appreciation, support, understanding). Require standards not because you need them but because your child needs them. Get your needs met by another adult and let your child be free to be themselves * Be a source of reality *hurt vs harm in discipline * ! Internalisation (internal parent: conscience voice) can be good news (internal sense of love and limits that functions when you are not around) or bad (if you have been overcritical / harsh - the child becomes depressed or guilty or they will react toward the cruel parent within by acting our the harshness, being mean/sadistic with others =>conscience gone array, the very structure that should bring us closer to God drives us away from Him, from love, from responsibility) * Children do not respond well to boundaries if they are embittered / exasperated by their parents: do you do any of the following: exercise too much control over their lives so that they have no power/choice in their lives, disciplining with anger&guilt, instead of empathy and consequences, not meeting their needs for love, attention and time, not affirming their successes but only commenting on their failures, being too perfectionistic about their performance instead of being pleased with their effort and their general direction in which they are going * Kids are reactive by nature (behaviour determined by external influences not internal values or thoughts; they live in constant protest to authority/frustration to having to delay gratification) - maturity - proactivity *rewards: 2 situations: for learning new skills; for exceptional performance. NOT for what is normally required at their age-group, not for a skill that is already learned and is expected to be practiced (ex. taking out the trash when they are big enough) - for this category you don’t receive rewards but you pay if you don’t perform. - this avoids entitlement *honesty the best policy: The problems of indirect communication, gossip, triangulation . One of the most important principles in relationship is direct communication and full disclosure of whatever is going on in the relationship. *Our relationship is bigger than this conflict, feeling or experience. Our connection and affection will remain after this conflict is past *"I want to know what you are feeling, but I want to hear you tell me instead of show me." *Don’t sweat the small stuff. Important: honesty, responsibility, caring, morality Most important thing: your own issues: not what you do but who you are with the child: how you react, avoid, cajole (persuade/coax/flatter), ignore him *Adult have more freedom because they are more responsible. Teach this to your child (hold freedom as an incentive): responsibility bring freedom, growing up has its rewards *2 most important character attributes your child needs in order to mature: Attachment: Is your child able to connect emotionally to you? Does she see you as someone who cares for her? Honesty: Does your child tell the truth?
