Anytime that I start a book, I look to see if the author has a good concept and grip on the three basic parts of a story: Plot, characters and settings. I have now come to the conclusion that there is a fourth part of a good novel; an excellent novel, and that would be continuity. So overall, if I were to review all of the books that I have read so far, how many of them would nail it on all four parts of a book? I know one thing, Jan Burke's book, "Bones," surely did not. Let's look at each part more closely. Plot - Very disorganized and climaxed way too early in the book. The author then tries to tie in somewhat of a second plot to story, but fails miserably at it. If Jan Burke would of taken what she did at the end of the story and intertwine it with the original plot of the story, it would of worked better. Characters - Very much under developed and confusing. I'm done with the book, but still am wondering about the two main characters. What was Irene Kelly's main objective in the book? Did Nicholas "Nicky" Parrish achieve what he needed to do? No, even the switching between secondary characters left me stymied and puzzled. Setting - I couldn't tell from one scene to another; were they still in the forest or were they at a building. Burke was clear enough with descriptive dialogue and scenery to keep me enticed. And sometimes, it didn't help with trying to figure out the characters. Continuity - I felt that Jan Burke had a hard time; struggled with going back to a scene and pick up from where she had left off. Without the proper continuity, the story didn't flow properly and had me lost several times. Once an author has hit every part of what makes an excellent story, the reader is drawn in, enticed and wrapped up in with the plot. The reader tries to guess the characters next moves, not trying to decipher what the author is trying to convey to the reader. Jan Burke's "Bones" just didn't even tap that nail in. She missed the mark so bad, that the I couldn't wait to get the book done. I must admit though, before I started to write this review, I went on line to see what other readers/reviewers had said about this book. And I had to agree with the majority of them: Jan Burke just didn't do it with this book. A very small amount felt that the book was good; that it being in a series of books, that it could even be a stand alone book. I have to disagree with them. If I knew that this book was one in a series, I might of considered picking up one or two books prior to this one to read, but to be considered as a stand alone, is not right. Sorry readers and Jan Burke. I just cannot recommend this book at all.
