Title : Miss Spider's ABC Author : David Kirk Genre : Children's literachure, ABC Theme(s) : ABC, insects Opening line/sentence : “A. Ants await.” Brief Book Summary : The book goes through each letter of the alphabet. Corresponding each letter with a bug or flower, who awaits Miss. Spider’s arrival for a surprise birthday party. Professional Recommendation/Review #1 : Cheryl Preston (Children’s Literature) Miss Spider's "buggy" friends are preparing for her surprise birthday party, and each page features an uppercase letter with an accompanying alliteration: "ants await...fireflies fandango...yellow jackets yield...." Children will be fascinated by the magical paintings and enjoy the playful text. This is a great story time book that can be used as an introduction to beginning letter sounds. Another winner in the Miss Spider series of exquisitely illustrated picture books. Professional Recommendation/Review #2 : Pat Ferguson (The Lorgnette - Heart of Texas Reviews (Vol. 13, No. 1) David Kirk uses concise, alliterative text and vibrant illustrations in this alphabet board book to introduce the reader to a wide variety of creatures from ants to a zebra butterfly, who are preparing for Miss Spider's surprise birthday party. Young nature lovers will delight in the bright, colorful pictures and playful tone of the book. In addition to the obvious use of reinforcing the alphabet, this book also fits well in a life-science unit. Throughout this well-written book, phrases such as "fireflies fandango" and "moths mingle" provide excellent opportunities to build vocabulary and strengthen language development. The sturdy design combined with short text and bold illustrations make this book appealing as a read-aloud for toddlers. However, it is sophisticated enough to avoid appearing babyish to primary-age children. Response to Two Professional Reviews : Both reviews highlight the inviting illustrations to beginning readers. Both reviews also stress Miss. Spider’s ABC’s as a great introduction to those learning letter recognition and sounds, which I believe as well. I enjoyed how Ferguson’s review went on to connect the book to a life science lesson due to the books incorporation of insects, I think this is a great connection. Evaluation of Literary Elements : This book been designed for young readers to become familiar with letter recognitions and sounds. The illustrations will keep readers interested by recognizing and learner new insects. The plot of the story ensures engagement – “what are the insects getting ready for? Maybe a party, but for who?” Consideration of Instructional Application : Not only does this book act as an introduction for letters for pre-school/kindergarten, but can also be used for an introduction to life science. Learners can draw an insect they commonly see outside. Discussions about where they live and what they eat can become apart of the lesson as well. The learners can develop writing skills by writing the first letter of the insect the chose to draw, which can be posted in the classroom.
