The third volume in the collection of Christie's Poirot series, a collection of short stories, better than most mystery collections, I would have to assume, having been written by the best-selling author of all time. Still, I had a hard time getting into them, in part because they are stories, and sort of for me pale in comparison to the novels from her I have read. My biggest problem (yes, this continues for me as a problem) is the clueless sidekick Hastings she devised in part out of her mimicking Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's Holmes and Watson (and it's so great to see Lucy Liu's much smarter Watson in the tv series Elementary! Recommend! But really, almost any Watson is better than Hastings). Being mired in Doyle fan-fiction-dom limits all these early volumes to some extent. Hastings is a constant idiot and Poirot is arrogant to the point of being mean with his "friend" that he has nothing in common with. Feels like a device. IS a device. And one she knows later doesn't quite work. One way to appreciate these essentially tightly written stories is that the still young Christie is developing her chops as a young mystery writer, sharpening her little narrative hooks, polishing this great dandy Poirot as a character, with his fussiness and ego and order and logic and insistence on the importance of the use of "grey cells" in the solving of crime. When Poirot speaks, everything comes alive, she has it down, he is pretty irresistible. The best is yet to come in after volumes. I'll let you know when I get there. But make no mistake: this still stands as very good mystery writing, even in her early attempts, and if you like your mysteries quick and clean, check it out. Some people prefer short stories to novels, and the problem with some of the early Christie novels is that they take a while to develop. They can meander. But here's a kind of template or series of templates she is developing even in these stories you might begin to see (and follow, if you wanted to try writing mysteries). You can probably read much of it online now. I especially liked "The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan" and "The Disappearance of Mr Davenheim" where Poirot, ill, solves the case without leaving his apartment.
