Can You Forgive Her? The author addresses us directly before we even begin reading. Forgive whom and for what? There is an unspoken suggestion in the question that you ought to forgive her. I've always been vaguely intrigued by the title of this novel. Why did I wait so long to read it? It's delightful, a sort of cross between Dickens and Jane Austen. There's an Alice Munro story called "Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage". It could be the title of this book too. Or a plot outline. The main characters, three woman and six men, do not add up - there will be some hateship from those left standing before this musical chairs of a courtship is resolved. This book is written in the third person, but the writer comes in every now and then and has a remark for us, I am not going to describe the Vavasors' Swiss tour. It would not be fair on my readers. "Six Weeks in the Bernese Oberland, by party of three," would have but very small chance of success in the literary world at present, and I should consider myself to be dishonest if I attempt to palm off such matter on the public in the pages of a novel. It is true that I have just returned from Switzerland, and should find such a course of writing very convenient. But I dismiss the temptation, strong as it is. Retro age, Satanas. Can you Forgive Her? is the first of the six novels in "the Palliser cycle". The BBC made it into a mini series. I've watched several episodes and, like most BBC dramas, it's very good - but not nearly as good as the book. http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=... My pretty dress is binding! No, I do NOT hunt vampires. Yoga adjustments are so difficult in these clothes! But darling, I tell you Bob Ross did not paint those mountains! Can You Forgive Her? was first published in monthly installments in 1864-1865 and then in book form in two volumes. These were illustrated by Phiz and another lesser known artist, E. Taylor. Here are a few of the illustrations: I'm as round as your hat and as square as your elbow I am Baker you must put Dandy in the bar The most self-willed young woman I ever met in my life Burgo Fitzgerald Friendships will not come by ordering said Lady Glencora Alice Oh George, she said, you won't do that Trollope's writing method really bugged his contemporaries. He revealed in his autobiography that he wrote 1000 words an hour, on a strict schedule. What a money grubber, thought Henry James. Can you forgive him?
