For the most part I really enjoyed reading The Coffee Trader by David Liss. The main protagonist is Miguel, a Portuguese Jew, living in Amsterdam, and working as a broker in the emerging stock exchange. Miguel and a Dutch woman, Geertruid, scheme to corner the coffee market. Hampering there efforts are Solomon Parido, a wealthy member of the Jewish community, who harbors a grudge against Miguel, and Joachim Waagenaar, a Dutchman who lost everything in a financial deal Miguel brokered for him. Joachim holds Miguel responsible for his financial losses and harasses Miguel throughout most of the novel. One of the interesting things about the story is as Miguel schemes and plots to corner the market in coffee trading, he sees schemes and plots being hatched against him, which causes him to misinterpret the actions of others. Another interesting things about the novel is that most of the characters are either manipulating someone, or being manipulated in turn. This contrasts nicely with all the manipulation going on at the Exchange. I found the references to the Ma'amad, the Jewish self-governing body controlling all aspects of community life, interesting. Many of the Ma’amad’s rules stem from residual fear of the Inquisition, and the expulsions from other European countries. Amsterdam has only recently become a safe place for Jews to live and the Ma’amad fears having too much contact with the Dutch. So, even though they are free to practice their religion in Amsterdam, the Ma’amad has forbidden the Jewish community from having close contact with the Dutch/gentile community. Keeping this in mind, I found the number of Jews with Dutch servants a bit puzzling. Miguel spends a great deal of time worry that another Jew will seem him talking to his Dutch associates, yet he sleeps with the Dutch maid in his brother’s house. Liss never makes it clear if the Ma’amad has forbidden all contact with gentiles (which would then make the Dutch servants against the rules) or if the injunction is specifically referring to brokering, or doing business with them. I was a little unhappy with the way the book portrayed women. There are only 3 important women in the novel. Hannah, Miguel’s sister-in-law, while an interesting character, spends most of the novel victimized by her maid and ignored by her husband (she finally stand up for herself at the end of the novel but by then I had come to find her passivity annoying). Geertruid, Miguel’s business partner, is supposed to be “mysteries” but I guessed fairly quickly what the big mystery was (or at least I’d figured out where she got her money for the coffee trade rather quickly). Hannah’s maid, a rather nasty piece of work, lacks any real motive. Time and again I asked myself why is she behaving that way? Only Liss never offers an explanation, so the reader is forced to assume her behavior stems from jealousy or spite. At the end of the novel Geertruid’s actions are not at all believable; she is way to forgiving. These women seem to lack (or have really weak) motivations. I realize that in a novel set in the 1650s you won’t find any “modern” women, but Liss could have done a better job of making the ones he had more three dimensional. Geertruid’s only motivation seems to be money, Hannah has no motivation at all (she is acted upon and then reacts), and the maid is cruel, end of story. But this is really a small complaint since most of the book concerns Miguel and his attempts to get rich on the Exchange. All together this was a pretty good book and I recommend it to anyone interested in 17th Century history.
