1. Diamond as big as the Ritz: I'm not sure what I'm supposed to feel here. Is this supposed to be commentary on the fact that rich people live in their own universe that does not often represent reality? Or a commentary on how American economics are going to crash and burn? OK, but I would have preferred a protagonist I can...not hate. 2. Bernice bobs her hair: I watched an adaptation of this in high school. It was very mean spirited, and so true to the source material. 3. Ice palace: STAY HOME! AVOID SNOW! 4. May day: I had to go back because I couldn't remember anything. I still don't, except for a general sense of depression. 5. Winter dreams: Right. Women fade. Men mature, but women fade. Not sure if the point of the story is to subvert what its statement, because the main guy is one sad sack. 6. "The sensible things:" Look, I don't know. Something about the fleeting sense of true love? 7. Absolution: Childhood + religious guilt = NO. But you gotta get them while they're young. 8. Rich boy: Another story about a financially secure but romantically unfulfilled sad sack. 9. Baby party: In retrospect I liked this story. Complex relationships and power-dynamics. Family obligations. And people getting very protective over their kids. Also, ass kicking. Just something about the immediacy of everyone's anger really touched a nerve: how a situation can escalate from seemingly nothing to an explosion. 10. Magnetism: More marital drama. Maybe you need to be married to truly appreciate the emotions? Or maybe you need to be a celebrity. 11. Last of the belles: The past is GOOOOOOONNNNEEEEEE!!! 12. Rough crossing: Everything comes bubbling up as this couple is on a cruise boat in the middle of a storm. Afterwards, both look back at what happened as something done by other people. Not sure if they just both had a moment of insanity, or if the circumstances brought out their real feelings. 13. Bridal party: Or why we have ceremonies: they can help us let go and move on. Or you can end up like that dude on Love Actually who was obsessed with his best friend's wife. Thankfully that did not happen here. 14. Two wrongs: She finally dumps him. Not without emotional turmoil, but she lets go, and it's better for her. 15. Scandal detectives: Kids falling in love and plotting to beat up some people and being kids, I guess. 16. Freshest boy: School can be tough? I feel you, brother. Though I've never been the least popular kid in school. 17. Captured shadow: I know the excitement of being in a play, so I felt this story. I wish we saw more of the rehearsals, but ultimately the story was pretty satisfying. 18. A woman with a past: it is fucked up that a woman can have a "past" because she went out with a lot of guys. The story is trying to de-contract that idea, but it only manages to do so via the girl being validated by a man. She does play a part by refusing to hide herself and saying to the world: I did nothing wrong! But it's the attention of the popular boy which gives her...I don't know...respectability? At the same time I'd like to think that some female camaraderie was involved, and that the guy's girlfriend, who was always nice to the protagonist, had something to do with his plan to help. And besides, it is about a young woman maturing and realizing what she wants in a romantic partner and what she wants from herself. 19. Babylon revisited: gripping, tense, and very bleak, this story held me from beginning to end. Yes, he deserves all the mistrust and hurdles and guilt, but you as a reader feel sympathetic towards him. You want him to succeed, because you believe in second chances and he seems to have his life back on track. The characters are all relatable. I got attached to them within the short time we spent together. 20. Crazy Sunday: We're back to melodrama involving characters I couldn't relate to if I tried. Joel is "in love" with Stella, even though it seems like he doesn't view her as human. 21. Family in the wind: family quarrels aside, I wish they had established the relationship between Helen and the Dr. better...or like, at all. Because now his desire to randomly adopt her seems a little creepy. 22. An alcoholic case: what it says on the tin. 23. Long way out: I don't know anything about treating trauma, but it seemed like these doctors didn't even try, all in the name of tranquility. On the other hand, we don't know if having to face the truth would have helped, or if it would have broken her completely. 24. Financing Finnegan: seriously though, I want to read that story about his adventures in the arctic, but I get a feeling it'll be terribly pretentious. 25. Pat Hobby himself/A patriotic short/Two old timers: this one built atmosphere and character quickly, and then told the story of someone who has been big once. He isn't a failure, but he has become a "has-been." And he remembers the past fondly, and sometimes it breaks his heart. But at the end he moves forward, though not on. I don't know why this counts as three separate stories. Each story is so short, and they are no separated by blank pages. 26. Three hours between planes: identities are mistaken, and memories of childhood are relived. A sort of romance is sort of, but not really, attempted to rekindle? The past, however, cannot be recaptured. 27. The Lost Decade: The guy was drunk for 10 years -- so was America? Or at least a certain portion of the population. Except he was drunk through the 30s. I don't know. I AM DONE!!! NEVER AGAIN!!! Ok, to be fair, I liked a few of the stories, but only "Babylon Revisited" and "Pat Hobby Himself" had a combination of an interesting story and a character I actually didn't want to burn in a fire. "Captured Shadow" captured the insanity of preparing a play: the behind the scenes of amateur theater. A few others were not detestable, but on the whole those characters just don't speak to me. I find their experience pitiful at best.
