Apr 5, 9am ~~ Review asap. 1045am ~~ This is a touching memoir of an unusual (for the era) family situation. Murray was raised by his mother Natalia, her mother Ester, and Natalia's loving friend Janet. He spent his earliest years in Italy with no real memories of his father, who lived in New York. He spent a lot of time in boarding schools and summer camps, and had a sometimes explosive but loving relationship with his mum. But he also understood about Natalia's life choices. He seemed to be a very open-minded young man from the beginning, and I was impressed with his non-judgmental approach. He admits that he was mostly concerned with his own sphere in his younger days, but that he was not as unknowing as people might have thought at the time. He was an example of understanding and tolerance that many people today could learn from. "I had never envisioned them actually making love, but I knew they wanted to be together, that Janet had joined the family. That was all that mattered to me." It was a little dizzying trying to keep up with the travels everyone made here. Janet was based in France for her job with The New Yorker magazine, Natalia was in New York and Rome. But they maintained their relationship until Janet's death in 1978. Woven into the story of their love is the story of Murray's development in life. He spent some awkward time with his father now and then, wanted to be an opera singer, lived in Rome, lived in New York, got a job writing for Time magazine, visited race tracks and finally got a job at The New Yorker where he spent many years as a contributor. I first 'met' him in a book he wrote about horse racing and was intrigued enough to order two others, this one and Fortissimo, which I read a couple of weeks ago. He has also written mystery novels, but that is not my genre so this will be my last Murray book, most likely. He was open and yet tender with his memories and the material he obtained from the boxes of letters that Natalia said were only to be opened after her death. The dedication of this book is for Murray's three children, "who wanted to know". I think it was a lovely gift to share with them and with all of us.
