“The chief character in this narrative is the Caribbean Sea, one of the world’s most alluring bodies of water, a rare gem among the oceans, defined by the islands that form a chain of lovely jewels to the north and east. Although bounded on the south and west by continental land masses, it is the islands that give the Caribbean its unique charm.” Carribean by James Michener is a beautiful book capturing the magic of the Caribbean Sea and all of the countries that are part of that beautiful chain of islands and land masses. While traveling I always love reading books pertaining to the history of the area. And this was truly a wonderful find for me when perusing my library, I found this classic by James Michener. So while reading this beautiful book, we are sailing the Pacific Ocean from California to Baja, Mexico and through the Caribbean along the Mexican continent and on to Central America to the Panama Canal. And then to Colombia and the Yucatán Peninsula before sailing up the Atlantic Coast to Florida. And this book explores the remarkable history of this area from the pre-Colombian period of the native Arawak tribes to modern times. Written in sixteen chapters, some loosely connected, we witness the history of this region from many different perspectives. It was magical. It was also a clash of many cultures as we witness the stories of the native Caribbean, Spanish, French, British and North American. Opening the book was the chapter: A Hedge of Croton highlighting the invasion of the Caribs in the Arawak homelands followed by the death of the Mayan culture and the adventures of Christopher Columbus carrying the weight of European ambition and brutality in Hispaniola. But some of my favorite chapters were the adventures of Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins and Henry Morgan dominating the narrative as they wage a violent competition for control of this rich territory. At the heart of the narrative of the Carribean is the tragic and harrowing story of slavery and rebellion that still makes up much of the fabric of the region today. The slave uprising in Haiti is a significant chapter as it vividly portrays human resilience in the midst of chaos and bloodshed. It was only fitting that the book concluded with a chapter on the cultural identify of Cuba striving to overcome the devastating effects and long lasting scars of Colonialism. But in the final chapter, The Golden Era, a character is reunited with previous characters to end this epic tale of the Caribbean Sea. This was a well researched and powerful book that captures the essence of this glittering string of islands in all of its vast scope and wonder. “Traveler, you who sail into the Caribbean in silvered yacht or gilded cruise ship, pause as you enter these waters to remember that deep below rest three men of honor who helped determine the history of this onetime Spanish Lake; Sir John Hawkins, builder of the English Navy; Sir Francis Drake, conquerer of all known seas; and Admiral Ledesma, stubborn enhancer of his king’s prerogatives and the interests of his own strong family.”
