Little Red Riding Hood, written by Lari Don, is a famous old favorite. Little Red Riding Hood was on her way to her granny’s house with a basket full of cakes and bottles of lemonade. On her way, she encountered the wolf who recommends she takes an offering other than sweet treats so it lasts longer. Wolf’s tactic makes her decide to pick flowers, which gives him enough time to swallow granny. Upon her arrival at grandma’s house, the wolf swallows Little Red Riding Hood too. Little Red Riding Hood and her granny were saved by a hunter in the woods who was tracking animals by their snoring sounds. After retrieving the protagonists, the hunter filled the wolf’s empty belly with stones to trick him into thinking he was still full after a meal. However, when the wolf left to go back into the woods, he would encounter trouble and never return. This fairytale is recommended for students ages five to eight. I found it on the course instructor’s Goodreads account and read it as an audiobook on Epic! I enjoyed this format because it made the reading experience exciting and I enjoyed the narrator's change in the characters’ voices. When looking at the illustrations, the pages in the book have finely detailed paintings to express the story. This is a strength. The illustrator also uses a double-page spread and stretches a single picture across two pages. According to Children’s Books in Children’s Hands, this “can signal a pause- a moment to ponder the events” (p. 69). Another strength of the book is the characterization of the wolf. The wolf is considered a “rival” in this story and he is clearly identified as being mysterious and clever (p. 193). In my opinion, a weakness of the book is the ending because it could be considered ghastly for the young audience. In the classroom, this book could be used for sequencing and retelling. Students could make puppets and create a scene to practice acting out the traditional literature to build early literacy skills. Another activity could be for students to discuss the theme, or life lesson, Little Red Riding Hood learned. There is an explicit theme at the end of the book that says, “And Little Red Riding Hood never turned round to talk to strangers again.” This explicit theme is helpful for younger readers.
