In my continuing project to read all of the Edgar Best Novel winners, I've reached 1975, when PETER'S PENCE by Jon Cleary won the award. (Published 1974.) This book is difficult to summarize without spoilers. Suffice it to say that in involves the Vatican, the IRA, the Nuremberg trials, decaying Italian aristocracy, and the relationships between fathers and sons. Cleary wove all these elements, and more, into a thriller which, while it started slowly, built up momentum and delivered several breath-holding moments before the climax and resolution. I looked at the other titles nominated for that year, and the only one I was familiar with was Andrew Garve's THE LESTER AFFAIR. Since I'm a great admirer of Garve's books, I think I probably would have voted for him (had I been eligible), but my memory isn't good enough to say whether that was one of his best. In any case, from a vantage point of thirty-plus years later, a book in which many major premises were almost unbelievable visions of the future (a German Pope! Vatican treasures going on a world tour!), but which have since become commonplace, can look a bit old-fashioned. The reader does need to get into the Wayback Machine and return to a time when we weren't so jaded. (Not to mention a time with no cellphones!) This was a caper novel with a difference, and the difference was in the inner workings of the minds of the main characters. The characters of McBride and Pope Martin both have very scrupulous consciences and we see a lot of their inner struggles going on. Cleary also delves into the other characters, from the impoverished Italian aristocrat to the Aussie tunneler with a criminal past, so that each of them is believable and engaging, or at least we can see where they're coming from. I can't speak to the accuracy of Cleary's depiction of Rome and the Vatican, never having been there, but it certainly seemed real, with enough details to transport the reader without reading like a guidebook. I would have no doubt that this was certainly one of the best books of the year. Show more
