Many of these settings, characters, and themes were upgraded and used in "I Was A Teenage Fairy". I would recommend this to people who wanted an introduction to FLB's work. It all shows clearly how poetically she can write, and that her target audience are disaffected, misfit teens who are navigating their own sexuality and gender, and being abused by one or more adults. "Dragons in Manhattan" and "Tweetie Sweet Pea" are exceptions to this. (Seriously, as an adult I realize -nearly all I read at twelve- were stories about teens or kids with backdrops of abuse.) And fuck, it is all -outdated- thirty years later. This book had a lasting impact on me as a teen. As an adult, I opened up the e-book and realized I wouldn't have the same sense of fascination again. "Tweetie Sweet Pea" I never understood what this story was about or what it was supposed to mean, when I read this book often as a tween. As an adult, I still don't get it, still find it unsettling, and can't figure out why. "Blue" This story, I remembered clearly as an adult. I finally understood what was "wrong" with La's mom, and what she figured out how to do. As a kid, all I grasped was that she died by slitting her wrists in the bathtub because she was sad. Allow me to wave hello to early incarnations of Mab and Barbie from "I Was a Teenage Fairy." And--when La was describing the music box, the way the descriptive paragraph was set up, I was hoping to imagine "Masquerade" from "Phantom of the Opera" playing in my mind. My brain instead supplied me with the first three piano notes of "Something To Sing About" from BTVS, and the first three sung notes: "Life's a show." I was so surprised by my mind that I cackled. I didn't mean to, and hit the wrong button in the e-book, completely losing my place. It felt like a punishment, as it took me a bit to find my original place. The story's still really freakin' sad. "Dragons in Manhattan" Ooh, this story was my favorite out of the whole collection when I was a tween. As an adult: so many things in here, if shown realistically, would cause the plot to fall apart like a house of cards. Especially viewed through a 2019 lens--(shakes head) This--just wouldn't happen. The treatment of transgender people and sex reassignment surgery--so, so outdated. It doesn't take just one surgery to go full MTF. It takes between eight and fourteen. Facial feminisation is a detailed process. The story still had beautiful lyricism to it, though. "Girl Goddess #9" I was always both swept away and creeped out by this as a tween. As an adult, I was...disillusioned. It's two girls meeting their celebrity crush and his girlfriend, and discovering their own sexualities. It seemed so grand to me as a teen. "Rave" I don't remember reading this at all as a teen. Sad and beautiful. "The Canyon" I wasn't affected by this, damn it. Ugh. At twelve, I was entranced. Now, I understand it more clearly. I had hoped I would still be fascinated. "Pixie and Pony" I was a few pages into this story before I remembered it. More specifically, how it broke my heart over and over for a few years. It didn't break my heart this time, but I needed to set the book aside for a bit. "Winnie and Cubby" I didn't remember this one at first. I remembered it vaguely and then definitely parts of it. In re Cubby: Allow me to wave hi to the early incarnation of Todd from "I was A Teenage Fairy", or possibly Matt too. Cubby's dad is a horrible person. Otherwise, the emotions this story meant to evoke weren't there for me. I really like how FLB wrote it, though. "Orpheus" I read the story, but felt like I was missing something.
