This is a collection of Herman Melville’s more popular short stories, headlined by Billy Budd, a posthumously-released sea-faring novella. Most were good reads, though occasionally involve slogging through and retracing your steps along Melville’s frequent paragraph-long sentences and clauses, which can be challenging at times. Billy Budd: an impressionable and well-liked sailor commits manslaughter when defending himself from another sailor accusing him of conspiring mutiny. The even-keeled captain (see what I did there?) acts as judge though weighs on the jury in the dispensation of justice on the high seas. Took a while to get this going, but when it did, it was a good read and with a shocking ending. The Piazza: solitude and longing in the mountains. A dreamy, well-written short story. Conflicting, as I felt sadness for the character’s loneliness, but also appreciative of the beauty and tranquility of the country. Melville did a good job with this. Bartleby: story about an intransigent, obstinate worker who refuses to work or even leave work, and his perplexed and frustrated employer. Somewhat amusing in Bartleby’s determinism but could now be viewed in a different light considering current social issues, with homelessness and drug use coming to mind. Benito Cereno: a sea story of two captains who encounter each other’s ships off the coast of Chile. One, an old Spanish warship, is suspiciously (in the eyes of the other captain) crewed by Black sailors and its Spanish officers are evasive and tacit. The observing captain, Delano, of an American fishing vessel, pries around the Spanish ship alongside its captain, Cereno, who is mentally weakened by an unknown ailment and “supported” by his trusted, sycophantic Babo, who is obviously (to the reader) controlling Cereno while in the presence of the Delano. What sounds like a good, psychological story is weighed down by its slow burn. Maybe too slow for me. But it’s still a solid read, you just want to ring the neck of Cereno at times and have him somehow surreptitiously signal to Delano that he’s under duress. And for Delano to pull his blinders off and believe his intuition of the dire situation. Classic Melville sea story, though, and it ends well. The Lightning Rod Man: a surprising and enjoyable short read about an itinerant lightning rod salesman who visits the home of a prospective buyer during a violent lightning storm. The salesman is essentially selling peace of mind in the face of fear and pressures the homeowner to buy or risk losing his home--or perhaps his life. I enjoyed the protagonist homeowner’s passionate rebuke of the salesman. It could be relatable in so many ways: insurance sales, religious fearmongering, or buying that extended warranty for your car. Good sense, limits of control, and fear vs freedom are the big themes here. The Encantadas, or Enchanted Islands: a series of 11 “sketches” about the Galapagos Islands, each of a different flavor. One is about the desolate, austere environment there, another about the failed attempts to colonize the archipelago, a third about a murderous hermit on one of the islands. One memorable sketch was about a woman unfortunately marooned there for years and was later miraculously saved. These sketches weave fact, fiction, effective symbolism, and Melville’s vast experience as a seaman, so they make for good, if not different reading. I wasn’t sure I’d like this unconventional series on a niche subject, but it heightened my pre-existing desire to visit these strange and special islands. The Bell Tower: a psychological goth-horror type story, where an architect wishes to build a belltower in his town, but later realizes no one can hear the bell ring because of the design of the tower. His obsession threatens his sanity.
