great re-read while waiting for my new baseball-related book to arrive in the mail (what makes you think i'm having trouble waiting for baseball to come back? I can handle it). all the usual great stuff that made this an annual highlight of spring for me in the 1980's. It's funny how many of his riffs I remember quite specifically across the decades (ex. the material on pp. 156-157 concerning the Astros' free agent signing of Joaquin Andujar -- i'd forgotten that this was the stimulus for it, but the idea that you want the sweet red juicy part of the watermelon that is a player's career, rather than the bitter rind stuck with me and comes up surprisingly often in my thinking about the Washington football team -- looking at you, "Mister Snyder," in relation to signing Bruce Smith, Donovan McNabb, Deion Sanders, etc. ad infinitum). kind of poignant to read his ambivalent sendoff chapter about how this would be his last annual Abstract ("breakin' the wand") coupled with the last sentence of dedication page, concerning his pals he used to play a table-game baseball league with: "I miss those days, but then I guess you always miss being young and thinking that you are doing nothing." If you'll indulge me (and who are we kidding? you can't stop me; you can only hope to contain me, goodreads readers) in a tangential digression, his sentiments remind me of the days [first 10 years after high school] when I produced (compiled? wrote? it was a mix) a monthly newsletter for our tiny graduating class and assorted friends/relatives/relatives of friends -- maybe 40 people at peak. That was a lot of fun and a great way to stay connected -- this is well before Facebook, before the internet, etc. I sometimes think if blogging had been an accessible format I'd never have stopped, but the time and effort cost (typing up jokes/anecdotes/commentary, appending maybe a cut/paste newspaper article of relevance, xeroxing it all, and stuffing a few dozen envelopes = non-trivial hobby task) eventually exceeded the rewarding aspects, which had begun to decline (slower influx of newsy letters from friends as you all leave college for the [vastly overrated] "regular world"), so i pulled the plug. I have friends who tell me they kept every issue and still cart around those binders through 30-40 years of moves, and I'm proud of that, but to this day occasionally second-guess myself for stopping. I guess Bill James could relate, since stopping the annual abstract hardly stopped him from doing sabermetrics research and writing about it -- just read yesterday a new study he posted on his website. Anyway, tl dr as the young people would say: you can want to quit something and still look back on it with great fondness.
