I approached this novel with anticipation, having read Gardner’s October Light over 30 years ago, enjoying it very much. I also have an unread copy of Sunlight Dialogues on tap. About a year ago I re-read his Grendel, shortly after having read Sean Heaney’s vivid translation of Beowulf, and I found that thin novel better the second-time round than when I’d taken it in as a young man. I began Freddy’s Book, I knew that I was entering the novel via an anteroom, a first-person narrator’s fussy and mannered story about how came into possession of Freddy’s book. This first-person narrator is a minor league psycho-historian, making the rounds at mid-west colleges, presenting himself and his work to small academic crowds. After a lecture in Madison, before he is to set off for Chicago, Professor Jack Winesap receives an invitation to join Professor Sven Agaard at his home that day so that he might meet his “monster” of a son. This allusion to monstrosity has arisen out of the discussion of his lecture the previous evening, when Professor Agaard blurted out that he has a son who is a monster, then abruptly and uneasily left the gathering. Professor Winesap accepts the invitation from the old professor (whose work he had studied and respected when he was a graduate student), and at the old man’s house, he notes that the boy is apparently kept locked in. Agaard explains that it is his son who has locked others out, that as a father he has done what he’s believed is best and left his very large, albeit obese and unhealthy, and very intelligent son to his own devices. Against inclinations, told that the boy Freddy has shown an interest in his psycho-historical studies, Winesap meets the shy, diffident Freddy. They say little. Later, Winesap delivers to the boy a copy of the lecture he was going to give in Chicago. Late that night, when the house is dark and silent, snowed in, Winesap hears and faintly sees Freddy come into his room and leave for him a copy of the book he’d been writing for the past two years. Thus ends the prelude, and the rest of the novel, with no further mention of Winesap, Agaard, or Freddy, is the story of King Gustav and the Devil. This tale is set in 16th century Sweden, when its people are trying to free themselves from the league to which they belong (Norway, Sweden, Denmark), where the Denmark’s King Kristian is dominant. Swedish rebels have for more than 50 years tried to break free of this league. The principals in this story are Gustav (who will become king of an independent Sweden), his advisor and friend knight Lars-Goren, and Catholic Bishop Brask. Each are dealing with the devil incarnate, a demon who is able to change his appearance, and who comes to each of them (and others) sowing ambition and confusion, inevitably leading everyone into evil and violence. The Devil supposedly resides in the land of the Lapps, north of Sweden and Norway. Gustav and Lars-Goren meet the devil shortly after escaping and witnessing the execution and immolation of their rebel compatriots who’d fought for Swedish independence. Lars-Goren is a stolid practical and sage man, prone to think things through slowly. There is the suggestion throughout the narrative that he will deal the devil some great blow. Gustav is more impatient, a man of action, whose chief virtue is having the wisdom to let the slower acting Lars-Goren review his intended actions. Bishop Brask at one time had been a devout Catholic and a connoisseur of literature and fine art, but by this time is a cynic, neither religious nor hopeful about mankind in general. He sees about him only the work of the devil: treachery and lust for power. Back and forth fighting, intrigue, double-crosses, and other chicanery transpire, but Gustav still holds control of Sweden and is making headway toward gaining independence for the country. He knows the devil is afoot and he sends Lars-Goren and Bishop Brask off to Uppsala to deal with the devil. After a time in Lars-Goren’s home in Uppsala, where he is the leading authority, Bishop Brask comes to admire Lars-Goren and envy him his Edenic existence, but he feels that Lars-Goren’s view of good and evil is unduly influenced by his fortunate surroundings, that scale prevents him from fully appreciating how difficult it is to keep evil at bay as populations grow and more people become entangled. His argument, finally, is that evil resides in each man. Before much more can be made of this, news that Gustav, for some reason upset that the devil is not dead, has now sent troops to Uppsala to kill the two. They flee to the land of the Lapps, where the people live as one with the reindeer, holding life in a simple, magical balance. Brask dies while attempting to kill the devil, and Lars-Goren succeeds, though it is clear that evil still exists in the world. The inconclusiveness of the symbolic and incarnate versions of the devil support the version of good and evil that Brask espouses. Gustav leaves Lars-Goren in peace, and the knight and advisor lives out his life in Uppsala with his family, apparently peacefully. How all this relates back to Freddy is still something of a mystery, as there is no apparent link between the evil in 16th century Sweden and in 20th century Madison, Wisconsin. That Freddy is bright and beleaguered by prejudice and mischief seems too far a stretch. That the story he writes is a fairy tale is perhaps a connection to the psycho-history Winesap practices, and it shows a reality underneath the facts. Still, that’s a lot of to do for so small a point. It was an entertaining read, though there was some slogging through the first part of Freddy’s book, when he lays the factual and historical groundwork. The preamble and the book both entertained, but as a whole, they did not cohere.
