This features a smart and tough cop who drives a Porsche on the job as he hunts a sadistic serial killer in the late ‘80s. Yeah, yeah. I know this book should totally suck, but the amazing thing is that it doesn’t. Neither does the long-running series that followed. Lieutenant Lucas Davenport is officially the head of the intelligence division of the Minneapolis police force, but his real job title should be Head Rat Catcher. When big cases that get media attention happen Davenport gets called in because he is a good cop who has built up a huge network of street informants, and he's also got a knack for playing the angles that keep too much crap from blowing back on his bosses. When a psycho nicknamed the 'maddog' starts a killing spree and leaves behind notes outlining his rules of murder Davenport finds himself drawn into a dangerous and very personal contest of wills. John Sandford (real name John Camp) was a Pulitzer Prize winning journalist who covered crime in Minnneapolis, and his books have a casual way of making the procedural and political side of police work seem authentic in the context of thriller plots. Sandford’s easy-to-read style often masks how good he really is it at coming with intelligent and action-filled books that put most of the others of this type to shame. Even after 20+ books Davenport remains one of my favorite cop characters. The schtick of him being rich and playing by his own rules should make him a bad cliché, but Sandford gave him enough personality to get you to overlook that. For starters, he’s kind of bastard in a lot of ways especially in these early days. As a guy who made his money as a designer of role playing games Davenport is a master manipulator who won’t hesitate to use any ploy to get his man even if he burns some people in the process. And he won’t lose any sleep about committing a crime if he thinks it’s necessary. Lucas is definitely a guy who believes that the ends justify the means. That’s part of what’s kept him interesting for over 20 years. Next: Lucas vs. Native Americans in Shadow Prey
