The phrase 'Mozart Effect' is now well known thanks to this book by Don Campbell. It refers to the idea that particular sounds, tones, and rhythms (including but not exclusively classical music) strengthen the mind, unlock creative chambers in the brain and can even help the human body heal itself. Going into this book having spent more than half my life being a piano teacher probably makes me a little biased, but I believe in the power music can have over us and I have seen first hand the 'aha' moments of my students as their coordination and ability grow. Parts of the book are a slow read but I really enjoyed the studies; half an hour of Mozart has the same effect on brain waves as 10 milligrams of Valium, on average students who play a musical instrument have higher ACT scores, and those exposed to ten minutes of music with slow even undertones tested higher in their Spatial Reasoning abilities. I also really liked the last chapters that listed different disabilities, diseases, and medical conditions and combinations of music that have worked for other people. I don't necessarily believe in music in the place of medicine but I believe music in addition to medicine can help our brains focus, relax, or become stimulated. I like that he included a reminder not to overstimulate; in a house full of people trying to talk over each other, a blaring TV, the vacuum, a crying baby, idling diesel outside or maybe a noisy air conditioner, ten minutes of silence would help a child with ADHD or an autistic child to focus and calm in the place of Mozart. Can music change who we are? Yes. It can take us by the hand and lead us into our childhood. We can find ourselves submersed in overwhelming feelings of love, joy, grief, or even anger. From a choir/music class/piano teacher point of view, I think this concept is great and I agree with most of it. I would like to move away from the unseen power music has and remember that teaching a child to create their own music is giving them an invaluable gift to express feelings and emotions that are at times overwhelming and expressed in no other way. Having taken care of my Dad through a horrific small intestinal cancer for a year and then losing him, I have a renewed sacred appreciation for the ability I have to sit at the piano and let buried feelings flow from my fingertips.
