I had a few books similar to this come in at the same time and out of the two I've already also read (still have The Mammoth Book of Illustrated Crime: A Photographic History to get done) I'd have to say this is the "best" of the group I got. Shots in the Dark gives a little bit of case info along with each photo unlike a lot of photos included in Scene of the Crime: Photographs from the LAPD Archive . Buckland included what I'd say is a detailed account of the photograph and photography, specifically as how it's been used in crime. It's not for the squeamish if that needs to be said. Page 72 has a photo of a tiny baby, dead and covered with what looks to be a towel of some sort, only his tiny feet hanging down, off of a cutting board in a kitchen. His "mother" decapitated him. Page 73 has an EMT carrying another tiny baby out of an apartment, seemingly dead, with his "parents" bringing up the rear. What I took away from the photo, besides the poor baby? The supposed father, obviously angry and showing this anger even while his baby is dying and the supposed mother, the only word I can use to define her is "nonchalant". It looks like it's simply another day to her. So, yeah, it's hard to read, hard to look at, hard to think about. But it also lets us know exactly what we humans are capable of. And I'm happy for that. If we're going to be capable of such things I want it vivid in my mind, as much as it hurts. That way I can be sure to be as careful as humanly possible in everything that I and my family do. *Be sure not to leave around, especially around children. I kept this on a shelf when I wasn't reading so my daughter wouldn't open it.* I'd "rate" the book higher but the account of photography wasn't as interesting as I thought it would be. It looks as if a few of the photos came from a site - www.celebritymorgue.com - which I have not been to but will probably check out just to see. Something tells me there won't be a lot of respect given to the dead in the manner the photos are shown but I could be wrong...
