My most recent experience reading a Len Deighton novel was quite a disappointment, to say the least. I can appreciate what he was trying to do with "Goodbye, Mickey Mouse" but I think the story just plain doesn't work for me. So it's a relief to return to Deighton at his best, with a clever tale of intrigue, love, and desert winds scrambling the airwaves during a search for intelligent life among the stars. "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Spy" is another "unnamed spy" novel with a first-person narrator (could be Harry Palmer, could be Frederick Anthony, could be Patrick Armstrong) who finds himself embroiled in an effort to extract a Soviet scientist whose knowledge of some very top-secret technology might yield the West an advantage during the ongoing Cold War. But as he and his American contact/friend Major Mann realize, all is not as it seems, and Andrei Bekuv is not to be trifled with. This is quite an enjoyable romp, and it carries with it a sense of love and loss, as our narrator meets and beds a glamorous female gambler. But the truth is more complicated than our would-be Romeo would like to admit, as is the complications surrounding Comrade Bekuv, who wants to find proof that little green men from Mars really exist. The Soviets aren't taking this lying down, and a body count begins when the KGB starts trying to get Andrei back. But how much is real, and how much is counterfeit? And what does this all mean for our narrator and his love life? I really enjoyed losing myself in the world that Deighton concocts here, where no one is really on the level and everyone is for sale to the highest bidder. "Little Spy" is one of Deighton's books that isn't as weighty as the work of his contemporary Le Carre, but spy novels can be fun, too. The globe-trotting owes a bit to 007, while not as glamorous as James Bond's cinematic jaunts. But our narrator eventually returns to where it all began, in the midst of the Sahara, and uncovers the truth. This was a fun ride of a book, and a nice return to fork after my last Deighton read.
