The first thing to know about The Hot Zone , the 1995 bestseller by Richard Preston, is that it is not a romance novel. While men, women, exotic getaways and showers are involved, they're not the type that would cue Sade on the soundtrack. The book is based on an article by Preston published by the New Yorker in 1992 as "Crisis in the Hot Zone" but by trying to hit two targets--journalism and the thriller/suspense genre--it misses both. The rudimentary style of Preston's writing dispels the material as satisfying non-fiction, while the lack of a strong central character or narrative limit it as a yarn. The material concerns the discovery of the Ebola virus in western Kenya in 1980 and efforts by the U.S. Army to neutralize it when the virus is discovered in a Reston, Virginia animal facility in November 1989. With a 90% fatality rate and no vaccine, meetings between Ebola virus and human beings proceed along the same lines as Jack the Ripper and his victims. The first half of the book sets up the infant rampages of Ebola in central Africa, documenting its effect on human beings and an averted outbreak in Kinsasha, while the second half of the book details the Army's hunt when the killer has the audacity to surface in the U.S. If the book has central characters, they'd be U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Nancy Jaax and her husband, Colonel Gerald "Jerry" Jaax, veterinary pathologists with the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) at Fort Derrick, Maryland. The Jaaxes treat service dogs and every other animal working for the Army (alas, Preston doesn't specify what the Army uses mules or rabbits for). The couple have three children, four dogs and a parrot. While Jerry has worked with monkeys, which can be dangerous and infectious, his wife has experience handling Ebola, putting her on par with a spearfisherman who has experience diving with great white sharks. When you begin working with biological agents, the Army starts you in Biosafety Level 2, and then you move up to Level 3. You don't go into Level 4 until you have a lot of experience, and the Army may never allow you to work there. In order to work in the lower levels, you must have a number of vaccinations. Nancy had vaccinations for yellow fever, Q fever, Rift Valley fever, the VEE, EEE, and WEE complex (brain viruses that live in horses), and tularemia, anthrax, and botulism. And, of course, she had had a series of shots for rabies, since she was a veterinarian. Her immune system reacted badly to all the shots; they made her sick. The Army therefore yanked her out of the vaccination program. At this point, Nancy Jaax was essentially washed up. She couldn't proceed with any kind of work with Level 3 agents, because she couldn't tolerate the vaccinations. There was only one way she could continue working with dangerous infectious agents. She had to get herself assigned to work in a space suit in Level 4 areas. There aren't any vaccines for Level 4 hot agents. A Level 4 hot agent is a lethal virus for which there is no vaccine and no cure. Another adversary of Ebola is Eugene Johnson, a civilian virus hunter contracted by the Army. In the spring of 1988, when a ten-year-old Danish boy visiting his parents in Kenya dies of a Level 4 hot agent known as Marburg virus, Johnson tracks the killer to Kitnum Cave in Mount Elgon in western Kenya, but his expedition is unable to isolate the virus, explain its origins or develop a vaccine. Peter Jahrling is a civilian virologist also employed by the Army who along with an eighteen year old intern named Tom Geisbert (who's an ace with an electron microscope) inhales tissue samples later testing positive for Ebola, putting both men on a self-imposed death watch. Ebola's predatory attacks on human beings in central Africa are like murder scenes. The onset of Ebola virus is a throbbing headache that typically occurs on the seventh day of incubation. Fever and nausea come next, with victims expelling a cocktail of tarry granules and red arterial blood known as "black vomit." Speckles break out all over the body and expand into bruises. The liver, kidneys, lungs, hands and feet become jammed with blood clots. Victims turn into passive automatons. Walking dead. They then hemorrhage in violent epileptic fits the Army calls "crashing and bleeding out," Ebola's program for transmitting to a fresh host through infected blood. One of the hosts is a twenty-year old who Preston calls "Nurse Mayinga." She's infected at Ngaliema Hospital in Kinshasa in September 1976 caring for a nun stricken with an Ebola-like replicating agent. As she develops symptoms, Nurse Mayinga fears that her scholarship to study in Europe might be revoked. Rather than seek treatment, the nurse wanders the city of two million, setting up a species-threatening event. As news breaks out, President Mobutu, the notorious ruler of Zaire, dispatches his armed forces to quarantine the hospital and blockade the rural areas where infected have been reported. Through no effort by the regime, Ebola mysteriously fails to replicate and disappears. Preston visits with Karl Johnson, a retired C.D.C. doctor and one of Ebola's discoverers who was dispatched to Zaire in 1976. They discuss scenarios like the one introduced by Nurse Mayinga. "Are you worried about a species-threatening event?" He stared at me. "What the hell do you mean by that?" "I mean a virus that wipes us out." "Well, I think it could happen. Certainly it hasn't happened yet. I'm not worried. More likely it would be a virus that reduces us by some percentage. By thirty percent. By ninety percent." "Nine out of ten humans killed? And you're not bothered." A look of mysterious thoughtfulness crossed his face. "A virus can be useful to a species by thinning us out," he said. On Wednesday, October 4, 1989, a shipment of one hundred wild monkeys from the Philippines arrive at Hazelton Research Products in Reston, Virginia. To prevent the spread of infectious disease, federal regulations require imported monkeys be quarantined for one month before being shipped elsewhere. Over three weeks, twenty-nine quarantined monkeys die in one room at the monkey house. Dan Dalgard, the consulting veterinarian, suspects SHF (simian hemorrhagic fever) which is deadly to monkeys but harmless to humans. Dalgard conducts autopsies and ships samples to USAMRIID at Fort Derrick. Armed with electron microscope photographs by intern Tom Geisbert, civilian virologist Peter Jahrling alerts his superior, Colonel Clarence James Peters, that they may have a filovirus outside Washington D.C. Fearing that Peters could quarantine both him and Geisbert in a biocontainment hospital known as the Slammer for thirty days over what could be nothing, Jahrling neglects to report that they handled and inhaled the Reston samples. They decide to test their own blood and self-monitor. Using a blood sample collected from Nurse Mayinga, Jahrling's analysis concludes that the Reston monkeys are infected with Ebola. Jahrling's analysis races up the chain of command. Among the experts assembled, Col. Peters invites Lt. Col. Nancy Jaax. Her work with Ebola leads her to believe that the virus can be infectious by air, enabling it to "nuke" an entire building should it get into an HVAC system. She also believes that even if Ebola is quarantined in the Reston monkey house, it won't stay there long. Col. Peters chooses Nancy's husband, Col. Jerry Jaax to lead a team of soldiers and civilians into the monkey house to euthanize the animals caged in the building. The Army had never mobilized a major field operation against a hot virus before. Obviously there were legal questions here. Lawyers were going to have to be consulted. Was this legal? Could the Army simply put together a biohazard SWAT team and move in on the monkey house? General Russell was afraid the Army's lawyers would tell him that it could not, and should not, be done, so he answered the legal doubts with these words: "A policy of moving out and doing it, and asking forgiveness afterward, is much better than a policy of asking permission and having it denied. You never ask a lawyer for permission to do something. We are going to do the needful, and the lawyers are going to tell us why it's legal." The Hot Zone ("Crisis in the Hot Zone" would've been a superior title for the book) has the makings of a compelling nature run amok thriller. Like Jaws , Ebola is the hunter and we're the prey. Like a shark sighting, an outbreak of Ebola is scary enough to generate a widespread panic. Like the great white in Jaws , the virus is a natural born killer, a prehistoric predator whose hunters both respect and admire it. It does not discriminate, ripping apart a ten-year-old boy cavorting in nature, just like Jaws , and despite the microscopic size of the virus, seems to have the same cunning as the great white. What surprised me about the book was how rudimentary the writing was. I haven't read the article it was based on, but the book is pitched at a much less demanding audience than the average piece in the New Yorker . Preston repeats himself a lot and spares detail, which is rarely an experience I have with the magazine. There's solid character work, but the book takes two hundred pages to establish the Army mission and never locks in around a central character or two. It's as if trying to please everyone, Preston took the weakest elements of non-fiction and genre fiction and muddled them up. I recommend the book for those looking for information on killer viruses and the true life crime story of how an outbreak was averted in the U.S. While a virus doesn't have the cinematic menace of a great white shark, Preston's magazine article did inspire two competing killer virus projects in Hollywood in 1994. An adaptation of his book set to star Robert Redford and Jodie Foster under the direction of Ridley Scott fell apart, due in part to the grim reality that the story ends with the euthanization of hundreds of monkeys. A competing project titled Outbreak with Dustin Hoffman, Rene Russo and Morgan Freeman did make it to the screen in 1995, pumping up and dramatizing the events of Reston with the aid of at least eight different screenwriters.
