I recently finished a book for review in which the author lays out what he thinks were definitive arguments against materialism (and by default, for dualism.) Chalker wrote something in this book that sort of ties into some of the silliness of those arguments - the old philosophical “how do we know what is real?” questions that supposedly “prove” one of his points: “I once knew somebody who said that the only rational definition of insanity was I recently finished a book for review in which the author lays out what he thinks were definitive arguments against materialism (and by default, for dualism.) when you saw a different world run by different rules than anyone else, and that your alternate reality, whether pretty or ugly, good or evil, was therefore false because it was yours alone. When most everyone else saw the same things you saw, felt the same things you felt, and believed what you believed, then the one who didn’t was the insane one.” (He really didn’t prove anything, but that’s a different review…) I’ve been struggling with how to condense and fix the flow of my electronic reams of notes on that one, and I turned to this book for a shift and shift it did. What a bender! Matrix before The Matrix. This is the kickoff, from Chalker’s Intro: “This book simply establishes the premise, gives the background and some of a very large cast, murders a few people (but not necessarily permanently), screws around with identity and ego, contains a hookah-smoking caterpillar, a pipe-smoking dodo, an all-female biker gang and drug cartel, a cigar-smoking Native American woman who says she goes into a parallel universe via the trees, the Roswell saucer, at least two possibly alien races, a little antigovernment paranoia, a bunch of two-faced villains, and a lot of mind control. We won’t get complicated until the next book.” Won’t get complicated, yet, eh? What am I in for??? I carried this around unread for almost two decades before losing it to a fire and could never get into it enough to keep going. Pushed this time and was rewarded. Near (for 1995) future craziness that takes a turn down trippy lane. Chalker also said this in his Intro: “I’ve come across discussions on such diverse platforms as conventions, fanzines, and the Internet where people argue whether I write fantasy novels or science-fiction novels. Most people think I write predominantly fantasy, and in this they are wrong. What I do not write are engineering stories “—hey, gang, let’s build a space station! Hey, let’s terraform Mars! Those are all well and good, and some folks do them well, but they are very much in the tradition of Astounding in the Campbell era, a magazine I am not going to ever denigrate but which, I think, told as many variations of engineering stories as I ever want to read.” Probably true. And… “My late father was born two months before the Wright brothers flew their first plane at Kitty Hawk. He died twenty years after the last man walked on the moon, the last one that’s likely to walk on the moon or beyond in my lifetime. I pray not in my children’s lifetimes, but we are a world and a nation who seem to have lost our dreams and are spiritually dying for it.” That happened. But humans are apparently finally going back in 2024. “The only downer is increasing evidence as I get older that my own playing around with the human mind and form seem increasingly more likely than terraforming Mars.” Yep. And … “And now I come to computers. Not today’s, of course, or maybe not tomorrow’s, but for all the wonders of cyberspace it still looks like cyberspace. Why should it? How good can it really get? Those who have run into me online know that I’m not a novice in this area and that I got my Junior Pournelle Merit Badge long ago. ” This is great! We are getting closer (and the real reason I highlighted that was the Junior Pournelle Merit Badge - IFKYK). It did draw me in, after all these years of not being able to. Now to write that review. ———- Some writing/editing sloppiness: “simply quit the project if he weren’t allowed full reign” Uh, full (or free) rein . And “corpus colostrum” Seriously? It’s callosum. He used it twice so … “BBS systems” Redundant (1995… bulletin board systems were only just on their way out.)
