“Jim talked out loud about freedom, while I worried silently and tried to decide what I should do. Jim said that the first thing that he would do when he was a free man in a Free State was work and save every cent of his money until he had enough to buy his wife out of slavery. Then they would both work until they could buy their two children, or maybe they would get Abolitionists to steal the children for them. I became sick with guilt when I heard Jim say those words. He would never have dared talk of stealing his children before and was saying that now only because he felt he was almost free. I was helping Jim run away and he was talking about stealing his children – children who belonged to a man that I had never met, a man who had never done me harm. I was sorry to hear Jim say those words; it was such a lowering of himself. I felt so guilty that I told myself that I would go to shore the first time I saw light and tell someone about Jim. I knew that was the correct thing to do. I felt much better…” - Mark Twain, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn There is a robust debate about whether The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is the greatest American novel, or merely among the best. Whatever it’s ranking, it feels fair to say that Mark Twain’s classic about a black man seeking his freedom, a confabulating white boy finding his conscience, and the mighty Mississippi upon which they travel, is the most American of the great American novels, dealing as it does with the preeminent issue of the nation’s founding, development, and idea of itself: slavery. At the outset of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , Twain famously asserts that anyone trying to find a message in the story would be banished. That has not stopped anyone from trying in the 140 years since its publication. It says a lot about the book that so many people have tried to ban it for so many different reasons. Controversies aside, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn takes an unusual approach to its examination of slavery. For one, it is humorous, which is a fascinating prism through which to view one of the least funny aspects of human existence. For another, it deals with slavery indirectly, portraying it as a part of life so ingrained that it is seldom questioned. It is also entirely uninterested in the experiences of the enslaved, who seldom demonstrate much agency. Most importantly, the story is told through the eyes of a child, one who happens to be one of fiction’s least reliable narrators. *** The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is a direct sequel to The Adventures of Tom Sawyer , though they are on different planets in terms of theme, structure, and tone. While the former is told in the third person, occurs in and around St. Petersburg (standing in for Hannibal, Missouri), and is a mostly joyous evocation of the sprees of boyhood, the latter is told in the first person, ranges far and wide over the river and countryside, and is about the discovery of an ethical conscience, though the sprees of boyhood eventually intrude. Despite Twain’s warning against the expectation of a plot, a plot there is, though it does not consist of the typical arc of setup, conflict, and resolution. At the outset, we learn we are going to be seeing things through the eyes of young Huckleberry “Huck” Finn, a secondary character in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer who now takes center stage. After a bit of tomfoolery, followed by a bit of child abuse played for laughs, Huck runs away from his troubles, and right into a runaway slave named Jim. Together, the two of them hit the river to deliver Jim to freedom. What follows is an episodic narrative that involves murderers on a sinking boat, a ridiculous family feud played out to the death, and the introduction of two of the most memorable buffoons in literary history: the King and the Duke. *** There are far too many things to say about The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , and most of them have been said already. Twain's desires to the contrary, the deconstructions of this slender book are legion. As such, I’ll try to make this brief. Perhaps the thing that jumps out first is Twain’s use of dialect. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn speaks with a very distinct voice, which tries to capture the rhythms, pronunciations, and idiomatic expressions of the region. According to Twain, he used half a dozen different dialects, with close attention paid to their differences. Regardless of the veracity – Twain did live in this time period, among these people – his attempt to channel what he called “the Missouri negro dialect” has been met with criticism. The charge made here – and against other titles using this technique – is that black men and women are made to talk in ways that are ungrammatical and subservient. This feature is a central target of Percival Everett’s James , a wholesale reimagining of the tale from Jim’s point of view. With space at a premium, I'll note only that everyone speaks in their own way. This isn’t Gone With the Wind , where black people communicate through eye dialect, and all the white people are speaking like English majors at an Ivy League college. In other words, Twain – unlike Margaret Mitchell – does not seem to be using vernacular to pass judgments on intellect. *** Related to the dialect is the use of the N-word, which appears as often as in a Tarantino film. As far as words go, it is probably the most offensive set of letters that exists in the English language. It’s unpleasant to read, and for some, it is understandably a deal breaker. Unfortunately, utterance of the word is also authentic, and Twain’s use of it rather pointed, especially in its casual employment. Every time Huck lets it fly, without even thinking, it is yet another indicator of the deep pervasiveness of racism. For almost every character in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , the degradation of their fellow human beings on the basis of skin color is as natural as breathing. *** It is no spoiler to acknowledge that The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is heading – from its first pages – to Huck’s own moral reckoning of the environment he inhabits, and the beliefs he has not heretofore questioned. To Twain’s credit, this is not a simple process. Even by the final pages, it is a subtle evolution. Complicating matters is the tortured endgame that Twain conjures up. In Hollywood’s hands, Huck’s redemption would have followed a straighter line, as it did in Disney’s laudable 1993 rendering. Without giving too much away, the actual conclusion of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is drawn out, absurd, occasionally funny, and extremely uncomfortable. In the late nineteenth century, I can totally imagine that the giddy ridiculousness of the climax acted as a teaspoon of sugar to help the antiracist lecture go down. Today, it veers a bit more toward the psychological torture of an enslaved black man by an up-jumped hillbilly and his somewhat ignorant friend. At the very least, it’s not forgettable. *** The arguments over the meanings of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , and whether it is ultimately an attack on racism or an embrace of it, have played out over the decades in school boards, libraries, and academia. In the end, all those words – including those you just read, or skimmed, or glanced at on your way to something better – are worthless, for this is one of those volumes you need to read on your own, and then decide for yourself.
