What an interesting book. Fascinating. When I read the athiest’s case, I was looking for a strongly reasoned case for religion. I read utter trash, and I should have read this. Short but sweet. I like that Lewis doesn’t start with accepting Christianity before jumping into why Christianity is the best and all the others suck. The fact that he logically steps his way into a “good” all-powerful god appeals to my sense of reason, something he would argue comes from god itself. I actually think his musings on a “higher” law of morality - things that are good and fair and that seem to unerringly be true throughout human history in different civilizations and peoples - I find that compelling and beautiful. He is right how different they all are. But almost always (always also with exceptions), selfishness, cruelty, cowardice… - some things are almost always looked down upon or treated with shame. Why? I am open to evolutionary reasons, to be honest. But I like that CS Lewis is contemporary enough that he is familiar with atomic theory and evolution and accepts many elements of those theories to be real and true fact. It makes it easier to read and to accept some of his arguments. My biggest challenge is that while I can accept that there is this overarching “moral law” that seems to be a through line in the wild diversity of human history and civilization, it’s a HUGE leap from that, to assuming that law or force has AGENCY. If he made that claim, I missed it (and I was looking). He assumes that the “moral law” comes from “something or someone.” And I genuinely do not see a logical foundation for that assumption. It means that the rest of the book - which as he goes into more Christian theology has some more leaps of reasoning - I am still back at the first half. He says we need to turn around and I say - the road ahead looks clear to me. I think I want to go on in this direction. So…I feel clear now that I am agnostic. I do believe in that higher power, but it’s not clear to me that that force has agency. He does discuss this, but his analogies sometimes are not apples to apples. Yes gravity always exists and always behaves. But now we know about things like quarks and string theory which introduce elements of randomness. Humans and animals are so infinitely complex, our loves and skin and vices and diseases and fears could all be chemical reactions one after another, but it’s also possible to me that morality as Lewis describes it is like color. A certain length visual wave will result in the color blue, but some people may close their eyes, or be wearing sunglasses, or be colorblind, or may look at something else, or mix blue with yellow and get green. It is there - it is a law of the universe, but it is not like gravity or inertia. Overall though I am impressed with CS Lewis’ clarity, his reasoning, and his beautiful faith. I found his description and explanation for the death of Christ to be the most reasonable and makes the most sense of any explanation I have ever heard - and I went to Catholic Mass and CCD for half my life. It cleared a lot of the theory up for me for sure. Recommended to anyone who can hold an idea in their head without accepting it. To those who love philosophy. Who believe in atheism like others believe in god. I enjoyed it and it’s short, and CS Lewis must have been one hell of a teacher!
