Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll 5/5 stars BEWARE THIS REVIEW IS FULL OF SPOILERS I have never read this book before. I saw the Disney movie countless times and lots of other adaptations as well. So when this one popped up for free on Audible I just had to add it and listen to it. And boy am I glad I did. What I love most about the older fairytale-like (children's) books is how brutal and honest they are. Characters are flawed and they don't shy away from their contemptuous behaviour. And that is exactly what draws me to them. It's so easy to fall into them and I just love having that sense of shock when I read them. And Alice's Adventures in Wonderland truly delivered. The book starts with Alice seeing a rabbit run and mumbling he is late. Her interest instantly peaked and she follows him down the rabbit hole. And slowly she falls down and down and down into this magical Wonderland. The way Alice narrates the book really captured my interest right from the get go. She has a very childlike demeanor but at times she felt so mature too. Like a mother who scolds her children and tries to teach them right from wrong. Every step she takes makes her fall deeper and deeper into Wonderland. She meets a lot of magical creatures. I never knew the storyline about the pig baby. And I was kinda shocked at how it was abused and how awfully it was treated. But it also felt like it fitted the crazy characters surrounding the pig baby. The Queen is such a crazy lady. She feels like 50 and 10 simultaneously. She is a selfish woman who thrives on attention and who perceives the world as her own amusement park. She kills characters left and right and is in a constant state of shock. 'How could they' and 'Off with their head!'. She is so selfish that it was almost funny to read about her. Such a brilliantly crafted character by Lewis. But most creatures were selfish and arrogant. They all draw you in and laugh at you when they push you away. The Caterpillar and Cheshire Cat were great examples of that. And honestly, the Cheshire Cat's grin freaked me out. He is much creepier than any adaptation I have ever seen him in. The Mad Hatter and Dormouse had such a vicariously feeling to them. And even they lived inside their own heads. Disregarding Alice completely. But my favorite part is the very last part. The part where Alice wakes up in her sister's lap. Her sister's thoughts and feelings fascinated me beyond anything. She had such a motherly feel to her. And how she suddenly sees everything Alice just told her gave her such an angel-like feel. Like she held the knowledge of the world within her hands. I really love how over the top and wild and wicked this story is. How cruel and selfish the characters are. And how steadfast Alice truly is on her journey through this crazy wonderland. 5 big stars from me for Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Super grateful I finally read/listened to this one. ♥
