My second star goes exclusively to the first chapter, which really drew me in--a precise, concise, humorous account of Winston Mabie's flight home to Wichita after his release from prison. He had always been afraid of flying, and five years in prison hadn't changed his fear, even though he was flying home to freedom. The writer detailed each dip, bump, whine, and various ordinary in-flight events; all of which caused feelings of fear and intimidation in Winston's mind. His tender gleanings of survival were overshadowed by the coming reunion with his father and readjustment to family life. The Mabie family, including three thirty-something adult children (including Winston) and two grandchildren lived in an 8500 square-foot mansion in Wichita. Head of the household was retired Professor Mabie and his wife--two parents who had enabled the unfocused, unfulfilled lives of their grown children. The first chapter would have made a fabulous stand-alone short story, and the writer should have stopped there before plunging into the rest of this chaotic novel that failed to pursue the story of Winston's future and reconciliation with his father, whose mother he'd killed in a drunk-driving accident and for which he'd served the jail term. I wouldn't have minded some diverting trails exploring this uniquely quirky Mabie family, if the writer had kept on track with Winston's story. The resolution of his story, if it can be called that, was a lame after-thought at the very end of the novel. The story devolved to focus on the extremely messed-up lives of Winston's two sisters, who seemed consumed with alcohol, drugs, and sex. Their only redeeming characteristics were a love of animals and the two children in the house. Also degrading was that the mother of the family had no identifiable name other than "Mrs. Mabie." I felt sorry for this woman who seemed almost invisible and who longed for a second chance at motherhood with her grandchildren. On a positive note, I credit the writer with a lovely job of delineating the characters and behavior of the very young children in the story-- four year old Roy and 8-month old Petra. I was impressed with how fully she portrayed the character of the not-yet verbal baby girl.
