After reading this I'm pretty sure it was written for nonmembers. It was basically a 101 guide for what we believe as members of the church. Some good quotes though: "The best thing about living a Christ-centered life, however, is how it makes you feel--inside. It's hard to have a negative attitude about things if and when your life is focused on the Prince of Peace. There will still be problems. Everyone has them. But faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is a power to be reckoned with in the universe and in individual lives. It can be a causative force through which miracles are wrought. It can also be a source of inner strength through which we find self-esteem, peace of mind, contentment, and the courage to cope. I have seen marriages saved, families strengthened, tragedies overcome, careers energized, and the will to go on living rekindled as people humble themselves before the Lord and accept His will in their lives. Heartache, tragedy, and trauma of all kinds can be focused and managed when the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are understood and applied." (pg. 15-16) "It should be noted, however, that the mere fact that a man holds the priesthood isn't enough in and of itself to give him any kind of authority. Those who are ordained to the priesthood must diligently strive to keep God's commandments. The Lord taught Joseph Smith that "no power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood." Rather, the Lord said, that influence comes as a result of living such Christian virtues as persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, and meekness, love unfeigned, and kindness and pure knowledge, "which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy and guile." (D&C 121:41-42.) The Lord also warned Joseph that "when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of theLord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man." (D&C 121:37)" (pg. 60) "Husbands and wives are unique in some ways and free to develop their eternal gifts, yet as coequals in the sight of their heavenly parents they are one in the divine goals they pursue, in their devotion to eternal principles and ordinances, in their obedience to the Lord, and in their divine love for each other. When a man and woman who have been sealed together in a temple are united spiritually, mentally, emotionally, and physically, taking full responsibility for nurturing each other, they are truly married. Together they strive to emulate the prototype of the heavenly home from which they came. (Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4 vols., Daniel H. Ludlow, ed. [New York: Macmillan, 1992], 2:487)" (pg. 65) "Indeed, life itself is filled with harsh realities that tug at the heart and tear away at the soul. Child abuse. AIDS. Natural disasters, from hurricanes to earthquakes. Famine. Prejudice and intolerance. Humanity's ongoing inhumanity toward one another. One cannot look at human suffering, regardless of its causes or origins, and not feel pain and compassion. It is easy to understand why one who lacks an eternal perspective might look at horrifying news footage of starving children in Africa or the devastation of a hurricane and shake a fist at the heavens. "If there is a God," the empathetic observer might wonder, "how could He allow such things to happen?" The answer isn't easy, but it isn't that complicated, either. God has put His plan into motion. It proceeds through natural laws-which are, in fact, God's laws. And because they are His, He is bound by them, as are we. In this imperfect world, bad things sometimes happen. The earth's rocky underpinnings occasionally slip and slide, and earthquakes result. Certain weather patterns turn into hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and drought. That is the nature of our existence on this planet." (pg. 76) "I continue to believe that faith -- real faith, whole-souled and unshakable -- can be as important to a healthy, balanced life as a sturdy anchor is to a ship bound for the open seas." (pg. 118)
