"It has taken the total military and industrial might of the whole English-speaking world - the greatest civilization since the Roman Empire - four years to win this 50/50 chance. If this spy gets out, we lose even that. Which is to say, we lose everything. Don't bring me probabilities, professor. Bring me ' Die Nadel .'" -- Winston Churchill, fictional quote but actual U.K. prime minister Follett's Eye of the Needle is probably best remembered as being his first bestseller over 40 years ago, as well as (I think) the only one of his books that received a film adaptation. Set in Europe on the eve of D-Day, the plot centers on 'The Needle' (a.k.a. 'Die Nadel' in his native tongue), a shrewd German espionage operative who has been eluding capture in the British Isles for four years. Known for his stealth abilities as well as his lethal use of a stiletto, he is on the run from British military intelligence (represented here by a pair of 'citizen soldiers' - a keen university professor and a dogged Scotland Yard detective) after obtaining photographic evidence for the Allied plan of Operation Overlord. The first half of the book is a traditional hero / villain pursuit (though still well written), but the narrative is then kicked up a notch in the latter part once The Needle is unexpectedly forced to take refuge on a sparsely inhabited island on the Scottish coast. There he meets Lucy, an unhappy wife of a disabled man and mother of a very young son. The Needle insinuates himself into this family dynamic, but things soon go very awry and Lucy has to 1.) flee for her safety during a storm to avoid The Needle, which is obviously a very difficult thing to do on a small isolated island, plus 2.) attempt to contact British authorities - as there is only a single two-way radio locally available - for both assistance and to advise of The Needle's activities. Without giving everything away, the quiet Lucy believably rises to the occasion and displays admirable grit and determination for her son and 'for Queen and country' - I know I stayed put to read the final 100 or so suspenseful pages in one sitting.
