The wait was worth it for this friends to lovers romance (I'd read book #3 first). Tyler has secretly loved Michele since the day they met at university ten years ago when she was a snooty 18-year-old and he, a hot-blooded 22. Michele, however, wasn't impressed with Tyler's golden-boy looks, how all the other girls ogled him, or how he was heir to a publishing fortune even though her tingling lady bits told her otherwise. Besides, she already had a cute and charming boyfriend who needed his degree in graphic design and visual communications, unlike Tyler who already had a business degree. Tyler's response to this rejection was to drown his penis in an endless sea of bimbo girlfriends and, well, why not? They just made it all so easy for him—duh! The sexual healing didn't work because Tyler's love has never died (which I actually found believable because the author did an excellent job of showing the reader his true feelings, minus his point of view). The only time Michele ever took Tyler seriously was after he'd injured himself playing football during their last year at university. She'd liked seeing his vulnerable side and feeling needed by him, but their emotional bonding had only lasted as long as Tyler's paralysis which had been temporary. The plot starts when Tyler, who's still hot-blooded, comes to comfort Michele, who's still snooty. He knows she'll be distraught after discovering her boyfriend of ten years is marrying someone else. Michele's in no mood for Tyler's TLC and just wants him gone so she can nurse her wounds in private. Even though she and the ex had been on and off for the last four years Michele still hoped he'd come back to her after the last the dumping. Fortunately, scrumptious Tyler persists in hanging out with her. The two end up having a great time eating pizza and watching a game show. Michele soon proposes that Tyler should accompany her to the wedding as her date which will be the first step in getting over Kevin. Tyler agrees on the condition that they appear to be lovers. She accepts, and in the process falls for him and his man bits (although bits is an understatement as hero's appendage is apparently sword-like in size 😳, LOL). I loved Tyler. He was smitten, caring, fun and oh, so patient with Michele who could be quite cranky at times. She'd been fighting a long-buried attraction to Tyler and took it out on the unsuspecting playboy. Discovering her ex-boyfriend's surprise wedding news didn't help soothe her mood either. Anyway, Michele wasn't completely unlikable. I loved her chemistry with Tyler and how she never pined for Kevin after she and Tyler became a couple. Safety: No cheating. Michele and Tyler weren't celibate before they got together. Michele had previously had sex with her longterm boyfriend, and only lover, prior to the hero although it can be assumed it's been months since she last had sex. Tyler had casual girlfriends. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
