"This is crazy" said Kyle "No, Professor....it's just business." "I'll have to think about this." "Of course, of course. Talk it over with your wife." p199 The premise of the book is exciting, contact with another star system, the fourth dimension, exploration of other kinds of awareness, saving the species. Right up my alley, what's not to love? Well, plenty as it turned out for me. Not only is the dialogue less than stellar, the premises are thin, the characters incongruous, and the interwoven plot, which in itself is an important topic, is sucked in to the ridiculous. After wading through the physics (which I have no quick way of evaluating) I certainly did not expect them to be almost irrelevant to what unfolds. The most interesting character to me was Cheetah, the AI, a work in progress. His suicide was just another implausible incident in the book. Did Kyle actually molest both his daughters, and was that why Mary killed herself and his other daughter won't speak to him? It has a lot to do with why he and his wife are separated. But it's not possible, except for what if were true? Is the false memory of guilt or innocence? Will the real false memory please leave the mind. You mean God is punishing you for being an atheist? p85 In the context of this book, it certainly felt like it. So why did I finish it when I had no real faith that it was all going to come together? Well, statements like the above which cackled out from the mostly bland dialogue, and the occasional insight that indicated a kind of truth, or at least an idea worth pondering. Most of the time there is no handing over the baton, no incorporating the past into the present. You wipe out those who went before. p204 RS is visualizing here nothing short of a revolution in consciousness. Do you think it's possible...that things seem to be discrete in three dimensions might all be part of the the same bigger object on four dimensions?....What if what we perceive in 3 dimensions as 7 billion individual human beings are really all just aspects of one one great being? p264 The Overmind, Jungs collective consciousness,the evolution of species, the foundation of memory, false memory, free floating shame, innate belief, ESP: RS has attempted to cram a lot in here and perhaps that is what killed the book for me. Complexity here becomes frivolous. As much as I agree that everything is connected, I could not squeeze myself into his tesseract.
