Gail Giles’s Dead Girls Don’t Write Letters , an ALA Quick Pick for Reluctant Readers, is a fast-paced story packed with mystery and suspense. Giles’s novel (or novella) is set in a small town in Texas, where the protagonist, Sunny, lives with and takes care of her severely depressed mother. Sunny’s family was never perfect, but the semblance of normality and happiness they once had disappeared with Sunny’s older sister, Jasmine—Jazz, for short. Jazz left home when she turned eighteen, ran away to New York where she died in a building fire, or so Sunny’s family is told. This destroys Sunny’s parents, who (Sunny believes) have always loved and admired Jasmine more than anyone or anything else: their father, formerly a talented reporter, falls further into alcoholism and anger, and their mother can barely function, even with Prozac and oodles of sleeping pills; only Sunny, the victim of her sister’s teasing and manipulation, seems to have survived the ordeal and the past year relatively unscathed and intact. But she is bitter. When she finds a letter in the mailbox from her sister, who writes to inform her family that she is not, in fact, dead and will be coming home, Sunny doesn't know whether to be upset or hopeful for her parents’ sake. Sunny must confront more than these confused feelings, though, when the girl who comes come back claiming to be her sister is not really Jazz but a smooth-talking, similar-looking impostor. Sunny’s mom accepts the look-alike as her daughter, but Sunny is determined to figure out the truth: Who is this girl, and how does she know so much about Jasmine, her life, her family? Why would someone steal Jasmine’s identity and life? Who would do this to Sunny’s family, and why? These questions are answered, but not before Giles introduces layers of suspense, tension, and family drama. I thought that, for the target audience—young teenagers—the suspense was sustained nicely until the “exposition” towards the end of the story. I didn't exactly dislike or disbelieve the explanation given for the mystery that I (and readers in general), like Sunny, had become invested in, but I did think it was underdeveloped and hurried in relation to the rest of the story. Everything after the exposition was the same: rushed, a birds-eye view of what followed for Sunny and her family that brushed on but didn't resolve the family and identity issues Sunny dealt with in the preceding pages. On the whole, though, I found this to be a fun little read, reminiscent of my beloved Lois Duncan novels from my “tween” years. I think that the ALA was right to market this book to reluctant readers; I also think that “tween” readers would find this novel engaging and fun to read. The story is fast-paced and captivating from the get-go: the first sentence introduces a mystery, and what follows is packed full of surprises, suspense, and new questions that will keep readers reading on. There are not difficult words, concepts, or narrative elements that will trip up readers, just a mystery enmeshed in a broken family’s problems. I don’t mean to imply that this book is overly simplistic or “fluff”; rather, it reminded me of a tightly woven mystery-suspense movie or TV show. Far from being “simplistic,” the novel raises questions and considerations about family, truth, belonging and acceptance, and identity. The ending could produce different interpretations, which might be a launching point for discussion and analysis in classroom or group discussions of the book. **Picked this up from the Public Library during class visit**
