“It’s a fine world, though rich in hardships at times.” What does one say about “Lonesome Dove”? Seriously? This epic novel is sprawling, contains a large cast of characters (in every sense of the word) and tells a story that combines the strongest elements of love that we can understand, those of a physical and intellectual nature. This novel begins on the Rio Grande in Lonesome Dove, Texas, makes a long journey to practically Canada by way of Montana, and ends back in Lonesome Dove. The main drivers of the story are former Texas Rangers, and business partners Augustus McCrae and Captain W.F. Call. I cared deeply about these two men. And Gus McCrae has to be one of the most quotable characters I have come across in all of literature. Honestly, “Lonesome Dove” is their story. It is a story of love and friendship. It does not sentimentalize either emotion, which makes it even more palpable, and true. Larry McMurtry does a stellar job of deftly interweaving three or four plot lines into a story that eventually converges. The writing is beautiful and concise (a rare combination) and McMurtry does not belabor points. And in an 858 page novel that is a mean feat! As for the characters, I can say I am a bit in love. No spoilers here, but McMurtry depicts the brutality of frontier life with a savageness that is realistic, quick, sudden, and then moved past. The reader will be jarred from time to time. McMurtry also helps create voice and point of view in this third person novel with subtle stylistic changes in the text as the omniscient narrator jumps from one character’s head to another. Just the manner in which the text was written (depending on the POV) would let you know what character’s head we were in. As a feat of writing McMurtry succeeds brilliantly in this book. As a feat of storytelling, “Lonesome Dove” is more than brilliant. Not one time when I picked up this text did I want to set it down because I was tired of reading it, or because the story dragged. Rather it was because life got in the way. Work, family, chores, etc. This text is funny (hysterically so at times) heartbreaking, exciting, hold your breath tense…I could go on and on. I won’t. It took me forty years to read “Lonesome Dove”. Do not make that mistake. I will revisit this text because I love some of these characters, and I miss them. I can’t wait to meet up with them again.
