This is a book about a mouse named Wolfgang Amadeus. This mouse was very small compared to his twelve other siblings. He would always lose races and get laughed at. He was constantly made fun of because of his long name compared to his small self. His siblings eventually got tired of saying his full name and just called him “Wolf”. The lady who lived in the house in which the mice lived in would play the piano every day. While Wolf’s siblings disliked the music Wolf quite liked it and began to carefully listen to it. Wolf found a liking in music and wished to sing rather than just squeak as mice do. One day, while the lady was asleep he decided to try to sing. To his surprise, his voice was beautiful. His mother finally recognized his talent as well as the lady who played the piano. The lady decides to test Wolf and plays “The Three Blind Mice” on the piano. She finally leaves and shuts the door, to make sure her cat doesn’t pose as a threat to the mice. She then decides to listen through the closed door. To her delight, Wolf was singing the song she had hoped to teach him. The lady wanted to make friends with Wolf so that they could accompany each other in singing. She begins to put chocolate on the floor by her piano to gain the mouse’s trust. She finally got Wolf to sing for her while she played the piano. One day the lady fell and Wolf had to seek help for her by using his high voice. While the lady was at the hospital, Wolf composed his own music. He sings it to the lady and she finds the music astounding. Wolf is happy to have her approval in the end. I like this book because it is, in my opinion funny. The way that the lady scolds herself for being crazy because she has a singing mouse and the relationship between Wolf and his mother is quite comedic to me. I like how the author started by making Wolf a looked down upon character and then transforming him into a character that is admired. Especially because the character was bullied but didn’t let it stop him, even though the bullying was from his own family. The author also included the message of not being afraid to try different things because you might just be great at them and you would never know if you never tried. The book also progressively shows how the lady gained the trust of the mouse and how after practice the mouse progressively gets better at singing and later on composing. I only wish that there was more background story on the mice because at some points it did get confusing because the author gave very little detail on Wolf’s family. I would recommend this to someone who wants a funny, light-hearted read.
