Impossible to provide one rating for these two novellas, as they are so different. A Simple Tale - unrated I honestly think I must've missed a huge chunk of this first novella. It ended so abruptly I could make no sense of what the trajectory of the story was. I listened to the last ten minutes at least four times. The central section, detailing Maria's experiences as a Ukranian worker in a German labour camp during WWII, her escape, marriage, and emigration to Canada, was riveting. But I have no idea where or how Maria's estrangement from her son or the death of her husband came to pass. And the bookending piece of Mrs. Ellington, Maria's employer, seemed lop-sided. Then, poof, the novella was over. Was there a piece missing from the audiobook? Did I fall asleep and miss a crucial bit? Disappointing, bizarre and I don't care enough to re-listen to figure it out. The Hunters - 4/5 This was my favourite of the two. I love an unreliable, unlikeable narrator on a journey to self-insight. There was a deeply-explored theme here related to our perception of reality being shaped through the lens of our own self-perception (Anaïs Nin's “We don't see the world as it is, we see it as we are”), and/or reality being created or manifested solely by our thinking it into being (in the Cartesian sense, if you want to be high-falutin', but also in the looser, woo-woo sense, law-of-attraction stuff). But WTF with the bunnies? An almost surreal detail, but at least this one stuck the landing. I wish Messud had developed this into a proper novel; I would've liked the greater scope that a longer format could have provided - especially, more on the nameless narrator's life before London and the romantic break-up that preceded their time there; and life after (the personal transformation referred to due to the new love interest in their life -- queer? either the first or the second would have been a same-sex relationship; we are not told the narrator's gender). Layered, intriguing, and suspenseful. Consumed by audio; both read very well by their respective performers.
