full review… Again I am truly mesmerized by Ken Follett's imagination his writing style and this absolute gem of a book Eye of the Neddle. This is an incredible novel that will keep you on the edge of your seat, with massive suspense, thriller and the elaborate machinations that only Follet could design! I'm truly shook! "In wartime, truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies. " —Winston Churchill Eye of the Needle became Follett’s first ‘breakthrough’ book, the one that got him accepted in publishing circles, and gave him early fame. Believe it or not, ‘Eye’ was his eleventh published book, as Follett himself describes “It was my eleventh try”! His eleventh try was a charm, because this book is phenomenal! A big difference according to Follett was his in depth research into the lives of soldiers and spies during WW II. Eye of the needle is a spot on, accurately written depiction of WW2 spy thriller at its best! . The research that went on the story is self evident from the very beginning. As in most relevant ‘historical fiction’ books, ‘the preface’ becomes critically important for laying down the landscape for the entire book. Follett starts with a description of a massive ‘D-Day’ deception. Allied forces (Brittain, US) conceived a brilliant ‘illusion’ of ships, tanks and barracks made of rubber, to fool the Germans into believing in a completely different location than ‘Normandy’ for the invasion of D-day: - “It was a huge, near-impossible deception. Literally thousands of people were involved in perpetrating the trick. It would have been a miracle if none of Hitler’s spies ever got to know about it. The remainder of the story is told in several first POVs, as we follow the most dangerous and effective German spy known as ‘Faber’ (code name ‘Eye of the Needle’). We’re also introduced to two British MI5 agents, and soon enough the race for WW II’s most well kept secret begins! The tension in this book is forever ascending..its fucking awesome! Follett creates memorable characters, and despite the fact we know the outcome of the war, and “Normandy’s D-day” surprise invasion, Follett takes the reader for a hellish ride! Faber, the German spy is so ruthless, yet Follett is able to dab speckles of humanity in his character..just brilliant. Despite his transgressions and murders, we almost feel compassion towards him! Themes of ‘nationalism’, ‘love’, ‘pride’ and ‘deception’ are widespread in this book. Also there are some romantic relationships including some vividly described ‘sex scenes’, that are done in good taste and add a great deal to the narrative. Follett again has impressed me with this masterpiece of war, deception and humanity’s greatest struggle for survival! Eye of the Needle is an expertly crafted WWII spy thriller, likely the best ever written amongst its genre! It’s a must read to those who enjoy thrillers and historical fiction! 5 Stars
