Det Ray Flowers is currently on sick leave recovering from a petrol bomb attack where he was badly burned. They were never able to catch who did or find out why. Ray moves into a cottage left to him by his aunt following her death. The village is quiet & quaint but Ray starts to see a young woman called Kitty in his dreams. Reading his aunt's diaries, Ray finds out that Kitty visited his aunt too & that Kitty lived & died several centuries before. As he starts to look into what happened to Kitty, he meets Sarah, a library archivist whom Ray starts to grow close to but he still feels a close bond to Kitty. Kitty is living in England in 1643 when the Civil War breaks out. Charles I raises the standard at Nottingham & goes into battle against Parliament. Kitty faces a battle of her own when a new minister & his family move into the village. Kitty was burned in a fire & is used to being looked at strangely, but the minister's wife takes an unhealthy dislike to her, which culminates in Kitty being accused of being a witch. She is taken to the Leicester Assizes where she will most likely be found guilty & sentenced to death. This book is a odd mix of genres - it couldn't make its mind up if it was a police procedural or a historical fiction with paranormal overtones. Out of the two storylines, I preferred Kitty's, she was a much more interesting character than anyone in the modern story. This odd mix meant that it felt a bit disjointed & Ray's connection to Kitty was very strange. A few sightings of a ghost haunting the cottage & some dreams I can sort of understand but about two thirds of the way through it takes an even stranger turn. Whilst in bed with girlfriend Sarah, she is 'replaced' by Kitty & Ray sleeps with her. Sex with ghosts? Is this Greys Anatomy? Could it technically be considered a threesome? What is even worse is that it intimates that this actually happened to Kitty in her time & that Ray takes her virginity. This puts Kitty at risk as the local witchfinder is intent on proving that Kitty has been consorting with the devil, & as a single woman, not being a virgin will be a death sentence. It's all very 'huh?' & then the ending is a complete damp squib. Very abrupt & it felt as if things had been left unfinished. I have an ARC of a later book in this series for review so I read this one first, & I'm hoping it's not quite as odd as this one.
