The Stranger was first published by Albert Camus in the original French in 1942. I cannot help comparing the hollowness, the emptiness in Meursault’s soul to the soldier in Hemingway’s short story “ Soldier's Home ”. But in that story, Hemingway describes a change from the war and his reactions are connected with his recent martial experiences. Camus makes no mention of Meursault’s past experience, his emptiness is fundamental to his soul, and his reaction is to the world in general. Camus introduces us to his ideas about absurdity, about how futile it is for us to try, desperately and mostly irrationally, to make sense out of the universe, to try and parcel out a small lot of order amidst a sea of chaos. Such ideas of family, justice, religion and nationality appear in Camus’ perspective to be pale and insignificant abstractions in a furnace like hell of indifference. The closing scenes between Meursault and the priest are in rare, high and thin air in the world of literature and I could only think of the final confrontation between Raskolnikov and Porfiry in Dostoyevsky’s Crime and Punishment for an adequate comparison. This is a short and easy read, but heavy with inference and provocation. *** 2024 reread - Seems like I may have read a different translation this time, I could be wrong, it's been years since I last read this, but it just seemed a little different. This was the Matthew Ward translation, which I very much enjoyed reading. Described by some as the most meaningful treatise on existentialism ever written, this novella packs in more than most novels twice the length. I cannot comment on whether this is a great existential book as I have a limited basis of comparison with only a few other such books read. I do believe this is a great book. The most obvious literary comparison will be to Dostoyevsky, but this reread made me also consider a comparison to The Shootist by Glendon Swarthout and, obliquely, to Walter Tevis' novel The Man Who Fell to Earth. An afterward by the translator stated that Camus intentionally used terse language to create a simple surface story but the provocative nature of the narrative reveals a plethora of hidden meanings and thoughtful inquiries into existence. I'm sure this is on a list of books that must be read and I would agree with such a placement.
