I enjoyed the book and yet seriously disliked it, as you shall see. It seems to me that high-altitude mountaineering has a serious credibility gap. Or at least it did 18 years ago when the book was written. Perhaps times have changed. the book wants you to believe that once you ascend into the death zone, strong, experienced climbers suddenly go catatonic and die of exposure or other mishap. Which climber gets struck by this is utterly random and unpredictable. I don't believe it. I expect that a blood oxygen level test, simple cognitive tests, and other medical tests taking only a few minutes would identify which climbers are weakening under the strain. These should be required to return to camp before they ascend the next obstacle and place themselves further beyond aid. As it is, identifying which climbers are not physically capable of summiting and returning to camp is left up to each climber individually. To their credit, some climbers sense that "it's not their day" and they return to safety. However, far too many climbers miscalculate, summit, and then die while descending. Life and death decisions should not be made by people with their mental skills deteriorating and the summit of Everest literally within sight. The age of heroic exploration is over. There is no glory in summiting Everest and then spending the next couple days dying of exposure, unable to descend, all while leaving behind a wife and kids. Furthermore, the companies that sponsor these expensive expeditions should insist on a simple testing system to avoid these outcomes. Surely they find it extremely embarrassing to sponsor an expedition that leaves several of its members dead on Everest. Or do they have no shame? In case you think I'm being dramatic, read the book. Everest is apparently littered with bodies. The difficulty of finding Mallory was partially about DIFFERENTIATING HIS CORPSE FROM ALL THE OTHER CORPSES. Fortunately that wasn't too hard, since he didn't have modern climbing gear. Still, the corpses they found could be catalogued by the condition of the body, since some victims apparently cartwheeled down the precipice at terminal velocity. The authors fail to give us perspective by publishing guesses as to how many feet the corpses fell. I was also unimpressed with how the high-altitude climbing community processes such deaths, many of which appear to be needless. This is done with a combination of alcohol and Buddhist beliefs. I don't know much about Buddhism, but frankly it appears to be a form of escape from reality. Instead of contemplating your mistakes while slowly dying of exposure, mistakes which surely sink to the level of sins when leaving behind a family, and coming to the realization that you are dying due to a lack of humility, and that perhaps it's time to ask for forgiveness before death, the Buddhist initiate instead concentrates on keeping his/her emotions flat while becoming one with the abominable snowman. Or some such ridiculousness. Yes, definitely unimpressed with Buddhism and mountain climbing. Mallory at least had an excuse. He literally had no idea that he could not successfully summit Everest. He did not know the obstacles in the way, because no one else had climbed Everest. He did seem to be aware that the climbing gear of the day was simply inadequate. However he, too, was guilty of miscalculating. The authors believe he slipped while attempting to down climb in the dark. Very plausible. So, read the book, enjoy it, but don't be impressed by the underlying attitude of indestructibility. The truth is there, but I'm not sure the mountaineering community has embraced it yet.
