Robert Shiller is my favorite person to see interviewed on economics. He chooses his words carefully, always saying the economy is unpredictable while being heralded as a prophet. No matter how many times he stares into a camera and tells people he has never predicted the future of the economy, people still believe the myths. Like Kurt Cobain yelling songs about how much he hates his job and fans while growing more popular by the hour. So I've been wanting to read this book for years. I've read some of Shiller's academic papers and enjoyed them. Shiller really digs into the complete picture of economics, delving, or forging even, into the area of psychology in order to fill-out the frame. In this book, Shiller and his research associates have put huge amounts of time into looking at past significant changes in the stock and housing markets in order to try and understand them. This time included data base and internet searches for news stories including certain phrases to try and understand the prevalence of certain ideas. One of these ideas is economic bubbles. Bubbles are those events which can't reasonably be explained by fundamental ideas of business or economics. They are agreed to be strictly events of sociology or some outside influence that suddenly causes business or market changes by extraordinary force. One of the issues of studying economics is that much of it is learned from history. Few people understand this fact. Many believe that the future of economics can be predicted or calculated/modeled with certainty. Shiller is clearly in a camp of people who don't believe that but is also, as a scholar, open to what can be learned from such calculations and models. Several bubbles are identified and attempts are made to understand or explain them in hindsight. The efforts to employ psychology come up short for me. They get very close but don't offer satisfying results. As an example, there is a section which talks about epidemic diseases and how they spread. These models are then applied, with agreed limitations, to the spread of information. This is done to try and explain how an idea like, 'Houses never lose money" spreads through society and causes changes in prices through buying activity. These ideas all made sense but I never quite got the exact connection. The psychology was too light. Perhaps it's there, if I were to scour the notes section and references. I suspect Shiller has been quite thorough but the words themselves left me wondering, "Exactly what is the connection with psychology?" I believe it's there. Perhaps another reading is in order. I wonder what his wife, a psychologist or social scientist of some kind, thinks about his efforts to combine psychology and economics. It comes off a bit "psychology light." The ideas of psychology and economic fundamentals are contrasted toward the middle of the book with the "efficient markets" theory. This theory essentially says that the market, in the long term, will always obey supply and demand laws. All of the people transacting to make up the economy serve to even-out lawbreaking events and therefore, the economy lends itself to predictability and, even, calculation. Shiller even admits that perhaps the reason some of his ideas show problems with the idea of an efficient market is that there hasn't been enough time to adequately, statistically signficantly, measure. This book covers huge ground. Toward the end there is even some scathing commentary on how the United States military preference might play into future states of economy. The killing of so many people will no doubt find some retribution. While I've leaned on Shiller's ideas and information heavily in a decision not to spend a large percentage of my net worth on a house, I came away from this book thinking intensely about how much I've leaned on the stock market. Shiller's idea of wise investing is clearly different form that espoused by the 401k support brought-in by the financial institutions holding the funds. I will look closely again at how my money is invested. Good luck to those trying to predict the future state of the economy. Experts agree that is not the point. One can only try to learn from the past by taking reasonable actions based on fundamentals and the hypothesis that the past presents tendencies which will be repeated. Luck might swing one way or the other so best to learn as much as you can and apply the ideas so as not to be unlucky.
