I tried. I really, really did. Everyone kept telling me I'd love it, that is was so seminal to recent sci-fi that I just had to read it if I was to truly appreciate the genre… And then I did and I was like… "Meh!" To be fair, a lot of elements of "Snow Crash" are flipping cool. I for one, look forward to the day and age where pizza-delivery mafias will replace the governement; can't be worse than what's going on now. The origins of language and how language shapes the human mind is such a fascinating subject, as is the Sumerian mythology used to bring these concepts on. But these things are so overwhelmed by male-adolescent fantasy-fulfilling elements that the good bits end up too little too late for me. A katana-wielding hacker/pizza delivery boy who goes by the name of Hiro Protagonist (I am not even kidding) is recruited by his corporation-running-genius ex-girlfriend to find and destroy a computer virus named Snow Crash that destroys the minds of the hackers plugged into the Metaverse who come in contact with it. He partners up with YT, a daredevil skateboarding teenage girl with a serious attitude problem. Hiro will soon find a link between the Snow Crash, which turns out to be a neuro-linguistic virus, and a religious organization who seeks to use it as a tool for mass population control. The uneven pace, the huge piles of exposition, chase scenes that are as useless as one infamous pod-race, the clumsy way Stephenson tries to make YT's chapters sound more like her by dumbing down his writing (if I see the word "thingy" one more time, so help me…): all these things were so annoying that while I can appreciate what he was doing, I did not have a good reading experience slugging my way through "Snow Crash". I'm sorry Neal: I know you were trying really, really hard, but I think that might just be your problem, trying too hard. Of course, now I know where "The Matrix", "Ready Player One" and a ton of other books and video games got their ideas from, and that's great. I am glad I read it, but I won't be re-reading it; if language related sci-fi is your thing, check out "Embassytown" by Mieville, which is dense, but at least it's gorgeously written.
