Sage MacKenzie had been a trapper since he was 16 and he was now 30. He was on his way to Fort Bridger to pick up winter supplies. The demand for furs had diminished and earned money sometimes as a guide for parties traveling through. He saw smoke in the distance and headed that way. He hid when he saw Indians headed away from the smoke mumbling something about a Crazy Woman. He found a burnt wagon with a man charred underneath it. A dark haired women with violet eyes was nearby but staring off into space. He checked her for injuries and found none and she wasn't talking so he placed her on his horse to take her with him to the fort. He ran into some men he knew and one of them came back the next day to try and take the woman from him. He ended up killing Moose in self-defense and burying him. The woman still didn't talk but made it clear that she wanted to have sex with Sage and she began cooking for him. They made it to the fort and she still wasn't talking. Sage called her Venado which was Indian for little deer. Sage spoke with a preacher at the fort and he agreed to let her join their wagons. She then yelled Sage and started crying as he left. Sage missed her and felt like he might have loved her. One of the guys from the fort, Sax, found Sage during storm a few days later and told him that the woman had run off and hadn't left with the wagon train. Sage began a search for her that lasted three days. An Indian friend, Red Dog found Sage and told him that his woman was with his wife and was sick. Sage went to her and nursed her back to health while staying a few days with the Indians. He went back to the fort for supplies and there were a couple of guys there who were running from the law. Sage and Venado headed to a cabin through the snow and Sax delayed the men at the fort from leaving for a few days. Soon after they arrived at the cabin, Venado told Sage that her name was Mary and she seemed to be less afraid. Then the two men from the fort found her alone in the cabin and one of them raped her. She fought back and was badly bruised. She retreated back into her mind to where she had been raped by what she remembered as the Comanche Indians. Sage returned to the cabin and killed the two men and threw them off a nearby cliff because there was no way to bury them. Mary no longer appeared to recognize Sage and her progress had been reversed. She no longer talked and Sage kept her with him when he left the cabin. They were out collecting wood one day when Mary saw a grizzly bear and ran from it. The bear changed directions and attacked Sage. Mary began talking and it was as if she had never lost her voice. She took Sage back to the cabin following his directions. Mary didn't remember anything about the last few days at all. Sage knew that she recognized him again and knew he was badly injured. Mary wasn't sure what to do but knew she had to remain in the moment so she could nurse him back to health. Mary was Marietta St. Claire. Her father was a banker and had moved to Austin before it became a state. A friend of her fathers from New Orleans came to visit with their son. Rafael Cousteau and Marietta fell in love and were married in New Orleans when she was 17. They lived in Austin with her parents and Rafe worked with her father at his bank. Ten months after their wedding she had a baby girl. They were taking a buggy ride one afternoon when they were attacked by renegade Comanche Indians. Rafe had been shot in the back with an arrow, their daughter, Elizabeth had been tossed around like a ball until she was dead and Mary was taken. She had been repeatedly raped by the Comanche and other Indian warriors who visited the camp as they traveled. She was eventually sold to a whiskey trader and ended up in Wyoming. Her father and husband searched for her for sixteen months before they stopped. James had not returned to work and spent most of his time in bed. He left the running of his bank to Rafe. Charlet blamed James and Rafe for Mary's disappearance. Rafe moved out of their house because it was no longer the happy place it had once been. Sage started running a fever and Mary could tell the wounds on his chest had become infected. She didn't know what to do so she poured whiskey over them and wrapped his chest again. Red Dog and Walks Slowly came to the cabin and Mary let them in to see if they could provide help for Sage. They put some herbs on him and chanted over him. Sage recovered and Mary unknowingly called him Rafe while preparing food for him. Red Dog and Walks Slowly left and told Sage that they would return in the spring but they weren't sure that Sage would be there. They felt he would be returning to the white man's world with Mary. Sage wasn't so sure but knew that faced with the decision of leaving the mountains or leaving Mary, he would choose Mary. Mary had started to remember small things in her past but not yet any people They discussed the possibility that she might be pregnant. About a month after the pregnancy discussion, Sage brought in some wet wood and was banging the pieces together to separate them. The banging of the wood caused Mary to remember what the Comanche had done to her child. She remembered them hitting her baby's head against some rocks. Her memory came flooding back and with it the knowledge of the Comanche's raping her, the other Indians who had done things to her, the whiskey trader and the men at the cabin. She told Sage that she didn't know who the father of her baby was and that she didn't want it. She was going to lose it and she didn't care. She wished she was dead. Sage then noticed that she was bleeding heavily and she lost the baby. It took her a week to recover but she did survive the ordeal. She thought that her husband might be dead but she wasn't sure. Sage told her that he would take her back to Texas from Wyoming when the snow had melted enough for them to travel. Her family needed to know that she was alive. They headed towards Texas a few months later. Mary was sorry to be leaving the cabin and her memories there. They encountered more Indians on their journey and another bear. Sage killed the bear without being injured this time. The bear had killed an Indian's 8 yr-old son. Mary learned that Indians were people with feelings too. She learned to trust Sage's judgment of people and they arrived safely in Austin. Sage took her home to her parents house. Her mother wasn't happy with Sage being there and knowing that her daughter had slept with him. She didn't take into account all the Mary had gone through and that she thought her husband was dead. Charlet was seemed more concerned with what other people would say and think about Mary after being gone for so long and being with Indians. Sage was angry but there was nothing he could do. Sage then went and talked with Rafe to tell him that he had returned Mary to her parents. He made him promise to take care of Mary and not let her stay too long with her mother. Rafe promised to take Mary away and start over someplace else. Rafe allowed Mary to see Sage the next day to tell him goodbye. Sage told Mary that he would be okay and so would she. This was the way things were meant to be and he left. She crumpled and wept bitterly as Sage rode away. He had cried before he set out to tell her goodbye. Within a few days, Mary knew that she was pregnant with Sage's child. Rafe was being patient about having sex with Mary and knowing that she was pregnant, she agreed to sex with him. She decided to pretend the child was early when she had him. She told Rafe that she was pregnant when she was sick on their journey from Austin to their new home in St. Louis. Her parents had also left Austin and returned to New Orleans. Sage left to wander through Texas and see the country. He ran into a boy who was in an unfair fight and decided to help him out. That was when he met Randy Lucas. They continued south and joined in the Mexican - American war effort. Randy was 18 and had been on his own for a few years since his mother had died of a beating by his father. They traveled together and fought in the war together. Sage was injured by a bayonet being thrust into his right him. It was five months before he could walk again and riding was painful and would most likely always be. He and Randy went back to Austin to check on Mary and found out that she had moved to St. Louis and had given birth to a boy. Mary tried to pass off the baby as premature but Rafe quickly realized that the child was Sage's. He was bitter over the fact that this child would inherit the millions he owned and he would not even be his own flesh and blood. The named the baby James Raphael after Mary's father had Rafe. Rafe had tried to get over what had happened to Mary but was losing the battle. They could put on a show for others but they both knew that things between them had changed. Sometimes when he made love to her he could see the Indians mauling her, he imagined the whiskey trader and others using her. Now he had a constant reminder having to raise Sage's son. Mary attended a party given by Henry VanCouver and he asked her to dance. Mary watched Rafe dancing with Henry's daughter and recognized that Roslyn and he were in love with each other. Rafe had been spending more time away from Mary and they hadn't made love in months. Mary left the party and Rafe followed her out. They talked of what was happening to them. Mary understood but she was angry because Rafe was being unfaithful knowing exactly what he was doing. Mary had given up Sage even though she was still in love with him and had no way of reaching him after all the time that had passed. Sage and Randy left Texas and stopped for a drink. They both ended up sleeping with barmaids who mentioned gold being found in California. Randy talked Sage into going there with him. They ended up striking in rich and Sage didn't spend much of his share of the money they made. Randy tended to spend a lot on drinking and women. Sage was getting tired of working the mine. Randy was reckless and bought a lot of blasting powder to use in the mine. Sage told him that he should hire someone to blast the claim for them rather than work with explosives that they were not experienced with. Randy and he argued and Sage left him on the mountain. Sage was getting ready to talk to an explosives man when there was a huge explosion on the mountain where his claim was. He went back to find Randy's body and buried him there. Sage headed back to Wyoming. He had money now but still couldn't seem to get over Mary. Mary hadn't seen Sage in three years. She and Rafe had divorced and he had married Roslyn. Mary joined another family and headed west to find Sage. The trip was brutal. One man accidentally shot himself and died from infection. There were bugs, snakes and heat that they all had to deal with. The trip was long and tiring. The wagon train was delayed when measles broke out and James got sick. They finally arrived at Ft. Laramie and Mary could see that James was regaining his strength. Thankfully, she had been spared from the disease. Sage was also at Ft. Laramie looking for work. Mary was napping and thought she heard his voice. She got out of the wagon she was resting in with James and saw him talking to some men. He had been hired to lead her wagon train to California. He had an Indian girl with him. Mary was worried that he had found someone to replace her but Sage told her that she was Sioux. She had been captured by the Crow and he had purchased her to return her to her people who were camped just outside of Ft. Laramie. Mary introduced Sage to his son who was now two and a half years old. Mary and Sage were married that evening after her returned from taking Sweet Bird back to her people.
