There is, I thought, almost no useful thing the human animal will not in his eternal perversity misuse, whether it be alcohol, gasoline, gunpowder, aspirin, chocolate fudge, mescaline, or LSD I'm not sure what happened here. I've really enjoyed all of the Travis McGee books up to here. One of them I think I thought slogged a little bit, but it was able to recover in its own way. This one just never seemed to really get going, until maybe the last 20 pages, but then it felt more like MacDonald felt like he should actually put some action into the novel. Although I'm not certain that the strangers on the beach who choke McGee out inexplicably in the middle of the book weren't added in after he wrote the ending and realized he had to include Israeli Secret Agents showing up on the scene at exactly the right moment to save the day... it was a kind of lame ending Lately, I've been in a 'reading' mood, so I don't think the way I was trudging through the book and not being able to get really into it was just because of my own shitty attention span. One of McGee's women 'friends' who he had helped out (Kempers review of this book where he said the portrayal of women makes Mad Men look like Feminist Propaganda made me laugh, and it's sort of accurate, although women are very weirdly portrayed in MacDonald's novels, it's sort of a bizarre mix of sexual liberation and deep down women want to be a no-strings attached fuck buddy with hulking / morse beach bums (let's include Meyer in this, too. It's not just McGee. But what's weird about the whole thing are the 'political' asides or musings that go on in McGee's head, he knows he's a shit, he knows the world is shit, he knows women get the short end of the stick and that everything is becoming bland and homogenized through consumerism, blah blah blah... but still a few weeks on a boat off the Florida Coast with McGee is a fairly standard treatment in these novels for anything that ails a broken female character.... I think this quote kind of gives a feeling of the weird spot women occupy in these novels... I think my shtick, Heidi, is that I enjoy all aspects of a woman. I tlike the way their minds work. I like the sometimes wonderful and sometimes nutty ways they figure things out and relate themselves to reality. I like the arguments, the laughs, the quarrels, the competitions, the making up. A nearby girl makes the sky bluer, the drinks better, the food tastier. She gives the days more texture, and you know it is happening to her in the same way. How this relates to Heidi Geis Trumbill is that I have the feeling it is a damned shame you stand outside the gates with a kind of wistful curiosity about what it's like inside. I want to be sort of a guide, showing off new and pretty country to the tourist. Life is so damned valuable and so totally miraculous, and they give you such a stingy little hunk of it from womb to tomb, you out to use all the parts of it there are. I guess I would say that I want to be friends. A friend wants to help a friend. I want to peel away that suspicious and contention because I don't think it's really what you're like. If we can get friendship going, then maybe we can get a good physical intimacy going, and from t hat we can fall into a kind of love, or fall into an affection close to love. If it happens, it adds up to more than the sum of the two people, and it is that extra part out of nowhere that has made all the songs and the poetry and the art. I'm still in my parenthetical aside.... what I realized while typing out that kind of long passage (which is kind of beautiful and creepy since it's basically him rationalizing to a woman who doesn't like physical intimacy how he wants to fix her, is that noble to want to help someone in this way, can a life not be happily lived with almost no physical interaction with other human beings?)... yep still in my aside... but what I realized is that this isn't a crime novel. But a crime had to be added, this is MacDonald's own weird attempt at writing a love story for McGee (actually his second, one of the first novels had the element included, but it ended so badly). The crime just had to be sort of tacked around McGee falling for a woman unlike most of the broken 'birds' (as they are called sometimes) and beach hounds that normally show up in the novels. And I guess there is something twisted that the first woman McGee falls in love with his murdered by the end of the book, and in this one she leaves him but not until after she is brutally damaged by an ex-Nazi. The off page, never told exactly what happened to her in that bathroom was much for jarring and effective then if it had been described... sort of the same way in early Richard Stark novels the beatings and other things that take place with only a brief mention are more horrific than if they had been graphically shown . I've let this whole thing get away from me....)... right so one of his friends he helped out, her husband dies. He was well off but now the money is gone. She calls McGee to come up from Sunny Florida to Wintery Chicago to help find out what happens. And that is what he does. That's my book report and rambling aside. Off to the next McGee novel soon, and hopefully I'll be back to enjoying them again!
