OK, more popular genre fiction doing a very mediocre job of representing their genre. Child and Preston must have a fan at the local independent bookstore because several of these McNuggets of entertainment are on their recommended shelf. After reading a few of them, I'm not sure why. Two dimensional comic book characters (and not in a good way), over-wrought plots, unbelievable exploits, yadda yadda. Probably the most fundamental criticism I can make regards their craft. They consistently tell us about the amazing abilities of Diogenes and Pendergast rather than showing them to us. They seem to want to set up Pendergast as a modern Holmes - Mycroft even - and yet their descriptions of his abilities boil down to magic. "And then through his amazing intellectual abilities, Pendergast saw the solution: 'Aha!' he exclaimed. 'Follow me!' This isn't a direct quote but you see this pattern throughout the Pendergast novels. Similarly they might describe a fight intended to illustrate Pendergast's amazing martial arts skills as follows: "Pendergasts movement blurred and his opponent fell to his feet unconscious. 'Anyone else?'" We might as well be reading Batman issue #1, here. "Through his amazing super-science, Batman analyzes the crime scene and identifies his culprit." Also, they make no attempt to make the elements of their stories remotely believable. In Brimstone, for instance, they invent some kind of microwave weapon that you cart about like a bazooka and melt people in their homes. In another story they invent a young lady who has lived an extraordinarily long life and yet remains essentially a pre-adolescent. These elements could have been handled in a credible way - that is, we could have been persuaded to suspend disbelief - but as it is, they are literal comic-book devices, no more intriguing than the Super-Villain of the week back in the Silver Age of comics. I read this book shortly after reading Jasper Fforde's lampoons of detective fiction - the Nursery Crimes series. I burst out laughing as soon as Pendergast appeared on the scene. A master of disguise, with a sidekick, a bizarrely expensive and impractical classic car, and an unpronouncable name. Child and Prestons work on these characters was momentarily diverting but ultimately a waste of time and money. Now don't get me wrong - I *love* comic books, from the classic (and ultimately poorly written) characters to the most innovative thing created today. But a novel isn't a comic book and the worst comic book I've read this year beats this. Jeeze - enough with the negative reviews - gotta post something I like.
