Artisans, it seems, are very important for Kay. Tigana had musicians, Sarantine duology a mosaicist as the main protagonist, in Arbonne, fashioned after the medieval Provence and Occitania, troubadours are in the middle of things (along with joglars and trobairitz, that is female performers). With them, the ideals of court love, gallantry, poetry, tournaments, knights and dames and all the associated drama constitutes a backbone of this novel. To give you a proper context: Dante Alighieri saw the love of his life, a woman named Beatrice, 4 times altogether (this is what you'll find in his biographies, however hard it is to ascertain the truth). Once, when they were kids, and then three times more (including her wedding to Simon dei Bardi and one encounter on a street when she did not respond to his greeting). Beatrice wasn't Dante’s lover, not even his friend or merely an acquaintance and yet, against those odds she was the ultimate love of his life (as you know if you have read his poetry). At the same time, Dante was married, had children and numerous lovers. But his love, and devotion and art — all that was only for Beatrice (even after her death). Another celebrated poet, Petrarca , was 3 years junior to his beloved Laura (he was 23 and she was 26 when they met in 1327 in Avignon). She was married and had 12 children, but Petrarca loved her ardently his whole life. She was the axis around which his art revolved (his poetry is divided into In vita di madonna Laura and In morte di madonna Laura ). Jaufré Rudel , one of the most famous medieval troubadours, didn't even see the love of his life in person - he has been shown a small picture of a lady from Tripoli. This was enough to infuse him with love and all knightly intentions. He joined a crusade but arrived in Tripoli already dying. When the lady in question learned about this, she came to his deathbed, offered him a ring and he died gazing at her. Soon after she became a nun. All the above stories are true, and if you find them ridiculous, you will have problems reading this novel. In the Song for Arbonne Kay wishes to emulate this ambiance and state of mind, creating a country characterised by a soft, somewhat effeminate culture, ruled by a woman, worshipping a goddess and torn apart by a decades-long feud between two of the most powerful lords over another woman. You need to be open to the romantic notions and rules of medieval courtly love to accept the premises for this design. This female-dominated Arbonne is the juxtaposed with Gorhaut espousing all things male , including masculine, military-driven culture and a warrior deity. Here you have the other element of the book design, a religious war somewhat mimicking the events of the Albigensian crusade . Conflict is imminent between the two states and the focal point of the brewing war is a young Gorhautian mercenary resisting in Arbonne, one Blaise. I fond Blaise a likable hero, conflicted and marred by his past, but likable (also at times hilarious). It soon transpires that he is much more than an unassuming sword for hire and as the plot thickens and connections become apparent, Blaise is forced to pave his own way to save both countries from peril. Sadly for me, Song of Arbonne, consists mainly of half measures and does not meet the standards I expected from Kay. He merely scratches the surface of so many different issues that should have been properly explored or uses shortcuts regarding plot-twists and character developments that after finishing the last chapter I was in a truly foul mood. Beautiful language and interesting scene here or there are saving graces, but overall the book is of average quality. Feminine Arbonne and masculine Gorhaut were perhaps meant to show that taking things to the extreme is harmful in both ways, that male and female element must be balanced, but you will not find it in the book. The clash comes and goes without any reflection of what had caused it (and the religious element doesn't really fit or reverberate properly). This is to some extent caused by the major weakness of the novel, i.e. the villains. Villains here are pathetic evil creatures. We have two of them, the king of Gorhaut is a monster of rare quality, while the High Elder, the religious leader, is just evil period. You will not find back stories, nuances or details that would invite the reader to understand (if not endure) their rationale. There is just everything you can imagine inserted into this character to ensure that the readers hate him without compunction. And Kay I know is able to write complex black characters to fall in love with! Finally, I had some qualms with the main love story of the book lying at the foundation of the unfolding drama . If you think about it, we read on thinking that the main engine for events is a drama between two men who had the same woman - we are led on believing that only one loved her. We even pity the poor girl and her fate. But this is proven to be false! Firstly, Aelis what a horrible, spoiled brat that was! She ruined lives of two men, her own parents, and her cousin, and endangered the very existence of her country on a whim - not to mention the fact that she deprived her daughter of a father! two fathers in fact! grandparents... a proper family... everything, because in her sick head there was no place for anything save revenge and lack of forgiveness. Her second victim was her lover, Bertrand, who carried the torch of her love for twenty-some years, even though the feeling continues against himself. This is the reason why he beds all the women he can; to find if not a replacement, then somebody who can make him forget, if only for one night. Undoubtedly Bertand is also a victim of this tragic love, just like his dead paramour. He is also a victim because Aelis locked him within a world of hatred for her husband Urte. Urte and Bertand become like king and yang, unable to live lives independently of each other: “they needed each other to keep alive the clear, bitter memories of that long-ago year, to give each other, however inexplicable it might appear, a reason to continue living.” But Urte, Urte is the greatest victim. Only in the last chapter is it revealed that the portrait of a crude, unfeeling husband Aelis painted has been false. Urte loved all these years, but because he himself was more Gorhautian in demeanour and habits than Arbonnais nobody realised this was the case. He loved but was not loved in return. And Aelis attributed him only the hatred she felt. And what? And nothing. The whole thing is shrugged over. Nothing is explored. As if the package of love is more important than the very thing. This is also a shortcut not worthy of the author I know and admire. In the end, I found the book simplistic. Several shortcuts and yet the finale is not neat; too many flapping loose ends. I am not sure if Kay himself knew where the story would go because we didn't have his usual foreshadowing indicating mastery of every detail in the design. Promising beginning, and pathetic ending. Some fun in between. No swoon though, so don't start your journey with Kay here. You might wish to try Tigana first or the Sarantine Mosaic duology set in Byzantium-like world: Sailing to Sarantium and Lord of Emperors . ---- This was a buddy read with the Kay Squad at FBR.
