Huh...well that was interesting. Yet another book that defies it's genre novel trappings and tries to just push a unique set of characters to their limit. If you really wanted a trashy horror novel you'll probably be throwing this book against the wall in the last quarter, when it becomes clear that the tense, eerie mood being built upon is only an entity unto itself and is never truly given full reign. This is clearly more of an atmosphere story than one of substance. Spoiler-alert: The hotel creeper never really becomes a monster or acts on his violent emotions of lust and aggressive loneliness. He's just a misunderstood developmentally handicapped weirdo who lives in the air grates. There is no showdown or fight for life in the confines of the hotel. He's just a useless tragic character. He's not even a well-developed tragic martyr as his back story and relationship to the hotel and family are never fully fleshed out enough for you to deeply care or be intrigued. Really this is more of a slice of life romance between two teens escaping real life horrors like rape, abusive parents, neglect, small town drudgery, grief and what not. They have a slow burn chemistry and friendship that turns into a relationship you can really care about. This ended up being the only redeeming point of what could have been an empty story. Their innocent aim to create an artificial paradise from the stresses of life is poignant in a way. Frank, the rapey alcoholic abusive dad that initiates the movement of the plot is your run of the mill "kick a puppy level villain" as my sister would say. He's so irredeemable, nasty and rough that it's more unintentionally funny than threatening. He's the kind of one dimensional sociopath that see's his 14 year old stepdaughter sunbathing and thinks "that damn tease! I better teach her a lesson with my dick". This guy was so dead from the moment he was introduced. He's the token throwaway asshole. My beef with Judy's character is that while I enjoyed her interaction and relationship with Marty, her character otherwise acts as a lust target to drive the action and attention of literally every man she comes across.....but she's 14. That's creepy as hell and the author describing her as having a mature or womanly figure didn't make that anymore reasonable or less pedo. Her breasts get exposed more than a chick in a bodice ripper and nearly every interaction is against her will. Just blegh! Too creepy and unnecessary. The ending is pretty meh as well. It stretches out this odd unexplained paranoia and then follows it up with nothing. I almost laughed out loud when I got to the bottom of the last page. It was like "We couldn't get rid of this foreboding feeling that the nightmare wasn't over so we went back to the hotel. It was like re-entering a surreal dream. Every sound reverberated back into our heartbeat. Every shadow held the promise of a lurking ghoul. When we got to the basement nothing was there. What a relief!! Then we skipped into the moonlight and snuggled. The end". Like wtf? So, yeah I have mixed emotions about how the story was handled but I can also admit it was entertaining and not altogether a waste of time. The story had more potential than it lived up to but it's worth it for the great relationship development between Marty and Judy.
