Despite having some of the best worldbuilding in its genre, Robert Adams' Horseclans novels are awash in "unconventional" storytelling decisions. Arguably the biggest of those shortcomings is Adams' bizarre tendency to skip past major plot events. Huge battles, significant character moments, and even deaths occur off-page, only to be repeatedly referenced after a sudden time jump. Extremely frustrating. At least across the first seven volumes in the series, easily the biggest such omission was the fate of Bili Morguhn's company in the western wilderness, as left unresolved at the end of The Savage Mountains . Bili obviously survived, as a much older version of our hero appears in The Patrimony , but we're left wondering how Bili, the Moon Maiden Rahksahnah (Bili's future wife), and their followers made their way back to the Confederation. Thankfully, The Death of a Legend finally begins to provide readers with the details of Bili's western expedition. One of the more satisfying Horseclans novels up to this point, even if it adopts an unusual framing and continues to be hampered by many of Adams' idiosyncrasies. Technically, The Death of a Legend is set several decades after The Patrimony , with an elderly Bili Morguhn lying on his deathbed after a hunting accident. That being said, the bulk of the plot takes the form of extended flashbacks, with a feverish Bili vividly recalling the events of his most famous campaign. This takes us back to the days immediately following the volcanic explosion at the end The Savage Mountains . Bili, the Moon Maidens, and their allies are separated from the rest of the Confederation army, and are forced to find new friends in the region while avoiding Muhkohee raids. Encountered along the way are a hidden fiefdom ruled by exiled Middle Kingdom noblemen, as well as a race of Sasquatch-like telekinetic giants. The biggest peculiarity here is that much of the novel's first-third is devoted to recounting various battles that were already depicted (from a different POV) in A Cat of Silvery Hue and The Savage Mountains . The fact that The Death of a Legend fills the biggest plot gap in the series automatically makes it an above-average Horseclans novel. Its core plot, with its relatively narrow focus upon Bili, Rahksahnah, and company, is also consistently engaging. And special kudos to the giant Teenéhdjook as Adams' best worldbuilding addition since the earliest volumes of the series. Unfortunately, The Death of a Legend is kept from greatness but a handful of (easily fixable) decisions, ultimately preventing more than a 3-star rating. For starters, although Adams' prose has significantly improved over the years, he continues to spend far too much time on unnecessary detail and can be difficult to follow. The fever dream framing of the story is also wholly unnecessary, especially since Adams had already abandoned a linear chronology on Horseclans Odyssey . Why not simply write a proper sequel to The Savage Mountains ? Still, easily my biggest issue is Adams' decision to spend 30-40 pages recapping events from A Cat of Silvery Hue to The Savage Mountains . Either Adams was desperate to fill out his standard page length, or was worried that readers had forgotten important details from those stories. All of this implies that The Death of a Legend is a mixed bag, and I suppose that's true, but it's a mixed bag that the average Horseclans fan should enjoy. If you've gotten this far in the series, there's really no reason to stop here. And given that the "extended flashback" structure of this novel continues in The Witch Goddess , you'll probably finish the book eager to read more.
