The Redneck Manifesto is a rant. The sort of rant you might hear at any number of grimy dive bars across the country on any given night. A rant that is, unquestionably, entirely more entertaining and slick that you would hear at those dive bars. It’s even a rant with endnotes! But if it’s an intelligent rant, it’s not an accurate one, endnotes notwithstanding. Jim Goad is angry, and if you’re a hillbilly, hick, redneck, or white trash of any variety (a bit broad there, but we’ll return to that) he’s angry on your behalf. And he’s got a point in there somewhere. White and black men are much more likely to mingle in a factory than a white-shoe law firm, in a dive bar than a martini bar, and in a trailer park than a gated community. Life as an indentured servant was more than a little hard (the early, historical portions of the book are easily its best). We really should have been a bit more worried in the 90s about foreign, Arabic terrorists. Well, yes. But American, white terrorists aren’t any less nasty. We would kindly ask people to not knock over our buildings and, failing that, not ask and not do it kindly. The portion of his rant on tidewater cavaliers would have been considered roughly accurate had he written it a few decades ago, but historiography marched on without Mr. Goad, and he would have benefited from picking up a newer book. Therein lies one of Mr. Goad’s primary problems. He’s always got a source ready at hand, but by his standards it need merely be in support of his position. Accuracy and intellectual honesty are optional, at best. Hence the bad history above. And a ready willingness to quote Alexander Hamilton on guns that is strangely absent when it comes time to talk about banks. Would I betray my hillbilly roots as high-faluting to demand that if you use endnotes you not be completely full of BS? (And it’s not a bad bibliography. One can overlook a little A People’s History of United States for some Mind of the South and Night Comes to the Cumberlands.) You can’t hardly rant without throwing your own biases in, but I guess this is a rant too, so I won’t shed too many tears over pointing Mr. Goad’s biases out. Mr. Goad has a very specific view of what the very broad people he is talking about are, and he’ll fit them into that square hole come heck or high water. He thinks religion is silly so he just talks about Bigfoot and Elvis instead (he’s channeling his inner Marx here, which is a bit bourgeois, to tell the truth). Well growing up in backwoods southern Appalachia we took religion REAL serious, and hellfire and brimstone flew every Sunday. Mr. Goad, Portland white trash that he is, only has a passing familiarity with my people, now doesn’t he? He commits that old sin of lumping us highland southerners with the lowland southerners (and letting a bunch of people from Lord knows wherever take up cause with us while he’s at it!). As anyone who has lived in both the highland and lowland South could tell you, David Hackett Fischer was right. They remain two very different places populated by two very different cultures. And so Mr. Goad’s rant goes down the path of so many other lonely fools on barroom stools. He can turn a phrase or two and hit a button, yes, but that son of a gun doesn’t know his rear-end from a hole in the ground.
