This is my first book by Georgette Heyer. I've heard so many great things about her that I had to see for myself. At first, I wasn't too pleased with the book, but I warmed to it after the first couple of chapters. The way “Cotillion” starts out: with a miserly, eccentric uncle trying to hold his relations hostage to his will, I thought it would be dreary. But as soon as Cousin Freddy comes on the scene, the book takes a most pleasant, comedic turn! Against his will and his protests, the heroine, Kitty, talks him into a fake engagement, so that she may go to London, and make her cousin, Jack--of whom she always had romantic fantasies-- jealous. However, while she's in London, her kind heart gets her embroiled into all sorts of schemes to help various people. Freddy is always there to get her and her friends out of a fix. During her stay, she has ample time to compare the selfish ways of her "dream" hero, Jack, with the very generous and honest ways of the real hero, Freddy. I didn't like Kitty at first. She seemed so manipulative--getting Freddy to propose when he clearly didn't want to. It seemed her plan could end up destructive to both of them. I realized as she grew that the plan was just naivete and not pure manipulation, and everything turned out well in the end. She started out as an unexciting character, but I came to love her for her actions—which gives her more depth than initial looks and sparkling personality. I loved the unexpected hero of the story, Freddy, and his relationship to his very normal family. He totally surprised me! I had come to expect an Alpha hero: tall, handsome, perfect. Freddy, on the other hand, is more like the boy next door. While Alpha heroes are very sexy and I love them, they are soooo unrealistic. Freddy could very well be out there--realistic and dreamy at the same time--and as Kitty says: “Who needs a knight to slay dragons when you really need to be rescued from a social fix?” They each grow up as the story unfolds and they learn about what they really want and what is really important. Besides the protagonists, the novel also has a wide cast of nicely developed side characters who add to the twists and turns of the plot. The story evolves in a series of complicated steps, just like the lively dance of the title. Heyer's writing is delightful. She mixes humor with the beloved Regency Romance genre, which is something I have a penchant for lately. While it's no literary masterpiece, it's a rare find-- a pleasant escape from 21st century life that satisfied my romance cravings without insulting my brain with bad prose, poor pacing, violence, sex, or the melodramatic bodice ripping of most historical fiction. I have no idea how authentic the Regency slang the characters spout, but the word play is very amusing. I didn't expect to get so engrossed and interested as I did, and I’m totally going to invest more time on Heyer’s works soon!
