(Soundtrack for this review) Do you want to know what I don't give a shit about? This book. I made it a little more than a quarter through it (35 pages to be exact). I found the writing to be blah (to be fair, I think it is the translation), the type to be a bit too small and the font to be faintly illegible. I dreaded having to go on break and read more of this book, and did internal backflips when I noticed the a new Harpers just went on sale before I went on break and saw there was a new DFW story in it. I broke my irrational ban on reading newly published DFW work in order to not read this book. It's about drugs. Which is kind of a boring subject. Especially when it's about drugs and rock n' roll in the late 1960's / early 1970's. Yawn-ville. People from the hippie generation acting like drugged out assholes. Oh, so fucking counter-culture. Even if the book is in Japan, some assholes different country. There isn't even any kind of cultural difference because it's all part of the universal culture of idiocy. This book did make me a little sad that because of some misguided decisions that I don't know nearly enough to really comment on, a country with it's own culture went into a war, lost, were occupied by a vacuous country that exported the worst they had to offer and undermine future generations. I could have plowed through this book. Instead my disgust with the book made me remember this quote from one of the members of Born Against: "FUCK ROCK. Fuck cigarettes and slicked back hair that ends in a pony tail and a high door price. Maturity and progression do not mean status quo music and ideals. Under the false pretense of reaching new audiences, former punk bands bring us closer to square one, throwing out the window the foundation of independance which took years to build. This band is an attempt to reinforce those quickly eroding foundations. Maybe these "rock" types don't see it this way, but speaking as someone who has never been lured by the slippery slope of psuedo concerned UPC code post hardcore bullshit, common sense tells me that no matter how many reggae songs you write about human rights, your audience will still "rock out" and drink wine coolers. Then they'll go home and fuck like dogs to your politically concerned kick ass tunes. THE MEDIUM IS THE MESSAGE!
