290619: just heard author of this book judith krantz has died, so suddenly feel my age. also that of girlfriend predeceased who introduced me to this, whom in turn i introduced to The Snow Queen by joan d vinge... that book has continued to work for me, this book... not so much... but i must remember how young we were... 080617 from ??? 80s read 2017 second review: well. i read it, or close enough. and the answer to the motivating question? should i read it again... no. this is what happens when a book is easily downed from the library: requires no effort, no critical thought. but i did read all but skipping through the last fifty pages. by which time i have a good idea that perhaps this need not be read (even) once... this is very much a book of the materialistic '80s. there is a cumulative effect of exhaustion from so many proudly recounted names, where the cars are Bentley, purses are Hermes, places are London, Cannes, Beverley Hills, where the clothes are Dior, Blass, where the people are beautiful and/or talented... there was a tv show i must have seen a few times as a youth, i think called 'lifestyles of the rich and famous', and this book is kind of that. in written form. with sex. good sex... everyone is 'rich' here or connected/headed to rich. 'famous' in their particular world of: money, fashion, moviemaking, money. i remember much of it actually, i see more clearly after thirty years of other reading that this is a fantasy. early part, where the protagonist is poor little relation of rich, undergoes transformation as kind of Pygmalion, marries ridiculously wealthy man, who fortunately then dies through strokes... she is sort of sympathetic. meant to be, anyway. but then comes her mature transformation to shallow, image/clothes conscious, sex-obsessed, wealthy widow...less sympathetic... in this fantasy the sex is graphic, mostly good, somehow revealing character, and i understand this is 'class' trash. yes romance maybe but sex always. i do not know if the blurb contentions are true. i did not read this until late 80s. i think a girlfriend had seen a tv miniseries at a vulnerable age, rec this to me, certainly brought some world i did not know then, retrograde portrait of gays/lesbians, one point at which one says 'shopping is like a good fuck', sincerely agreed to by another character.. so in the end, or rather up to the point i started skipping, i was reading this almost as a satire. an error in thought. this is a sincere fantasy, not meant to be loved as camp, but it was a decision of mine whether i would try one of those 'fifty shades...' or reread this. so i reread this. (now I have tried that book... maybe i have learned, because I cut my losses and stopped only 30 pages in...) i was only rating this by memory the first time and how much was that because it worked for girls i knew? there is a sequel. i will not read it... question answered, well i did read it again... 090811 this is a later addition: okay this is a question: do i want to reread this? after almost 25 years? from a somewhat more educated or at least read perspective, from a thoughtful, independent, mature standpoint? well i am interested in reading my youth so... but then it is a long book. did i read the whole thing? questions questions... oh wait a sec, i have to find a copy? maybe i will read dickens instead... final question: do/did many men read this book? does not look like it... .??? 80s read, by memory 2017 first review: this was maybe most interesting in that girlfriends liked it, but the rampant materialism, the glamour, the money, the brands, seem embarrassing now. this was a book of the early eighties (when i read must have been late eighties). i confess, one serious girlfriend loved being a (part time) model so i guess this is what i wanted, too. i was young, i was attracted to surface glitter. i think i read this through trying to discover what women want: money and sex. preferably, moneyed sex. this is before there was this sex and the city tv show, so maybe similar was vicarious pleasure of the times. plus ca change…
