"Birth controllers contrasted the danger of abortion to the safety of contraceptives and argued strenuously against abortion." "The editor (of JAMA) asked the doctor to remember 'that pregnancy is rare after real rape, and that the fright may easily cause suppression of menstruation and other subjective symptoms.'" "Physicians practiced in the home. There, they primarily interacted with the woman of the house. She called in the doctor for help when her own knowledge and nursing failed and was there when he attended any members of her family. She talked with the doctor about the illness or injury for which he had been called and consulted with him on treatment. It was she who carried out (or not) his orders to feed, bathe, and medicate the patient and continued to care for the sick in her family after he left." "Over 97% of the city's midwives were foreign born. The few native born white or black midwives practicing in Chicago may have performed abortions as well, but they have not appeared in sources. Immigrant women probably preferred immigrant midwives when they needed abortions for the same reasons they preferred them during childbirth - midwives were female, foreign born, and cheap." "Indeed, official government agencies and the police relied upon private individuals and agencies to assist in enforcing the laws; in the abortion case, state officials expected the medical profession to act as a leader to repress the practice, particularly within the profession's own ranks." "Furthermore, birth controllers criticized the medical profession for withholding contraceptives and accused it of being too willing to perform therapeutic abortions." "The peak years for arrests for abortion coincided with organized efforts against abortion. For example, a peak in 1905 is probably due to the Chicago Medical Society's renewed efforts to eradicate abortion, and the peak in 1912 matches the coordinated, nationwide raids by the U.S. Post Office on people who used the mail to sell contraceptive or abortion instruments or services." "Affluent women may have avoided official investigations into their abortions because they had personal relationships with private physicians, many of whom never collected or destroyed dying statements or falsified death certificates." "Dr. Henry Dawson Furniss told a story that encapsulated doctors' worst fears. He had 'absolutely refused' to perform an abortion for a woman who later died from one. Under questioning, she used the opportunity to get even with Furniss for spurning her plea for help by blaming him for her abortion." "Dr. William Robinson, a political radical who advocated legalized abortion, scorned physicians who 'badgered' sick women to make dying statements. 'The business of the doctor is to relieve pain, cure disease, and save life,' he declared, 'not to act as a bloodhound for the state.'" "A 1939 poll of the nation's medical students confirmed the medical acceptance of abortion. The majority of the medical students, 68%, were willing to perform abortions if they were legal." "State authorities labeled gays and lesbians 'perverts and national security risks,' and police raided their bars. Abortion symbolized subversiveness, as did these other ideas and activities. In fact, abortion was linked to communism at the time, and red-baiting entered the medical abortion discourse." "Physicians and birth control clinics refused to provide contraceptives to unmarried women. In the late 1960s, the health clinic at the University of Illinois in Chicago insisted upon seeing a marriage license before providing birth control." "Furthermore, the decline in the number of therapeutic abortions between 1951 and 1962 was highest among Puerto Ricans and lowest among whites. Public health officials noted that 'the disparity... between ethnic groups has been widening over the years' and believed it a 'medical responsibility... to equalize the opportunities for therapeutic abortion.'" "Dr. Hall pointed to sterilization practices as additional evidence of a double standard in the treatment of low income patients. When ward patients obtained therapeutic abortions, they were sterilized more than twice as often as private patients. The propensity to sterilize low-income women of color matched the calls by some public officials for forced sterilization of poor, unmarried mothers. These coercive sterilization proposals, based in racist stereotypes and designed to be punitive, were aimed at low-income black women." "While black women were being sterilized against their will, others who wanted sterilization found it equally impossible to have their wishes respected." "Abortion deaths accounted for half of the maternal deaths of women of color, compared to 25% of the maternal deaths of white women." "This woman's negative reaction may have reflected racial and class differences as well as familial religious opposition to abortion. She was an African American going to a mostly white group she had not graduated from high school, let alone entered college; and her boyfriend's grandmother had been pressuring her to have the baby. An outsider might see the service as a hippie operation, and though essential, distressing despite the counselors and cookies." "1969 polls found that the majority of physicians supported repeal of the criminal abortion laws and the majority of Americans, including most Catholics, believed abortion should be a private decision." "Making abortion legal improved public health: overall mortality dropped dramatically. In New York City, maternal mortality fell 45% the year after the state legalized abortion."
