The Bounty A completely thorough and exhaustive history of just about every aspect of this case in which the author has intended to reverse the negative opinions of the infamous Lieutenant Bligh. In what we can now refer to as Exhibit A in Bligh’s defense is his astonishing navigation in the Bounty’s launch which immediately became something of a legend in British maritime circles. After Fletcher Christian had put him and the loyalists into the Bounty’s launch off the island of Tofua, Bligh, against all imaginable odds, had navigated the little 23-foot-long craft 3,618 miles over a period of forty-eight days to Timor, in the Dutch East Indies. Here, his starving and distressed company had been humanely received by the incredulous Dutch authorities. Eventually, passages had been found home for him and his men, and Bligh had arrived in England in a blaze of triumph and white-hot anger on March 13, 1790. And so begins our tale, more or less. We see this famous story in quite a new light that paints the now infamous Bligh as somewhat less a villain and possibly even the hero of this story. First of all, he was only 33 when the voyage began from Spithead so the three famous films of the mutiny are in grave error in depicting the hateful captain as an old man. It also didn’t seem to be his decision to go around Cape Horn but was something he was ordered to do. He abandoned that route after 30 futile days of battling wind and seas but without losing a single sailor. That point soon came, and on April 17, Bligh determined to abandon the Horn. Only shortly before his departure from England, almost as an afterthought, he had received (through the intercession of Joseph Banks) discretionary orders from the Admiralty to make for the Cape of Good Hope if the Horn proved impossible. This Bligh now determined to do. From here, he would approach the South Seas from the opposite side of the globe. The detour would add some ten thousand miles to the voyage, but there was nothing to be done. After twenty-five days of battle with the sea, the Bounty was, at 59° 05’ south, more or less where she had begun. There is ample evidence that Bligh was less beastly when it came to the men on his ship as his floggings were probably well below average on British vessels. So why did his mate, Fletcher Christian lead a mutiny? The answer is that there probably should have been a hell of a lot more mutinies in this age of sail. What prompted this particular bit of piracy was not so much the doings of an evil master—almost all captains were hatefully tyrannical—but possibly the belief amongst the mutineers that they may just be able to pull it off. On the other side of the world from England, in little-known waters, after just having spent 5 months on a tropical paradise those in favor of a mutiny probably felt that they had better chance of a decent life outside of the law than inside. This was my second reading of the book. This time around I felt it was a little long, with a bit too much detail, but the first time I read it I had no such complaints. I think that it is just as long as it needs to be. I especially enjoyed the stories about the fate of the mutineers on Pitcairn Island. This ranks as one of the best tales in all of recorded history and this book does it justice.
