In this book the author relates how she was supposedly taken to hell on numerous occasions in order to experience it and then told to proclaim what she witnessed and experienced to the world and to warn them what hell is really like. I have a number of problems with this book, some of which I will give below. In the first chapter the author notes that Jesus Christ Himself will give her a revelation to prepare the saints for His return and to turn many to righteousness. Are we to assume that her supposed commissioning is somehow an admission of the insufficiency of the Gospel of Christ and that further “revelation” is necessary? Since the author supposedly experienced this then one must assume so. In the 16th chapter of the Gospel of Luke we’re told of the rich man and Lazarus. Near the end we’re told that the rich man is in hell and Lazarus is in heaven, or more precisely in the “bosom of Abraham”. At the end the rich man is pleading with Abraham to send Lazarus to his family to warn them about “this place of torment” to which Abraham replied “They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.” The rich man responds that his family will repent if one is sent to them from the dead. Abraham brings this discussion to a close by saying, “If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.” In the old covenant if “Moses and the prophets” were sufficient are we to think that today the Gospel of Jesus Christ is any less so? Are we now to assume that God and therefore Jesus Christ have changed their minds and that this supposedly added revelation of hell by the author is necessary and therefore implying that the sufficiency of the Gospel, as presented in the Bible, is not enough? One cannot resist such an implication. It is books like this that amazes me which shows an almost complete lack of discernment among Christians today and they seem to be more than willing to believe almost anything anyone tells them from a Christian perspective. In Acts 17 we read that when Paul was preaching to the Bereans he commended them for investigating for themselves whether or not what he was saying was in accordance with the Scriptures. I don’t see so much of that these days. In her “Closing Words” she writes, “For best results you should read this book along with your Bible and balance what is written here with the Holy Scriptures.” The problem with a statement such as this is that the author appears to be placing her book on a level with the Bible! Something I doubt any serious Christian would or should accept. She is, in effect, saying not only here but throughout her book that what she is writing is indeed added revelation. This is something that every Christian must reject. I have, therefore, come to the inescapable conclusion that it is highly unlikely that the author experienced anything that she has written about in her book. So one may ask why would someone write and teach what she does in her book? In Acts 20:29, 30 Paul said, “For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.” Since this happened in Paul’s time why should we believe that it won’t happen in our time? Unfortunately, this book and others like it are rather characteristic of the charismatic free-for-all that seems to be ravaging Christianity these days.
