I enjoyed this read so much that I am going to immediately continue the journey with Small World: A Microcosmic Journey . I read When You Are Engulfed in Flames this week too. The juxtaposition of the two books has had my head spinning for the past few days. Two authors, two ways of encountering the world and the people in it. Brad Herzog 's reader enjoys predictable wave after wave of polite encounters that start with well mannered introductions and result in a story shared or a lesson learned. David Sedaris ' reader laughs and grimaces their way through his encounters with people and places. The difference between the two? Respect, Research, Remove. Herzog's research affords the reader a historic and geographic touchstone absent in Sedaris' encounters which are more idiosyncratic, more personally his own. I felt while reading Brad Herzog that his experiences and conversations could have been my own because of the structure of his research, writing and the rhythm of his distinct interviewer/interviewee style of encounter. David Sedaris ' story similarly relates his encounters with older generations. But they are individual, personal. He rubs ointment into their shoulders, sits alongside them in a solidarity of sorts til he sees their kitcsh turn to junk before his eyes, quarrels with them. Of his companion Hugh's mother he writes that the two of them had guinea worms years ago in the Congo. He does not deny the reader an image of the worms coming out of their living flesh, but goes on to remark that "I used to see the same thing, but after fifteen years or so, I got over it, and now I just see Maw Hamrick." After 10 months on the road in an RV with Brad Herzog and his wife, Amy, the reader sees Amy only in her roles as wife and near silent travelling companion. She took the photos. He drove. We don't know who cooked, who cleaned, who navigated, who shopped what they found to disagree about? In fifteen years my hope is that the wide line of respect that separates Herzog's reader from the people he encounters will begin to narrow enough that his Maw Hamricks will come to life before the reader too. Brad Herzog voice and experience, like, yet-so-unlike Sedaris', is one I am looking forward to reading for years to come.
