I enjoyed this book. I thought it was well-written, overall (I only noticed one or two 'mistakes' in which the same sentence was repeated twice). The authors are able to get their "points" across in an easily understandable manner. I enjoyed the 'personal moments' scattered throughout the book, where they share moments from their lives to highlight different points in the book as well as lessons they learned from various experiences they went through. I thought they were quite relatable throughout the entire book. Even when they get 'somewhat technical,' they still manage to keep their message easily understandable to the 'general reader' as opposed to being focused solely on/for 'scholars.' I liked how they challenged readers to seriously look at their lives, at their testimony, in an encouraging fashion. I did not feel like there was any kind of condemnation or judgment in what they had to say over the course of the book. Instead, there was an excitement at what they felt God had shown them and a desire to help fellow believers to grow and mature in the Lord. Some ‘things’ that stood out to me as I was reading: 1. You never know who is watching you, who is watching your walk. Live in such a way that points them to God, to Jesus, to salvation. You never know the impact you can have upon somebody by how you live your life, by a kind word spoken at the right time. It might not mean much to you, but your words and your actions (especially when both work ‘together’) can have a powerful impact upon the life of another person. This is so easy to forget! 2. We should treat everybody with dignity and respect because they are eternal beings created by Almighty God. The way we treat people can and will impact them for eternity, either positively or negatively. We need to treat people with dignity and respect, regardless of how they treat us or how they respond to it at that moment. 3. Jesus said the world will know we are His followers by our love for each other, the love that we have and share. This does not mean we accept or tolerate sin, but we are to still show love to each other. If the world does not see Jesus’ love in us being shared by us with others, than there is a problem and we need to either stop calling ourselves “Christians” or repent and “get with God’s program” (they never actually ‘said’ this ‘last point;’ it is more what I took from what they said. They did say we are to love each other and that if we do not have love, the world cannot recognize we are Christians or how we are different than anybody else who is not a Christian, though.). 4. Jesus is the Light that dwells within us as Christians and there is no reason we cannot “shine” for Him, let Him shine through us all day long, into the lives of those around us. I am glad that I decided to read this book. I enjoyed it greatly, and it gave me some points to ponder upon further.
