Hey where'd my review go?? I think it's on a different edition. Oh well. Got through it for the third time! Read every damn word this time. I rarely got through a page without stopping to scribble down notes for the thing I'm writing—whereas I can get through legions of other books without being inspired in the slightest. My subconscious redirected me back to this book to get everything flowing in an authentic manner again. It's a bit like if you start a new diet and your stomach goes "I've had it with this shit, get a pizza in your bad self NOW!" Except artistic and benevolent in this case ;) While it's quite simple in its premise and execution, I think slightly differently about it each time I go back. In this case that it would be a wonderfully therapeutic reading experience for anyone in the social media age. I remember thinking Slocum (slow come, impotent, aha aha) was one of literature's most repellent characters ever, the first time I read it. It's hard to maintain that disgust for a third reading and also I'd wager that everyone has thought everything he says in this book, at least once. It's a book filled exclusively with dark, dismissed thoughts. And what's surprising then is how big it is. Reading it this time I thought, "I've thought that, I've thought that, in instances that appeared to be small, but summing them all up and putting them in one place, wow are there a lot of thoughts. In which case, I should get these in check. In which case, I should realise I'm not the only one thinking them. And I should experience their cumulative damage in this book's one sitting." Comedian Maria Bamford had persistent negative thoughts and underwent a therapeutic process known as flooding: "What they do is they have you read out loud in the present tense of your worst fear happening. You just listen to it over and over and over again." If you're anything like me, you fear the seductive influences of many different stimuli around you. Sometimes I feel like I can't get off Twitter even although I hate it! But the truth is you can wear yourself out on the things that are bad for you. There are many novels about people stuck in bad lives, but in practice I think you inevitably reach breaking points on those combinations that are just not working out for you. They become fundamentally unliveable. And we use fear as a crutch, almost, like without fear we would not be motivated. Maybe, but it does steal a lot of life's enjoyment. In Slocum's case it steals all his enjoyment. Is it physically possible that we allow our worries to detract from anything that may be pleasurable in our lives? I know it feels that way sometimes and we know the best way to conquer fears is to address them head on, and so the reading of this book is like exhausting yourself on every daily fear you've ever had. (Minus perhaps contemporary components such as social media—enter Leo ;)!!) I know my own taste pretty well and I've cleverly coupled this reading experience with a rereading of Alain de Botton's The Course of Love, which sets off a happy marriage by stating, "There will be an affair, and they may think of killing themselves more than once." I look around my life today, the crashes I've had this year, and I think, I have a job that is interesting for many hours a week. I get to leave it after 4pm and do my own thing. It funds my hobbies. I have many of those and I enjoy improving upon them. I have a husband with whom I occasionally have big fights, but we recover from them quicker, and do our best not to extend their animosity. Marriage is a skill and we are curious amateurs. This is what a good life looks like. It works for the most part, and I've done it long enough to see that. There's also something about the light of autumn that encourages positive reflections—it's my favourite season :D I could write an anti-text to Something Happened with everything good I think about my own life. If Something Happened is 600 pages, anti-Something Happened would be... 610 pages. To recognise that is to understand how best to appreciate my own life. Slocum is incapable of hearing his anti-thoughts, the unplayed notes. I should point out that I doubt this was the main reason for this book being written. A sweeping post-war statement about a certain type of man. The reasons I return to it are different though. My contender for the Great American Novel.
