A Goodreads friend’s review enticed me to put this on my TBR list and so I ordered it (the 20th anniversary edition because it has an introduction by the author) and read it in two days. The 14 stories overall were excellent, and one had me close to tears. There was a bonus story in the 2002 Anniversary Edition from his second collection of short stories, All Aunt Hagar’s Children titled A Rich Man (also published in The New Yorker, August 2003). The writing was exceptional. I probably should have paused and written down some passages that really struck me, but then I would have been doing a lot of writing and less reading and well I wanted to read…. 🙃 From the Introduction I learned that he placed the stories in a sort of order, from young characters/protagonists to old characters/protagonists. All the stories take place in Washington DC. I think the time period is 1950s-1980s… Here they are with my ratings, and a comment from me here and there… The Girl Who Raised Pigeons — 4 stars • Poignant part (the whole story was poignant) when Robert is tempted to abandon his baby, Betsy Ann, on the street in hopes a better person will raise her, because he is only 19 years old, and his wife just died, and he knows nothing on how to raise a child… The First Day — 4 stars • A mother registers her daughter into kindergarten...the mother cannot read…and therefore needs help to fill out the forms…wrenching but at the same time I admire the mother’s courage and stamina in doing everything she possibly can for her child. The Night Rhonda Ferguson Was Killed — 4 stars • Good writing. Rhonda only plays a minor role in the story. It’s about Cassandra, a teenager, who greatly admires Rhonda who is all set to be a big music star and become famous. Cassandra has a mean temper and a bad-ass attitude (both her parents were killed in an auto accident when she was young). Young Lions — 4.5 stars • Caesar, a young black man, has a Beretta (so that’s not good!). Father threw him out of the house. He deserved it…turning into a real lowlife. Attempting to fleece/scam a retarded woman and gets a woman who is his apparent lover involved… The Store — 5 stars and would give it 10 if I could…I just loved this story. 🙂 • A young man takes a job at a small grocery store and works for an ornery old woman who drives pink Cadillac, and at first I doubted he would stick it out, but he did, and at the end of the story he is going to Georgetown University…very interesting story and you had to be rooting for him all the way. An Orange Line Train to Ballston — 4 stars The Sunday Following Mother’s Day — 5 stars, and had me close to tears at the end. • A man for inexplicable reasons kills his wife and his sister, Maddie, has to raise the children Madeline (who eventually has a child and he is severely retarded) and Samuel. Lots of things happen in the story and eventually the man gets out of prison and seeks a reconciliation with his daughter, and she is conflicted, her brother definitely is not conflicted and does not want her to have anything to do with their father. He comes over the Sunday after Mother’s Day in his ramshackle car… In this story there are 3 people with the name Samuel…the father who murdered the mother, the son, and the daughter’s son. Lost in the City — 3.5 stars His Mother’s House — 2.5 stars A Butterfly on F Street — 3 stars Gospel — 3.5 stars A New Moon —3.5 stars A Dark Night — 4 stars (also published in Ploughshares, 7 (1): Fall 1981) • 91-year-old Bible thumper, Mrs. Garrett, who thinks she knows everything and is rude to Beatrice, one night is terrified of a thunderstorm and has to beg Beatrice to let her in. Beatrice earlier in the story had told of a lightning strike with devastating consequences. Marie — 4.5 stars (also published in the Paris Review, Issue 122, Spring 1992) • Old lady has to go the Social Security Office to prove she has a disability and the person she is supposed to see is never there. It is quite hard for her to get there, and people treat her rudely…so rudely she does something about it. Notes: • He won the PEN/Hemingway award (1993) for this collection and it was on the shortlist for the National Book Award in 1992. • He won the National Book Critics Award, International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award, Lannan Literary Award, and the Pulitzer Prize for fiction (2003) for his novel, ‘The Known World’. • Also was awarded…MacArthur Fellowship — 2004; PEN/Malamud Award for excellence in the art of the short story — 2010 Reviews: • https://www.hackwriters.com/lostcity.htm • an interview of Edward P. Jones in 2013): https://www.theparisreview.org/interv... • From Jonathan Yardley, long-time book reviewer for the Washington Post (August 7, 2006, https://www.washingtonpost.com/archiv... : “Lost in the City turned out to be one of those exceptionally rare books -- in my 40-year reviewing career, there have been perhaps a dozen -- that come from nowhere to leave one astonished and delighted.”
