Our narrator Quinn is a newly made vampire, struggling with the spirit that has been his companion his whole life. He searches out Lestat in the Rue Royale for help, scared that Goblin will become too powerful if he continues to feed from Quinn‘s vampire blood. Quinn takes Lestat to his ancestral home, Blackwood Farm, in the swamps of Lousiana. And boy, does Anne Rice love Lestat! With Chapter 7 we dive into Quinn‘s retelling of his life and the family history of the Blackwoods. And that story takes some time—we only reach the present and reunite with Quinn and Lestat about 2 hours before the end of the audiobook. I liked Quinn‘s story, but it is very long and detailed. So, don’t expect a lot of Lestat. I have never been to Lousiana, but it was all very vivid in my mind—the swamp, the heat, the humidity… Rice also managed to bring all the characters to life beautifully. Aunt Queen was the highlight, but I enjoyed the others as well. The narrator gives Lestat a pretty ridiculous and unattractive voice, partially due to the French accent. Luckily, that accent drops away with time. Still, this is not how Lestat sounds in my head. On second thought, maybe the narrator just did the accent badly. We are in the world of the Declaration of Enmity by the elders of the Talamasca and meet Stirling Oliver. Not sure if we met him before? I was a bit surprised when Mona Mayfair‘s age was mentioned. Only 15 years old, which made parts of the story a bit cringe-worthy for me. There are not a lot of intersex characters in the books I usually read, so that was a nice addition. Too bad that it was a mostly negative character. I liked the part when Quinn is finally turned and taught how to be a vampire. Lestat did such a bad job with Louis and Claudia. Or maybe I need to re-read Interview again. Anyway, nice touch that Quinn received some guidance, although he was turned against his will as well. Maybe we can attribute this to Rice‘s world and writing evolving, 26 years after the first book. And what is it with characters in Rice‘s books falling in love with each other at the drop of a hat? I liked this, despite the exaggerated length. I am very apprehensive though about diving into Blood Canticle , because I have seen some very bad reviews. I will probably re-read The Witching Hour first, before we get really deeply into the crossover with the Lives of the Mayfair Witches. It‘s been 30 years since I read that doorstopper! Rating: mature / explicit 4/5 — 🧛‍♂️🧛‍♂️🧛‍♂️🧛‍♂️☆
