Babi Yar: A Document in the Form of a Novel; New, Complete, Uncensored Version by Anatoly Kuznetsov is a documentary novel about the Nazi occupation of Kyiv in Ukraine and the massacres at Babi Yar. The two-day murder of 33,771 Jewish civilians on 29–30 September 1941, in the Kyiv ravine was one of the largest single mass killings of the Holocaust. After the initial massacre of Jewish people, Babi Yar remained in use as an execution site for Soviet prisoners of war and the Roma people. Soviet accounts after the war estimate in the region of 100,000 men women and children were murdered here. This is the new uncensored form, as a censored version was first published in a soviet magazine in 1966. In this this new version we get Anatoly’s story in full and as it was meant to be read. Words, sentences, paragraphs and whole pages that were erased by Soviet censorship from the first edition are now highlighted for the reader in the version of the book. This was such an interesting aspect of the book, to see how the censors cut away large chunks of the story and how this would would have affected reading the book at the time it was published. This is not by any means an easy read, its a heartbreaking and quite a daunting book, but for me an important documentary novel that will stay with me forever. It’s not a book I can recommend easily to bookish friends as it’s a slow burn, harrowing and did take me a few weeks to get through. Having said that I have learned so much about Ukraine and Babi Yar and was such an enlightening read and important read for me. I think its worth quoting Anatoly Kuznetsov ’s last few lines in the novel and remembering they were written pre 1966. I wonder if we shall ever understand that the most precious thing in this world is a man’s life and his freedom? or is there still more barbarism ahead? With these questions I think I shall bring this book to an end. I wish you peace. [And freedom]. I think there is a lengthy bookclub discussion in these few lines alone.
