This was good, but too flawed. The h lets herself be talked into a charade by her selfish cousin, hates lying to the H's aunt (who she grew to care about in a short time) yet ends up lying to her again, as well as planning to disappear from her life when the woman's looking forward to her becoming a member of her family and planning a party for her. No matter that she felt the need to get away from the H, that was still crummy of her to treat his aunt that way. And speaking of crummy: while I have no trouble believing her crappy aunt could turn her back on the h for her supposed betrayal of her cousin (the aunt's spoiled, selfish daughter) for her uncle to do the same was unbelievable! While he never makes an appearance in the story, it's mentioned that he cared about her and didn't consider her a "charity case" like his wife did, so for him to agree that she should be cut out of their lives didn't ring true, unless he's such a wimp he can't stand up to his wife. As for the H: did he really think the h would stick around and agree to make their sham engagement a real one? He kept saying he didn't believe in love, most marriages were a disaster, just his money and the fun they'd have in bed should be enough for her, and then he was apparently indifferent to her attending the Mardi Gras ball with the OM. Meanwhile, he like to taunt her with how attracted she was to him, despite how the OM seemed to represent her ideal of the kind of man she said she wanted. He'd show the good side to his nature a few times, but then the cynic would come back in full force and while it was too late for her not to fall in love, it wasn't too late to prevent him knowing it and she ran, like so many h's do, but at least she had a good reason. I had to laugh when he found her and asked why she left him???? Well, DUH!!! I thought the ending was a bit abrupt, but having read more than one of Ms. Dailey's books, I think she likes writing them that way. I would have liked to know more of the love story between the H's aunt and the judge (the OM's father) and since I liked the OM (he wasn't either a simp or a jerk like a lot of them are), I was hoping he'd meet someone else and forget the h ASAP. It's not a bad book, but not one of the author's best. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
