I’m so mad at myself for putting off reading this absolute gem for so long, simply because I let myself feel daunted by Tiffany’s brattishness. While it’s true that her character is the most aggravating I’ve come across in Heyer’s novels, her behaviour was for the most part a source of comic relief and her scheming never failed to backfire! It was extremely satisfying to see all of her efforts amount to nothing until she was forced to leave Staples with her reputation in tatters. Everyone, even the least perceptive, saw beneath her beautiful façade and I really don’t see her self-imposed exile in London as her ‘getting what she wanted’, since she’ll have to take herself wherever she goes, which is more than enough punishment. But enough about bratty anti-heroines: this novel features a refreshingly mature and truly honourable main couple, Sir Waldo and Ancilla Trent, who fell in love with each other one intelligent and slightly sarcastic conversation at a time. Sir Waldo in particular is everything one could want from a Regency hero, and, despite his being present on the page for most of the book, I kept asking WHERE IS HE whenever he was absent for more than one scene. Some of this couple’s interactions made me sigh with their barely restrained romanticism, and unlike other cross-class romances featuring a gentleman and a governess, the difference in their social standing was portrayed realistically and never conveniently brushed aside. Kudos to Georgette Heyer for using the Big Misunderstanding™️ to her advantage, by employing it as a source of some well-needed angst for the main characters without turning either one into gullible idiots. It gets resolved in the most adorable way ever, so for once I feel nothing but appreciation for this trope! Finally, I enjoyed the small country village setting more than expected, thanks to Heyer’s talent in presenting such a well-rounded and sometimes hilarious set of supporting characters. After all, as someone very intelligent once said, ‘three or four families in a country village is the very thing to work on’….
