"'What if...' I thought to myself, 'What if there is only a fixed proportion of sanity available in any given society at any given time?' No previous theory of abnormal psychology had ever assumed such a societal dimension. For years I had sought some hypothesis to cement the individual psyche to the group; it was right in front of me all the time. But I went on, I elaborated, I filled out the theory, or rather, it filled out itself. It fizzed and took on form the way a paper flower expands in water. 'What if,' I further thought, 'any attempts to palliate manifestations of insanity in one sector of society can only result in their upsurge in some other area of society?'" Will Self's debut short story collection, The Quantity Theory of Insanity: Together with Five Supporting Propositions plays with the themes of psychopathology, institutionalization, modern consciousness, and the individual in modern society. I don't think "plays" is too jaunty of a word, as Self was clearly having a lot of fun with these stories. By investigating these themes, by pushing the conditions until they are outrageous, the satire does what satire is supposed to do: make the reader see things differently. Self continually holds up a funhouse mirror to institutions/fields/thoughts/beliefs and we are left seeing them differently. Naturally, the satire is always tethered, however loosely, to real pathos. Whether it's an anthropologist that spends years studying a tribe in South America that proves to be the most boring culture on Earth, a woman that dies but that doesn't wind up at the pearly gates but rather living in a flat in a different suburb of London, or a newly hired art therapist working at a psychiatric ward that seems blur the lines between patients and employees, there is a type of humor that by now is very recognizable. And, of course, there are plenty of moments where Self likely had to stop typing away at his typewriter as he gave himself a laughing fit: "The form of this project took me away from the precincts of Aston (to which I was nominally attached) and into the ambit of the Institute of Job Reductivism, at that time being run by John (later Sir John) Green, who went on to become Director of the Institute of Directors." He is adroit enough to know when to pull back on that kind of comedy and wordplay. But even when the work feels it's teetering on goofy, the agile prose and the unabashed style reassure us that we are in deft hands. You are continually reassured by the dialogue. Really, what an ear Self has for the voices that find their way onto the page. That feeling of reassurance builds in every story as there are interconnections and internal references throughout the collection, as well as recurring characters. I read The Quantity Theory of Insanity for the absurdity. I was craving absurdity. I mean, truly. I needed my preoccupation with the news to be vandalized. I'm talking covered in obscene graffiti, dented with hurled rocks, defaced beyond recognition. And it delivered. Speaking of sanity, I spend wayyyyy too much time thinking and deliberating over these damn star ratings. I feel ridiculous but I try to really analyze them and consider them thoughtfully. I believe I know the difference between "liked it" and "really liked it" but it's not so much that I don't like the scale as there are just so many ways to interpret and misinterpret ratings. I worry that I will convince a potential reader to not read something if I don't give it a 5-star "it was amazing" rating. Which of course is probably ludicrous. But still, I don't want to talk anyone out of reading a book. And I don't want people to simply look at star ratings without reading reviews. They are supposed to be reflections of the reader, but they can also be seen as reflections of the given book. And they can reflect the reader's experience of the book that includes their conditions beyond the book. Frankly, it's a whole ball of yarn that I can't begin to unravel, nor can I even really articulate. Anyways, I have no rating to give this book. But, I will say, because I strive to be the kind of person that is honest and upfront, that I likely won't read this book again. Maybe that will be a new rating system of sorts: books I will read again and books I won't read again. But perhaps a book is worth reading again because I'll appreciate it more down the road, or understand it more, at the very least. Also, that doesn't factor in reading it again for pleasure versus reading it again for, I don't know, reference. Maybe rating books is just inherently fraught with too much difficulty to practice it sufficiently. I guess it's possible that I'm overthinking the whole endeavor. But I don't think I am. Maybe it's not only possible but probable that I've simply spent a little too much time in Will Self's intelligent, droll, madcap world.
