First off, Mulata is not a book to take on a vacation. It is a long and complex and requires concerted and sustained time and attention. It is not a book that makes much sense when read here and there in the free moments of a trip. Miguel Angel Asturias (1899-1974) was a Guatemalan author who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1967, the second Latin American to win the prize after the Chilean poet Gabriela Mistral in 1945. He is best known for El Señor Presidente (1946), a surreal dictatorship novel. I’ve had Mulata for a long time, from the days in the 1970s and 1980s when Avon Bard was the most noteworthy publisher of Latin American fiction in English translation in paperback. Avon Bard books were uniform in design (white spine, back cover, upper front cover(mostly); a bold Sans Serif font; eye-catching color illustration on the cover). I always noticed them on bookstores shelves. Once I read the Avon Bard edition of Gabriel García Márquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude, I became a dedicated buyer and reader of the series. They were a strong formative influence in the early years of my adult reading life, and I have missed their presence since the series came to an end in the late 1980s. Asturias published Mulata in the early 1960s, when the Boom period of Latin American fiction was fledging. I have never considered Asturias a Boom author, because he was of an older generation, and Mulata does not share the main trait of Boom fiction, magical realism. Still, for the sake of context I wish that I had read this book back when I first read the magical realists, whom I thought were radically blurring the real and the magical as they defamiliarized the real while treating the magical with familiarity. But compared to what Aturias achieves in Mulata, magical realists like Juan Rulfo, Carlos Fuentes, Julio Cortázar, Gabriel García Márquez, or José Donoso seem timid to me now. As I read Mulata, I struggled with how to describe it but finally came to think of it as a folk novel. The stories and traditions out of which Asturias builds the book reminds me of the tales in John Bierhorst’s collection Latin American Folktales : Stories from Hispanic and Indian Traditions (2003). There is no distance between the ordinary and extraordinary, natural and supernatural, this world and the divine, not unlike the mythos of the Ancient Mediterranean. In Mulata, Asturias creates an animist universe. The book also reminds me of the 14th C Chinese folk novel Monkey by Wu Cheng-en, which tells the story of the monk Tripitaka’s journey to the west for Buddhist scriptures; Tripitaka is aided by three divine animal figures–a monkey, a dragon, and a pig–and they encounter or initiate many wild adventures before finding the scriptures. The blurb on the cover of Mulata from the National Observer references Rabelais, Baudelaire, Joyce, and Rimbaud. While I can see connections to the latter three, Rabelais’s Gargantua and Pantagruel–with its wild, exuberant, episodic, anything goes, anything can be imagined narrative–seems a perfect predecessor for Mulata. So let me take another jab at a description: Mulata is a phantasmagoric folk novel, grounded in a world which mixes Mayan and post-conquest (that is, Christian) mythologies, and whose mortal, divine, and category shifting (mortal← →divine) characters inhabit a landscape with few divisions, fewer as the novel progresses. If magical realists blur the line between the magical and real to create the frisson of an uncanny liminal state, Asturias jumps into the world of Mulata with both feet, mucking about, muddying everything, producing and reproducing characters, settings, and storylines that grow larger and larger, like the appetites of the eponymous characters of Gargantua and Pantagruel. This is not a polite book. It is broken up into three sections and thirty one titled chapters, each a free standing story, linked in a larger narrative chain. From the table of contents, Asturias seems to be an ethnographer–a Mesoamerican Brothers Grimm?–who has collected a lot of stories and found a unifying thread. From this perspective, Mulata is Asturias mapping out that thread, and the novel does feel like a–subway(?)--map networking Mesoamerican myths, culture, and nature. The first section focuses on a primarily pre-Hispanic, Mayan myth world, and the narrative is initially built around four characters: Celestino Yumi, aka the Fly Wizard, a poor woodcutter; his wife Catarina/Niniloj; and two supernatural characters, the Corn Devil, aka Tazol, and Mulata. Celestino goes to market day in a nearby village with his fly open, acting the fool. Everyone in that village and his home village are embarrassed by his behavior, including his wife and best friend. Celestino has acted the way he does on a bet with Tazol, who wants Catalina for himself and offers Celestino his best friend’s wealth in compensation. Celestino is not admirable. He acts the fool, alienates others, and sells his wife to obtain his friend’s wealth, because he has always wanted to be rich. Nice guy, the fool as hero. He has regrets, though, after Catalina is whisked away by Tazol in a hurricane wind. Celestino misses her, the companion of his poverty, and he is so distraught that he attempts suicide, but he is such a fool that he manages only to hang himself by his foot. Do we pity him? Tazol does, saves him from hanging upside down, and changes the terms of the deal. Instead of victimizing Timoteo, Tazol directs Celestino to find a bag of gold coins at the bottom of a cave, and later much more gold, which allows him to build a very successful farm, making Timoteo jealous. Tazol still benefits from the deal, because he takes other wealth seekers who venture into the cave and sells their blood to the capitalists, industrialists, and owner-class who exploit the poor. The devil is a nimble opportunist who can pity the fool and always find ways to pursue his business and succeed. Tazol also gives Celestino a farm diorama in a box, which is full of miniaturized farm buildings and implements. When Celestino removes them, they magically become full-sized. Unexpectedly, he finds a figurine of his wife Catalina in the box. Tazol, such a good demon, returns to Celestino his wife rather than keep her. Celestino has not had to sacrifice anything, and he still becomes a wealthy man. Quite the deal with the devil. But Celestino remains an untrustworthy fool, for while he takes everything else out of the box he leaves his wife in it. What happened to his regret, his suffering because of her absence? On another market day in the nearby village, our fool hero meets Mulata, who bewitches him with her cleavage, They marry and return to Celestino’s village, Quiavicús. When they have sex, she only allows to him to take her from behind, a “back moon,” because it turns out that she doesn’t have a vagina. Mulata is a demon who doesn’t feel anything but desperately wants to, so she is violent with Celestino, hoping that he will be equally violent with her, but he is unwilling to follow her lead into sado-masochism. To continue her pursuit of pain/feeling, Mulata brings a bear into the house. Celestino’s infatuation wilts in the face of Mulata’s strange behavior, and he thinks nostalgically again about Catalina, deciding to get her out of the box, because after all Celestino is just a poor woodcutter and he misses his wife. Awww!! When Catalina comes out of the box, she is a dwarf rather than full-sized. Despite her size and Celestino’s betrayal, she dedicates herself to her fool husband. When Mulata loses control of the bear (surprise surprise), Catalina saves her; she cannot, though, cure Mulata’s addictions to pain and smoking (tobacco? cannabis?). Given all of Mulata’s chaos, Catalina just wants to be alone with her husband, so she tricks Mulata into climbing into the cave where the moon resides during the day and leaves her lots of weed. Catalina blocks up the entrance, yet despite all the pot Mulata gets out, but as an erupting volcano. Everyone flees, and Celestino’s farm and wealth are buried in lava. This time Tazol does not step in to save Celestino. Through many more adventures, Celestino continues to be the fool, make more bad choices, get in trouble, and need to be saved. Although Asturias introduces many more characters, most of them supernatural, throughout the book, the structural center is the Celestino-Catalina-Mulata triangle. In this mythic landscape, the characters are transformed again and again, but the power struggles between them remain a constant, becoming expressions of the larger forces in Asturias’s conception of Mesoamerican myth. I could continue moving from adventure to adventure, jump down all the book’s rabbit holes–all are Alice-like transformations–but I won’t. Bodies are transformed. Celestino learns from the Boar People (Sauvages) how to return Catalina to her regular human size. When Tazol tries to make off with her again, because dwarves are a hot item and the Corn God is still attracted to her, Celestino hangs on, and Catalina stretches back out to normal size. Given their experiences–that is, their near helplessness before supernatural forces–Catalina and Celestino decide to become sorcerers and head to the city of Tierrapaulita, where God (the Christian God) does not go because it is inhabited by the ancient indigenous devil, Cashtoc, and a host of animist demons, giants, and dwarves that fill the natural world. Tazol remains persistent and impregnates Catalina through the navel, and she gives birth to the demi-demon, Tazolito. Celestino remains a fool and dares Catalina, who resents how he has treated her, to turn him into a dwarf, which she does. A dwarf demon, Huasanga–a vagina thief–is attracted to Celestino and marries him, but Catalina still loves her man, so she turns him into a giant to put him out of the reach of Huasanga, but Huasanga’s ardor remains unabated. When she says that she wants to make it with a giant, the other giants are offended and throw her in a cesspool, where she befriends the flies, who become her protectors. Life is transformation. Still, for all of his foolishness Celestino is the constant sexual lodestar of this book. Besides physical transformations, the book is also freighted with identity shifts. Once Catalina becomes a sorcerer, she takes on a new name, Giroma. As a dwarf, Celestino becomes Chiltic. These identity transformations, layerings really, become much more important in the second and third sections of Mulata. In the transition between the first and second sections, Asturias charts a shift from pre-Hispanic to post-Conquest myth. There is a church in Tierrapaulita, and the priest plots to import holy water in coconuts. The plot fails, because Huasanga turns the coconuts into the vaginas she has stolen, including Catalina’s, which she stole as recompense for losing Celestino, as both dwarf and giant. But, just as with other characters in the book, the priest is not fully defeated and returns to the fight with Cashtoc and crew, who after more weird battles decide to abandon Tierrapaulita. Cashtoc’s animism leads him to see the universe as a unified creation to which all beings, natural and supernatural, belong, while Christianity treats humans as separate and alienated. When the Christian devil, Candanga, shows up, he institutes “Breeding Time” in order to produce more people to inhabit hell. Cashtoc had intended to destroy Tierrapaulina, but he does not. Once again, the world Asturias creates in Mulata is not marked by death but by transformation. In the second section, Tierrapaulita has been abandoned by the old indigenous demons and replaced by a Christian devil and a Christian Hell, not unified with the world but separate from it. Still, while Cashtoc and company stalk off, Celestina, Catarina, Tazolita, and Huasanga all turn back and return to Tierrapaulita, which becomes a space where new and old orders clash and transform one another. Again, what dominates the book is transformation, and identity shifting/layering speeds up. The new priest, Father Chimalpin, throws down a purple glove as challenge to the devil, but an indian picks it up, seemingly unaware of the challenge. The indian turns out to be Celestino, with his fly open. He has come into the church with his fly open, so we are back to the beginning of the book with Celestino as fool. What goes around comes around; everything changes, and everything stays the same. To combat the devil, the priest grows 11,00 hands to grapple with him, but with 11,000 hands and 11,000 arms the priest becomes a spider, revealing the demon at his core, a luciferized being. The new sexton is Jerónimo de Degollación, who is also Mulata. Celestino is a poor indian, pockmarked by small pox; his face has the same number of pockmarks as the priest has arms. Celestino is also possessed by Candanga and goes by many names, names of those he has known who have died and who live on through him. Celestino and Mulata almost manifest their old identities, but they resist because they masquerade in the new Christian world. Nonetheless, Asturias makes sure the old order remains transparent in the new. Mulata is not only the sexton, but she is also Cashtoc, who–no surprise–has not abandoned the city after all. Amongst all these transformations, identity shifts and layerings, Asturias returns to desire, sex, and marriage as unifying themes. In a fight between demons, Celestino/Candanga/pockmarked old man/hedgehog marries, fights, and has SM sex with Mulata/Cashtoc/Sexton/Moon. The Mulata conglomerate being is penetrated by all the hedgehog spines of the Celestino conglomerate being. They are married by the priest-spider and his 11,000 arms and hands. In marriage, syncretic combinations: Mulata and Celestino, sexton and hedgehog, Cashtoc and Candanga, the pre-hispanic and the hispanic, the old devil and the new devil. To interrupt the marriage–Celestino married again!!--Catalina and Huasanga storm the church, and they drag Mulata off to be hacked up and reduced by half: one lip, one eye, one ear, one leg, one breast, etc., and no vagina, which was stolen by Huasanga. Mulata’s reduced body and its pieces are tossed into the river, where she/they are lusted after by Celestino, who is still lusted after in turn by Huasanga.Under the control of Catalina, Mulata ends up as the casasola, the sorcerers’ castle, where she takes on a new name, Yapole Icue. Half Mulata combines with a skeletal woman to become whole. Responding to a set of questions from the skeletal woman, Mulata confirms that she will take back her sex whatever its condition, so they steal her vagina back from Huasanga. As the Mayan and the Christian mix, clash, and transform–changing, changing, changing–sex is the force that motivates the narrative of Mulata. For this review, I have worked through the novel’s primary narrative threads which Asturias spins out from Celestino, Catalina, and Mulata. ←I have jumped down these rabbit holes to consider some of the transformations that develop out of them. Given the complex network of stories that Asturias deploys and the cultures that mix it up in Guatemala and Mesoamerica, I can’t believe that I have done little more than scratch the surface or jumped down a few of the caves, rabbit holes, or pock marks that Asturias scatters through the novel. I feel like I need more ethnographic knowledge of Mayan culture and the syncretic hybrids of Mayan, Spanish, and European cultures that Asturias taps for Mulata. The third, very short section seems to be a quick mopping up, not a conclusion or a tying together of threads but one more reflection of the messy melange that is the novel. The priest has suffered small pox, and he has as many scars as Celestino or the spider priest who took on the hedgehog, which also the pockmarked equivalent of 11,000 spikes. He calls for a healer rather than a doctor, and the healer suggests sleeping with a virgin with a rash as a mutually beneficial cure for the rash and pockmarks. The sexton, now without Mulata, seeks out the virgin with a rash for himself only to end up in bed with a snake. Clashing cultural symbols! As the sexton runs back to the church covered only by a sheet, a massive earthquake strikes, and the priest rides into the sky on a mule. As Tierrapaulta crumbles, the sentences of the last chapter break into elliptical fragments. Reminds me of the last section of the poet Vicente Huidobro’s poem, Altazor, where the poet falls faster and faster until language is stripped away from him. In Mulata, all that is left is the shaking earth, a folk apocalypse from an apocalyptic folk. Overwhelming book.
