I have several books about the Cuban Missile Crisis. Robert F. Kennedy's Thirteen Days has the highest profile of the books written about this event. This is a subject I've long been fascinated with, partly because if one of these great nations had set a foot really wrong in the middle of this infamous cold war confrontation, it's quite likely you and I both would not have been here to read this. Thirteen Days is the first book-length account I've read of the crisis. I read it as preparation for reading other, more scholarly works. And as an overview from an administration insider, it's not bad for a start. Nonetheless, I think it would have been helpful to learn—at a point much sooner than Ted Sorensen's closing comments—that Robert F. Kennedy drafted this memoir in the second half of 1967, and did not have an opportunity to shape the book for publication before his assassination the following year. Seeing Sorensen—who apparently ghost-wrote JFK's Profiles in Courage —at the close of the book made me wonder if he was a key figure in completing the work. I do think those who put the book together deserve praise for leaving RFK's writing voice largely intact as far as I can tell. Being that it's a memoir, I'm still somehow always surprised when a memoir underwhelms me with lightweight writing, and that is the case with this book. It reads like an early draft, and it probably was. I guess we can forgive Kennedy for frequently telling rather than showing. Still, his writing is smooth and rather engaging—he was obviously well spoken. He takes great pains to praise the administration for its mature leadership and pragmatism—emphasizing that they wanted honest opinions from all parties involved while putting together policy decisions. Kennedy also tries to downplay any thought that the outcome was a victory—while he's proud of the teamwork involved, I think he knew that it's pretty hard to celebrate something that almost became a grand tragedy. The publisher touts the book as a 'second-by-second' account, but it's nowhere close to that—it's not even quite a 'meeting by meeting' account. It's more like you're kind of 'in the room' or in the hallway. You don't get the feeling of being at the meeting table hearing the Joint Chiefs shouting for an immediate invasion of Cuba. Much of the storytelling is anecdotal, and seems to be drawn from summary material. I especially wanted a direct look at JFK's decision making in that crisis, but we never get that close, and I found that fairly disappointing. This was more like a general overview of the collective will of senior leadership. Judged as a work of period history, I don't consider this a great work or even an excellent work. I agree that it's necessary to read if you're at all interested in the subject. But it's more like an introduction—the hors d'oeuvre before the main course. And to be honest, I would have felt better about the reading if I had known about Ted Sorensen's participation from the beginning rather than be surprised by it at the conclusion. It's still worth a positive review for being essentially a 'finished draft' even if it isn't a more finely crafted final product.
