(3.5) This 1992 debut collection is set in Washington, D.C. in the 1960s to 1990s and features elderly church ladies, aimless young people threatened by street violence, and middle-aged men coming to terms with their Southern heritage. I grew up in the D.C. suburbs and our predominantly African-American church met in D.C. before moving out to Maryland, so although I’m more familiar with a tourist’s perspective on the capital than a resident’s, these stories felt authentic to me: the names, the Black speech and slang (I also learned two new-to-me terms, “Bama” and “ace-coon” for a poorly dressed bumpkin and a homeboy, respectively), the locations, and the ironic sense of being marginalized even when living so close to the national seat of power. This is perhaps clearest in the title story, in which a high-class prostitute gets word that her mother has died and jumps in a taxi; instead of asking to go straight to the hospital where the body lies, she makes the odd request to just drive around until they get lost. Twelve of the 14 stories are in the third person; perversely, I especially liked the two first-person stories. In one, the very short “The First Day,” a little girl learns to be ashamed of her illiterate mother when she’s registered for kindergarten; in the other, my overall favorite, “The Store,” an unlikely friendship arises between a lazy young man and the woman who hires him to work in her grocery store. Other stand-outs were “The Sunday Following Mother’s Day,” in which a father tries to make up for being absent in prison while his children were growing up; “Gospel,” about a group of elderly gospel singers reeling from inevitable life changes; “A Dark Night,” something of a horror story in which elderly women meeting for prayer end up telling tales of stormy nights from their past; and “Marie,” about an old woman who gets so fed up with the Social Security Administration that she ends up doing something that doesn’t line up with her upbringing, as captured by a folklore student. Favorite lines (from “The Store”): “When my brother and I were in our early teens, my mother said this to us with the most seriousness she had ever said anything: ‘Never even if you become king of the whole world, I don’t want yall messing with a white cop.’” “When you work in a grocery store the world comes to buy: tons of penny candy and small boxes of soap powder because the next size up—only pennies more—is too expensive and rubbing alcohol and baby formula and huge sweet potatoes for pies for church socials and spray guns and My Knight and Dixie Peach hair grease and Stanback … headache powder and all colors of Griffin shoe polish and nylon stockings and twenty-five cents worth of hogshead cheese cut real thin to make more sandwiches and hairnets for practically bald old women trudging off to work at seventy-five and lard,” etc.
