A religious, racist, white supremacy, sexist bigot driveling about how great he is while playing Robinson Crusoe One of the most degenerated, misguided POVs I´ve ever read That´s more of a narcissistic, egomaniac, even kind of sociopathic, persons´ diary than a novel, and it´s filled with the unreflected, racist, extremely faith-focused, arrogant thoughts of an author who has the amazing gift to write both unilateral and boring. Compare it with the real stuff from centuries ago and see even more how it sucks Take Jonathan Swift or greek philosophers or hieroglyphics or cave paintings, or, the best example, Robert Louis Stephensons' Treasure island, all examples of less ego-focused works that have a plot, an arc of suspense, other detailed, credible characters that transport no sick pro slavery mentality or anything that differentiates a novel from a trivial travel report. Skim and scan, you won´t miss anything substantial, wise, or deep. Or just don´t read it, the best option. After quite a while I was just scanning anymore, because except for redundancies, lists, and stupid thoughts there was less to find in this novel. The main character is an unlikeable idiot, he doesn´t even have to be smart or fight to survive to get any suspense into the poor telling, because he has all he needs to survive on the island and saved material from the shipwreck, so he has nothing to do than to think of how superior he and his ever so great faith, culture, and sophistication are in contrast to Fridays´ immense primitivity. Would be a banned troll hater account nowadays Imagine someone doing it nowadays, no matter if online or in boring meatspace. In any civilized society, the person would be excluded, prosecuted, and flamed or, by friendlier individuals, pitied as the abject individuals that they are. The civilizations, groups, and societies that are still practicing such ideologies and would promote and invite the troll are a few centuries behind sociocultural evolution. A total not reading suggestion, but I can understand that the society of the 18th century liked this novel because it reflected, celebrated, and confirmed their inhuman and insane mentality. Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
