Once upon a time, I mentioned to my sister that this was one of my favorite Baby-Sitters Club books, and that it was a shame that the family copy had been lost. Very soon after--the next day, perhaps--she walked up to me and handed me a new copy, signed by Ann M. Martin herself, which she'd found in a second-hand bookshop. A startling example, perhaps, of whatever cognitive bias it is that makes us likely to find things we've been prompted to look for, which is the theme of the book. I'm sure there are or have been thousands of quizzes on the theme of "What Baby-Sitters Club Member Are You?", and for that genre of quiz, they might be more insightful than usual. (Though I'm hard-pressed to imagine what questions might reveal that you are a "Dawn" or a "Jessi".) For me there is no question: I have always been a Mary Anne, overly sensitive, shy, and prone to self-doubt. Accordingly she is my favorite, along with Claudia, whose creativity I also identified with, though not the self-confidence it took to wear all those outfits. (You might say Mary Anne is who I am, Claudia is who I'd like to be, or at the very least, who I'd like to date.) The first BSC book I read was Claudia and the Phantom Phone Calls , where Claudia faces a Halloween mystery; this time Mary Anne gets one. For a couple of minutes no one spoke. We watched the storm and the flickering lights. Finally, Claudia said, "This reminds me of last Halloween." "What does?" I asked. "Almost everything." Like Claudia's mystery, the answer to the riddle lies in the affairs of the middle-school heart; unlike Claudia, Mary Anne lacks both the experience of being envied and the background of mystery novel reading that would arm her to solve it easily. Overall, I've always preferred the spookier episodes in the BSC annals. That's my experience of baby-sitting, myself, especially once the kids go to sleep: the eeriness of being in someone else's silent house, with no adults to protect you. My favorite sequence of the book is when they go to the library to try to find a magical antidote to the bad-luck curse that afflicts Mary Anne after throwing away a chain letter. Mary Anne, an avid reader, expects essentially to find the Necronomicon in some forbidden annex, and is disappointed: "The new library doesn't have any lost, dusty, spooky corners. The witchcraft books are just in a row of other books on metal shelves under a buzzing fluorescent light." They do have spells, but (as I myself found, when, under this book's influence, I tried to read a book called Ceremonial Magic that my dad owned) their instructions are impossible, calling for months of work or obtaining "scrapings from the underside of a sea snake". In the end I perhaps would prefer that Mary Anne's solution to the puzzle be better connected to her ongoing maturation and growing self-confidence. (Her dad, whose lightening-up from the terrifying, borderline abusive rigidity of the first few books parallels her growth, does contribute to the resolution, at least.) I guess her coming-of-age storyline was essentially finished and arrested when she got together with Logan, which is disappointing to realize: shy girl stands up to dad, comes out of her shell, gets the prince, The End. I think I liked her best in a book she's not even the protagonist of, Boy-Crazy Stacey , where pre-Logan she gets shit done and cleans up all of Stacey's messes while remaining sympathetic to the obvious train-wreck she's heading towards. Anyway, at least this is a relative high-point for Mary Anne before she's turned into an idiot hick in the next book, Stacey's Mistake , if you're reading them in order (which I never did). That book sucks anyway. This one has the non-spooky magic books, Mary Anne in a cat costume, Claudia shutting Kristy down and Mary Anne playing her like a fiddle, Jackie Rodowsky's robot, and Claire wondering if the bird knows Santa Claus. This is the one to get.
