I had a hard time getting into this. I had previously read Keane's late-in-life masterpiece, Good Behavior, and her first book, a simple but entertaining riding to hounds romp. I think this was the first of the novels where she moved away from light romances and into darker psychological territory. I found the opening with its attempted characterization of Sebastian blundering and hard to follow, and the windows into characters' thoughts were stated in laughably unsubtle terms. The idea is that Jessica is terrorizing her lesbian lover Jane into staying with her, so instead of letting Jessica's actions speak for her, Keane gives us this: "Had the truth been in her now, she would have cried out, 'You dreary man! You smoke Gold Flake cigarettes which I loathe and you ask me to lunch on Sunday, and neither you nor any other will ever help me to escape from Jessica and from all my weakness and terror.'" (p. 188) Jessica was so crudely drawn I found it impossible to imagine anyone like her. Like what even is this writing? "She would require no more of Jane after she had destroyed her. She only required her destruction. One must end a chapter. That one could go away and laugh and tell of it." (p. 281) The odd thing is that the actions were strong enough to speak for themselves, so I'm not sure why Keane spelled everything out so clumsily. There were some great moments, like when Jane sees Jessica with a Bradshaw train timetable and exclaims "Reading Bradshaw, darling. How fantastic! What a good brain you have, darling! How does it end?" (p. 253) But again, she mentions like five times that it's a train timetable so that she's sure you're in on the joke. Did her editor make her add these clarifications? Still, there are many moments of the keen (keane!?) perception that is so evident in Good Behavior, as when Piggy is feeling left out and terrible about herself, but then kind George proffers her a lifeline: 'Oh, I'm sorry, what did you say?' He had not quite heard her. Christ, to have to say it again. 'Did you enjoy the dance at Knockfin?' Her voice was striving small as gnat's now. 'I did, I think. I think I behaved rather badly. Joan told everybody I was drunk. Did she tell you I was drunk?' Adorable George who asked one a private lovely question. (p. 194) And she is so good at cruelty. The way in which Joan torments Piggy is both particular to its time and place but also universal mean-girl: How To Look One's Best In Old Clothes was a question that fevered Piggy to her very soul. The passion that was on her to look her very best on these lovely days was set about miserably by the knowledge that her appearance at Castelquarter in any clothes not in rags would be met by a cold scrutiny, and Joan's faint ridiculing voice would examine the matter, saying: "All dressed up to-day, Piggy?" or "Why are you so grand to-day, Piggy?" . . . To-day Piggy dressed herself up in as faithful an imitation of Joan's outdoor clothes as her own passionate concentration and Mrs. Kenny's skill had been able to accomplish. True this rough tweed skirt was new, but, instructed by her love, she had torn and darned a good three-cornered hole, she had left her dog's wet footprints to dry upon it too and hoped its unfamiliarity would so pass unnoticed." (p. 142-143) (It doesn't.) But then she'd go back to her odd clumsy exposition and ruin it all. Jessica was definitely the weak point, but Jane and Sebastian don't quite work either. She could have made more of Jane's attempts to make it into one of Sebastian's plays as a character, and lightened up a bit on the baby-Jane pastiche. The end went a ways toward redeeming the book for me, but I was left still feeling like it hadn't really come together into a meaningful resolution that said something. Hopefully this was just a mid-career stumble, and I enjoy what came before and what comes after more! Other notes: There are some minor mistakes in name references. Garden writer Beverly Nichols is actually Beverley (p. 231). Country clothing outfitter Austin Reade is actually Reed (p. 279). I only know this because I looked both up, and duckduckgo struggled. "Sylvester preferred to speak of plants by their correct botanical names. Perhaps because he secretly liked the Worts and Banes and Winkles of their English names and preferred to keep this liking to himself." (p. 112) "It was 6:00 now--a lean hour with dinner dim in the distance and tea an unrealized moment of the past." (p. 126) Medlars! "Feathers on the chintz, a light sky outside, too few buns, medlar jelly and weak scalding Chinese tea, meant Castlequarter from five o'clock till six to Piggy." (p. 163) "heavy ochre powder . . . greasy white lipstick that tasted of scented lard . . . chamois gloves with string sewn in the palms [for riding]" (p. 143) "Old field boots . . . brown Balmorals" (p. 154) Car has place for visiting cards, face powder, and cigarette ash (p. 207) Foraging for blackberries, shrimp, and lobsters at the seaside "Piggy would look perfect, Sylvester thought, as he turned his back disgustedly upon her, in a red bathing dress with short sleeves, frills and anchors all over it. It should be worn with black stockings and a round mob cap of checked rubber. No, he thought then, Piggy belongs in a slightly later date in the world's history. She belongs to the Age of Underclothes. She should have had an affair with a vulgar man in the Great War. Then the 'hot' books frothed and bubbled with underclothes. Well-shaped legs in black silk stockings stuck out of them in all directions. Sickening the way they wrote and talked about women's underclothes then." (p. 214-215) "Even in shrimping there was not quite that pure fever of selfishness, that sneaking poaching way one crept up on a mushroom unseen by a fellow picker, crept up and pounced as on a secret prey." (p. 220)
