This book is about a cute set of identical twins: . . . no, wait. Cute and marriageable identical twins: *fans self vigorously* Anyway . The younger and more sensible twin, Christopher (Kit), senses Something is Wrong with his twin and returns to London from foreign parts, only to find that his brother Evelyn has disappeared without a trace, and it's imperative that Evelyn show up at a dinner to meet his wealthy fiancée's family. Unfortunately for Kit and Evelyn, their charming, lovely mother is a complete spendthrift, and unless Evelyn marries Cressy he won't be given control of his own fortune, and won't be able to pay off Mama's massive debts and rescue the family from certain disgrace, and he and Cressy both understand it's going to be a marriage of convenience. So of course Kit is pressured by Mama into pulling the old switcheroo, except Evelyn keeps not showing up, and Kit keeps getting thrown into Cressy's company, and you can pretty much guess where it's going from here. But like most all Georgette Heyer books, the fun is in the ride and the witty dialogue, not so much in whatever surprises there are to be gleaned from a genre so littered with tropes. Unfortunately, the dialogue in this book didn't charm me as much as Heyer's dialogue usually does. Partly it was because this book contained too much talk and too little action and romance - there's 50 (!) rather boring pages of exposition at the start. But mostly it was because too little time is spent with Kit and Cressy and their budding relationship, and way too much time is spent with their foolishly extravagant Mama. If you agree with Kit and Evelyn (and apparently pretty much every other character in this book, other than their late and unlamented father) that a lovely, silly, 40-something woman trying to act like a 20 year old, who is utterly unable to manage her finances and who spends money she doesn't have like there's no tomorrow, is charming and delightful, and that she needs to be coddled and understood, but in no case put on a strict financial budget, then maybe you'll enjoy this book more than I did. It's too bad, because I thought the basic plot had real potential, and I thought Cressy and Kit were a clever and entertaining couple, other than his unfortunate tendency to indulge his mother. A soft 3 stars. There were some fun parts, but too few and far between.
