Well, on the coattails of Rim of the Pit, I wasn't completely sure what to expect of this book, which not unlike the Hake Talbot, was the second and final mystery novel written by its author (John Sladek) who then quit the genre due to a lack of opportunity (in Talbot's case, going back to nonfiction about magic tricks; in Sladek's case, continuing his career as a top B-list sci-fi author.) And both of them have several intriguingly impossible crimes. The premise of Invisible Green is promising enough: A group of seven British murder mystery / true crime enthusiasts, the Seven Unravellers, is set to meet decades after their last meeting in 1940; one of them has already perished in the Blitz. Now that their lives have matured and intertwined, the upcoming reunion brings about a lot of feelings - and in the case of paranoid Major Stokes, a sudden but seemingly natural death in his hermetically sealed house. Thackeray Phin, an American in London with a unique fashion taste, takes up the case for his friend Dorothea Pharaoh, one of the Unravellers. As he investigates the death and the remaining members, two more murders occur and the closed circle of suspects widens. Now whereas Pit has three major impossibilities and several minor impossibilities which are answered 90% well and 10% meh, Invisible Green has a locked room murder, a perfect alibis murder, and a semi-perfect-alibis murder with some interesting problems. All three of these, in my mind, are answered well, they play fair, and each in its own way has a sense of ingenuity. Overall, the mystery aspect is spot-on. The pacing of the mystery is a bit shaky, with some filler between the last murder and the solution. I can't hide the fact that the main characters are pastiches of the usual closed circle of suspects (and mystery solving team) seen during the Golden Age, but these are played off pretty well and are subverted interestingly. Also gets a special note for being the first fair-play mystery which uses the uncensored f-bomb (uttered by the irritable Frank Danby.) Overall, another entry on Hoch's Locked Room poll which utterly deserves its place, and at 15 it may honestly be too low. An engrossing read which makes me hopeful for the contemporary fair-play / impossible-crime fiction in my future.
