So I snagged this out of a desire to get on board a spaceship with another space outlaw in the vein of something like the star wars bounty hunter series or Resnick’s Santiago. Finishing these stories up, my initial thought was ‘Northwest Smith, I barely knew yah’. These stories are by no means tales of outlaw/weird west in space-style adventures. Northwest himself, while the author tells me is a bastard, is not much of a bastard when he actually does things and otherwise I really know nothing about him (not in a fun mysterious way). Anytime some sort of criminal enterprise is mentioned the author brushes over it saying literally ‘im sure you can imagine the roguish activities. Lets get back to the story.’ No bar fights, smuggling missions, brawls, rakish trysts, or stumbled-upon secret plans, just a dude I’m told has scars and pretty eyes who is strongly implied to not fill out tax returns. Why did I give this four stars then? Because after I realized these weren’t ribald space-farer tales I found out that Northwest Smith has a penchant for running into nameless entities from the void obsessed with creating the ideal ‘bad bitch’, ancient gods predating man who create planetary atmospheres in exchange for fresh meat, psychopaths who incidentally cause spatial distortions, jackass Venusians starting fires on the thrones of monsters, or literal mytholocal creatures on Mars (Shambleau is a deep cut nerd classic and I can totally see why, read it punk). Yeah, these are pulp lovecraftian suspense tales and Northwest is basically just a taciturn beefcake who finds himself perpetually tripping balls. While thats not why I sought this book out, it ended up being a total blast. Who doesn’t like tripping out a little bit from time to time? Story 2 (Black Thirst) is legitimately one of the best what-in-the-fuck is happening & where-in-the-fuck am I stories Ive ever read. Truly a bonafide ‘banger’. I really wrote this review so that I would see it in the future and be reminded to reread it sometime, absolute masterpiece of weird fiction. 1st enjoyed at 4:30 in the morning on a bench at the DC airport too, which becomes its own form of haunted house when you’re delirious enough.
