Salvatore often states that he believes this is the best book he's ever written, and I cannot disagree. While much different than most of his other books (think Forgotten Realms), MORTALIS will nonetheless please both old and new Salvatore fans. Darker and more mature than most of his work, the entire DemonWars saga is full of death, desperation, and fallible characters. Still fantasy, but much more believable and serious than any of the Drizzt books. And, MORTALIS is my favorite of the series thus far. However, it is not an appropriate place to start the series. To really understand what is going on and appreciate the manner in which Salvatore has developed the world of Corona, you need to start at the beginning, with The Demon Awakens (which is also excellent). MORTALIS serves as a transition between the first and second trilogies of the DemonWars Saga. Continuing the story where THE DEMON APOSTLE left off, with Jilseponie facing the truth of her lover's death and the Abellican church left in turmoil after the exposure of the demon-possessed Markwart, the first part of this book is fairly limited in scope, but necessary. Fairly quickly however, new aspects of the story are introduced. Plague has come to Corona and nobody is able to prevent or cure this newest threat. Neither the nobility or the church has any effective way to fight back against the insidious disease which threatens the entire land, and so lock themselves away in fortresses in order to protect themselves. Pony and a few others cannot stand by and watch the suffering, and try their hands at healing, only to meet disappointment. Death and desperation are the common theme throughout the majority of this book, as the impossible new enemy claims untold numbers of lives. The world of Corona is dramatically expanded in the volume. An entire new race of elves is briefly introduced and is sure to play a prominent role in the next trilogy. Also, a group of renegade monks known as the Brothers Repentant is born, led by no other than our old nemesis De'Unnero himself. Also, Jilseponie grows as a character, going from despondency to determination to save the world. While the ending of this book is fairly conclusive (MORTALIS could be considered a stand-alone novel) it leaves room for an exciting continuation. My favorite Salvatore book to date. Very highly recommended.
