One of the pleasures of reading a few books of an author's work is to see the parallels and changing style. Here in this huge late Dickens slice of life social commentary is combined with comic grotesques. Political commentary is given depth with sentimentality. The Jarndyce and Jarndyce case, a gigantic legal cog wheel whose teeth catch up one smaller wheel after another. All of society seems to be caught up from the street sweeper to the noble Baronet in a single huge mechanism driven by avarice rather than Christian charity. Agape is the counter force in the novel, but sadly it appears to require sacrifices. The obligatory deaths of children, mothers and fathers for me don't stand up on repeated reading. You can see how Dickens produces his effect. You can see him get the organ grinder ready, watch the monkey put on his sad suit and take out a little violin, a barrow load of freshly peeled onions is on standby on the page, waiting for that last gasp as an innocent soul dies with a sigh and goes off to meet its maker. I found it so overwrought on re-reading that it became comic. This misses the point. My reading experience is not similar to the original reader. They consumed the novel in monthly instalments over two years. One can imagine each one read aloud by the paterfamilias, the materfamilias pausing in her needlework, the children doubly determined to say their prayers at bedtime - just in case - as another death occurs. It is theatre in your living room. As an aside this sentimentality is very interesting. A few decades before Bleak House average life expectancy in Liverpool was fifteen years and in Manchester maybe as high as eighteen years if you were working class. The 1848 cholera epidemic saw over fifty thousand people dying with diarrhoea and vomiting, yet a couple of years later Dickens is giving us very individual deaths and perhaps unrealistically clean deaths. Rereading it struck me how long Bleak House is and how much could be stripped away. But again the point is the reading experience. The length and indulgence in the minor character is the fun of the book. In fact it is the minor characters who are fun. The major characters are the heart of the narrative are resolutely not comic. "We are not rich in the bank" says our heroine Esther (a name that should alert us to the theme of self sacrifice) towards the close of the book. Yet this seems in the context of the novel to be not true. Although not as wealthy as the Dedlocks, money is never an issue for John Jarndyce and his wards. They don't pause to travel by post coach - an expensive way of getting about, money is available to purchase property, money is never a matter of concern. However for many other characters money and the need to earn it or horde it is a constant issue. Something that Dickens does well in an understated way is make clear just how central every shilling can be and how precarious life gets. The comfortable life is the thin skin floating atop a pot of economic misery. Avarice is not simply a sin, it is a basic survival mechanism that distinguishes the unpleasant Smallweeds and Vholes from the ill fated Gridleys and Necketts. Something that you can see here that comes to fruition in A Tale of Two Cities is the notion of Saxon, Norman and Hortense . Sir Dedlock represent the Norman elite, proud, conservative but perhaps, like the carriages assembled in the novel's funeral cortege, empty. His virtue is chivalric and harkens back to an earlier age. By contrast the younger Rouncewell son has a Saxon face and represents a newer, modern educated and industrialising Britain, a bucolic place of full employment. Dickens' descriptions of the mill town and Rouncewell's industrial town are strikingly cheerful and pleasant. Not something you'd expect after reading Hard Times . No dark, satanic mills here. London by contrast comes across in this book as Cobbett's "Great Wen". But it is Hortense who is the surprise in the book. Despite the romantic elements in the story and proposals of marriage she is the one truly passionate character. Although present in only a few pages her passion drives a good chunk of the story. Her refusal to be bought off with a few coins will be echoed a few years later in A Tale of Two Cities . There is so much power in that one figure that I can't help but imagine her as embodying Dickens. The violence of her passion and its powerful effect on the narrative pull the story towards her. At the other extreme from Hortense are the trinity of self-effacing characters who are the centre of the book, Esther Summerson, John Jarndyce and Lady Dedlock. Their love is self denying and at various point and with varying degrees of success they manage to sacrifice their own happiness for the the good of others. Esther seems to be a perfect "Angel in the House". Each part of the trinity embodies Agape, even at the cost in Lady Dedlock's case of that honour uniquely feminine that should be preserved for the aftermath of legal nuptials, if one may be so bold as to suggest such a delicate matter on a family website. This then takes us to a central concern of the novel - good and bad charity . The good charity of our trinity, is dignified, individualised and with one possible exception, helpful. By contrast charity is for Mrs Pardiggle a continuation of politics by other means. Mrs Pardiggle's aggressive charity which seeks to police the poor seems particularly resonant. Perhaps rather like the poor themselves, it has always been with us. Even more extremely painted is the quixotic Mrs Jellyby. Her African colonisation scheme aims to 'educate' the Africans in plantation work and provide English settlers with employment as overseers ends not just with the local King wanting to sell the survivors for rum but also, since she is not an Angel in the House, the bankruptcy of her husband. If Esther is the ideal woman then Mrs Jellyby is her opposite. In Mrs Jellyby charity is actually shown as destructive to her 'proper' role as housekeeper. Mrs Jellyby's activities are really very interesting because here we have a woman entirely focused on political activity, quasi-Imperial colonisation and poverty relief - but Dickens uses this as a source of humour. For him this is fundamentally ridiculous activity for a woman to undertake. Votes for Women is the last crazy cause she embarks upon. I wonder if John Stuart Mill was a fan of Dickens, or for that matter what did Mrs Gaskell make of this? The central message is a Christian one. The hypocritical Christianity of Chadband or the judgemental faith of Miss Barbary are presented to us only to be disapproved of by the author. In the face of a legalistic and judgemental world in which avarice is a means of survival only the Christian virtues of faith, hope and charity offer a more palatable alternative and more importantly an alternative that Dickens doesn't poke fun at.
