3.5 ☆ rounded up Published in 1962, The Nonesuch ventured deep into Regency English society as Georgette Heyer created characters who reflected a spectrum of socioeconomic status. In particular, the author paired together a couple with a wider social gulf than in the previous novels I've read so far. Sir Waldo Hawkridge is the "nonesuch" who possesses not only a title, a fortune, but a deserved reputation for his athletic and sporting prowess. He figures prominently in the Corinthian set, to which many young gentlemen aspire. He's also a dedicated philanthropist, which distinguishes him from Heyer's other male protagonists. Sir Waldo and his cousin Julian (Lord Lindeth) travel into Yorkshire to inspect Broom Hall, which Sir Waldo has just inherited. When he meets Miss Ancilla Trent in the little village of Oversett, there is a spark of mutual attraction. Their eyes met, both pairs grey, hers very cool and clear, his faintly smiling... she gave him her hand... The thought flashed into her mind that she beheld the embodiment of her ideal. It was as instantly banished... I've realized that I prefer Heyer's older female heroines, or at least the ones who demonstrate initiative and independence of thought like Sophia Stanton-Lacy and Venetia Lanyon. Ancilla is another for she pursues an unpopular course of life by earning a living after rejecting two respectable marriage proposals. The horror of this lifestyle for a gently-reared female! But her family is in constrained circumstances. Ancilla isn't about to place greater demands upon them, nor is she going to "settle" for a husband merely for financial security. Even though Ancilla's remuneration is triple the average rate, her social standing is still reduced because she's a paid companion. Her charge is 17 year old Tiffany Wield, an English iteration of Scarlett O'Hara when she was in her brattiest incarnation. Indulged almost from the hour of her birth; endowed not only with beauty but with a considerable independence as well; encouraged to think herself a matrimonial prize of the first stare, Tiffany had come to regard every unattached man’s homage as her due... Tiffany never consciously deviated from the truth, but since she saw everything only as it affected herself the truth was apt to become somewhat distorted. Tiffany is an absolute horror. Ancilla is quite creative as she deploys reverse psychology to check the worst of Tiffany's conduct. “I didn’t make my face, so why shouldn’t I say it’s beautiful? Everyone else does!” Miss Trent regarded her thoughtfully. "Well, it's an odd circumstance, but I've frequently observed that whenever you boast of your beauty you seem to lose some of it. I expect it must be the change in your expression." Startled, Tiffany flew to gaze anxiously into the ornate looking-glass which hung above the fireplace. "Do I?" she asked naively. "Really do I, Ancilla?" "Yes, decidedly," replied Miss Trent, perjuring her soul without the least hesitation.” Regardless of his initial attraction for Ancilla, Sir Waldo only expected to stay at Broom Hall for a short period. But cousin Julian has fallen for the beauty and wiles of Tiffany. In good conscience, Sir Waldo can't remain idle while his 23 year old cousin is tempted to make a very bad match. Events play out in the fishbowl existence of country village life as the local matrons vie to entertain their illustrious London aristocracy and possibly catch an eligible match for their daughters. For the most part, Heyer writes for entertainment, not for social criticism, so her stories are quick and easy reads. Every now and then, I see that Heyer recycled bits between novels but the primary characters in this one feel original. The Nonesuch and later A Civil Contract reveal the rigidity of English society with all of its unspoken rules. While I like the main protagonists (and despite his unromantic first name, the "Nonesuch" is an appealing book boyfriend), I equally enjoyed the almost anthropological look into Regency English society. And I'm thankful that I am not a part of it.
