this is the story of two female star high school basketball players. they are going to school in bad areas of LA. one of them, nancy, is asian, the other, raina, is black. their parents meet--the black mother and the asian father and get together. the two girls have known each other somewhat since they move in similar basketball circles, but now, for their senior year, they will live together in the same house, though they will stay with their original high schools and play for different teams. they are both queer; the asian woman has a crush on the black woman, the black woman has a girlfriend who sometimes doesn't treat her well. they are both being heavily recruited for basketball scholarships to colleges. their parents are facing disapproval from friends over their relationship. their friends are getting in and out of trouble. the asian woman is our narrator--but she is telling us what happened from the perspective of looking back, so occasionally we jump forward in time to hear what happened to someone later in life. but mostly we hear about that year as it happens--as games are played and coaches come to recruit and fights happen and people make up. there is a lot of fear here--a lot about how nancy is afraid to make choices because making a choice can lead to making a mistake whereas as long as you hold off on your choice, something good or bad might happen--you don't know which. one of the things that i loved was all the detail about the games, about being part of a team, about practicing, about being recruited for colleges. all experiences that i haven't really had but that seemed authentic to me. the parts about what it's like to be queer in high school--well, i wasn't, but they sure seemed about right to me. the book was written in 1997 (i've had it a long time but just stumbled across it a couple of months ago when i was putting together stuff to donate), but takes place in 1986-87--right after cheryl miller graduated from USC. i don't think it's intended to be particularly YA but i think you could hand it to a teenager--if anyone reads it and thinks differently, i'd be interested in why. there are sexual implications, but no actual sex scenes, for example. i'll remember parts of this book for a long time--i'm really glad that i stumbled across it.
