A tour de farce, typical Mayle. This book should be a movie! It has all the makings of the new Pink Panther. Bennett, from England, has settled happily in..., well, Provence, of course. This is Mayle after all. Unfortunately a bad investment relieved him of all his money. He is enjoying the life of leisure and has no desire to find a real job so places an ad offering himself for hire, "anything considered." He is immediately contacted by the very wealthy Poe, who only requires that Bennett pretend to be him and live in Monaco for long enough for Poe to escape paying French taxes. He will be given a place to live, credit cards, a fancy car, exactly the kind of life Bennett desires. Oh, yes, and one more thing. He will receive a briefcase. The brief case arrives while Bennett is out and an ex-girlfriend Bennett is trying to reinstate as current girl friend allows the case to be stolen. At which point the circus begins. Because Bennett is the one who allowed the briefcase to be stolen, he is the one who must recover it. Poe will send him an American, an ex-girlfriend of Poe's, to help. The ex-girlfriend decides she is not happy with the amount of money Poe is paying her for her services and persuades Bennett to help hijack the briefcase and hold it for ransom. The pair wind up the Corsicans, Scilians, Japanese, the French police all in pursuit of the stolen and re-stolen case. Where in the world did they think they could hide? Fortunately for them, the French police are the ones who capture them and arrange for the case to be turned over to the French. The case is to be placed in Bennett's house in Saint-Martin. The housekeeper is to leave the house, but of course she stays. All of the other players are informed where the case will be and all make way to the sleepy little village. The old ladies who watch the comings and goings of the village are puzzled by all the sharp young men who have taken tables at the cafe, all with newspapers. And every time a car drives by, all lower their newspapers simultaneously. Then a very expensive car pulls into town, and another. A shot rings out. All the young men and more from inside the cafe run in the direction of the Englishman's house. It just has to be made into a movie!!
