The plot of points of Mortalis come together to bring either barely used portions of the previous book, or to develop upcoming plot for the book after. The main plot for this book comes in the form of the Rosy Plague that comes from the southern part of Honce-The-Bear. What I liked: - The development of Church vs Crown political intrigue from the previous book (and thankfully not just letting it die after Markwart's death) - Character development/experiences + new/barely used character development (RIP Francis) - The extension of the magic system and how the plague affects it + new ways it is interacted with - Development of plot which introduces new forces to come (Aydrian (w/Bestilbulzibar) + Doc'alfar) What I didn't like: (Possible future issues) - Lack of presence from newcomers (though this seems intended for the next book to carry them on) - Avelyn saves the day a third time? When does the action of Jilseponie, and her actions alone actually save the day rather than doing some good here and there, for then another and larger force take over the victory? - Victory again. The end of it all currently, though it does have its sacrifices, still comes out on the top, when it feels like for its situation that there just shouldn't be any winner and that losses should just be part of an end. Sometimes people lose and in this situation of the Plague, it felt forced that the blood of Avelyn saves you from the plague, but then sooooo many people just come by and starts taking the blood! It feels so strange and much of a reach. Wrap-up: - The plague definitely gave rise to issues of how people were treated when sickened with the plague and how the church became blamed for the issue of the plague, which then made it easier for Marcalo to develop his cult around their anger. I am disappointed in the use of Avelyn again for getting rid of the plot of the plague so easily, though I thought the overall use of the plague was otherwise well done, but its ending felt much like a reach. - The elves just hit you with such a NEGATIVE FORCE in this book with the fact that they have essentially kidnapped Pony's child and to top that off, take from the Humans though they say the stones are of their territory, and reason their kidnapping to be fair due to their sword-dance being taught to Pony by Elbryan. What ASSHOLES. - All-in-all with all of the plot points introduced and others converged into this book, it all sets itself together in the 2nd best book of the series so far, with the 1st being The Demon Spirit. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
