(edited) ✩ ✩ ✩ ✩ Let's start with the elephant in the room: “Cute little Peter Belly” I was honestly laughing out loud so many times because of this man's archaic 1980s Southern slang. I’m from Tennessee, I was born in the '80s, and I grew up exactly two hours away from where Thomas Harris lived—and I have never heard slang like this. I had to keep Googling just to translate sentences like "she had a cute little Peter belly." Because excuse me, what in the Hello Kitty is that?! Well.. for anyone who is unaware.. it’s a woman’s abdomen that pooches. 😆 •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────• The story and the plot are what kept me here, but not so much the writing. I was immediately pulled into the vivid, gritty details, and I was very engulfed when Francis was on the pages. However, it didn’t really scare me, it was just.. gross and sad. •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────• The characters were fantastic though! Will Graham: Will is amazing as the FBI profiler dragged out of early retirement. He is a total badass! I love how when he walks into a crime scene, it's like he has this "gift" that doubles as a total curse. He possesses this vivid, hyper-empathetic imagination that allows him to think exactly like the psychopaths he hunts. Jack Crawford: The head of the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit. He utilizes Will's unique mental talents, despite knowing the severe psychological toll it takes on him. Love him or hate him for it, I loved him. Side note: I could NOT get Scott Glenn's voice out of my head while reading his lines, even though he played Crawford in The Silence of the Lambs movie! Francis Dolarhyde ("The Tooth Fairy"): The primary killer Graham is hunting. He was born with a severe cleft palate and subjected to horrific emotional and physical abuse by his grandmother. Honestly, what a textbook recipe for a serial killer! Dr. Hannibal Lecter: He is the ultimate catalyst here, and yes, I heard Anthony Hopkins voice. While his actual page time is relatively brief, his terrifying presence pretty much looms over the entire plot. Reba McClane: A blind woman who works at the same film lab as Dolarhyde. She is independent, compassionate, and completely unaware of his dark side. Her genuine affection for him creates this massive, tragic internal conflict between Dolarhyde’s lingering humanity and his darker impulses. •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────• There’s this power vs impotence and the ritual of becoming that gives the story a rich motif. Mirrors are everywhere, and to me, it symbolizes shattered identity, self-loathing, and perception. They also reflect the split selves of both Dolarhyde (the man vs. the Dragon) and Will Graham (the profile hunter vs. the killer he tries to understand). And lastly, “The Dragon" is simply an extreme extension of the darkness hidden in human nature. •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────• Just a heads up: this book is absolutely not for the faint of heart (or for people who hate looking up 45-year-old stomach slang). •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────• Content Warnings: Graphic Murder & Violence Severe Child Abuse (Ugh) Sexual Assault Torture Animal Cruelty (Ugh) Home Invasion Body Horror & Burns Psychological Trauma Ableism Suicide and Self-Harm •─────⊰⋅☽⊱✦⊰☽⋅⊰─────•
