I saw the movie The Flight of Dragons as a child and loved it; Dickinson even came to my school where he laughed at the idea of making him this gallant hero that he was in the movie. I have wanted for many years to get the books the movie was based on; finally I was able to get them. Peter Dickinson starts with a premise, that dragons really existed. He then goes on to explain how they would work in the real world and goes about this in a logical and believable way. He brings together many repeated ideas from stories and uses common themes to establish what elements dragons really had. He discusses how such large creatures with relatively small wings would be able to fly, the reasons why they breath fire, how they could have four legs AND wings, why they have a treasure hoard and why was it thought they could speak to humans. He also brings many ideas together and explains how the work on a single creature. The book is largely non-fiction, what is amazing is how Dickinson manages to make it both scientifically realistic and believable, while still being very interesting and easy to read. One chapter (Life Cycle) is written as fiction, it reminded me of a nature documentary where it followed the life of a dragon from egg, to adult and then the beginning of the next generation. What is really remarkable was that it didn't seem like a work of fiction it was believably real. The book includes many quotations both from old texts such as Beowulf and from more moderns works such as The Dragon and the George by Gordon R. Dickson, The Hobbit by JRR Tokein, and Dragon Flight by Anne McCaffey. Dickson uses these to reinforce his ideas with demonstrations of where they are used in literature. The artwork is amazing and superbly detailed. You can get totally lost just looking at all the pictures and spotting new things in them. For those who have seen the movie The Flight of Dragons: Most of the times in the movie where characters are describing how the biology of dragons work these are taken from the book. For example the scene where Smrgol is teaching Peter/Gorbash to eat limestone and gemstones and how they fly, all of this is taken from the book. If you are interested in the story that the movie is based on be sure to check out The Dragon and The George by Gordon R. Dickson .
