“Treacherous Love” follows the story of a fourteen year old girl as she falls in love with her substitute teacher. It documents the change in her feelings for and about him as he seduces her. She starts out a normal girl, always writing about her close friends, but slowly, as her substitute teacher manipulates her, starts to become closed off from them. Furthermore, she struggles with more “common” problems, such as second-hand boy drama from her friends, her friends moving away, her parent’s divorce, and drug use (both her and those around her). Her teacher starts to show her affection, beginning with just making her his classroom aid and the like, but eventually, they begin an illegal and secret relasonship. The main character is believable, constantly swinging from mood to mood and obsession to obsession as most teenagers do. While she does lack some emotional access towards the end, overall, she is a fairly realistic and normal teenage girl, which enables the reader to consider the dangers of child abuse-it can happen to anyone. I feel I should mention early on that the story is meant to illuminate all the methods in which child predators attempt to prey on children and teenagers to help inform them of the dangers of such people, not to suggest that such behavior is acceptable. The author includes several notes to teenagers and adults, as well as a Q and A, and help hotlines encouraging possible victims to reach out. In other words, it warns children to set healthy boundaries and alerts them to some signs. Occasionally, the use of all upper case writing to emphasis a point gets distracting, but it does add a level of realism to the character. It’s definitely something a teenager would do. Furthermore, the story is believable. It happens in a way that the reader can see “actually happening” and gives them a bit of a peak into the mental state of victims, which is something most “safe environment” trainings don’t do. It does, however, let the reader better understand the mental state of such teenagers and children, because they get to watch it play out in the book.
