“All those who discuss the departure from Egypt in detail are considered praiseworthy." — Passover Haggadah “Say goodbye to her, to the Alexandria you are losing." — Cavafy, “The God Abandons Antony” The phrase “Out of Egypt” is richly evocative. To a contemporary reader, it brings to mind Isak Dinesen/Karen Blixen’s “Out of Africa”, a lyrical meditation on life as a member of a privileged colonial class. To anyone with a passing familiarity with the Hebrew Bible, it has a the significance of representing an escape from captivity, and a corresponding communal sense of obligation: — “I am the LORD that brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God; ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy”. This astonishingly rich memoir alludes to both aspects. But it is really about a second exodus out of Egypt. In the mid-twentieth century, most Egyptian Jews were driving from the country by the Nasser government’s official and militant anti-Semitism. The Aciman family were among them. Lawrence Durrell famously celebrated Alexandria in the 1940s as a city of “Five races, five languages, a dozen creeds.” By the end of the twentieth century, it was a city of one language (Arabic), and of largely one race and one creed. This is the story of the transition between the two, as told by a man who lived through it as a child. André Aciman was born in Alexandria in 1951. This makes him two years younger than my father. But his memoirs make his childhood sound like something out of the inter-war period if not actually La Belle Époque. This may reflect a life lived among grandparents who remembered the Ottoman Empire. It is probably also at least partially literary fancy. As an academic, Aciman specializes in Proust, and can’t quite resist making his childhood Proustian in every sense. Proust, however, was pretty clearly French. In contrast, Aciman’s family were true cosmopolitans, and this is a major focus of the book. At one point, the young André is asked what nationality he is. He assumes that he must be French, as that is the language his family speaks at home. He is shocked and offended to discover that this is not true, that his family came to Egypt from Constantinople. He writes that Everyone in the family had talked almost daily about a faraway, gaslit world called Turkey, where ignorance, dirt, disease, theft, and massacres prevailed. It never occurred to me that I was Turkish because of this. I felt sullied, mocked, betrayed. As in all cosmopolitan communities, questions of language are always at the forefront. The book is full of references to languages of diaspora. French is recognized to be not one language, but many. There is "good socialite French," and "the awkward way in which Armenians spoke French." Then there is the French heard over the radio from Europe: the French of movie stars, the French my uncles mimicked but never mastered, the French one made fun of but secretly envied, the French one claimed one didn't care to speak, the way some might say that they didn't care for certain cheeses because no Brie or Saint André could ever compete with a good hearty slice of fresh Greek feta. ... It was a French that made us feel remote, dated, inferior. Even the homey feta-like French was sometimes felt too formal for the Aciman family. In one of the most stunning passages in the book, the author describes his two grandmothers lapsing into Ladino or Judaeo-Spanish: Ladino spoke of their homesickness for Constantinople. To them, it was a language of loosened neckties, unbuttoned shirts, and overused slippers, a language as intimate, as natural, as necessary as the odor of one's sheets, one's closets, of one's cooking. They returned to it after speaking French, with the gratified relief of left-handed people who, once in private, are no longer forced to do things with their right. All had studied and knew French exceedingly well, the way Lysias knew Greek — that is, better than the Athenians— gliding through the imperfect subjunctive with the unruffled ease of those who never err when it comes to grammar because, despite all their efforts, they will never be native speakers. But French was a foreign, stuffy idiom." As Egyptian Jews, Aciman’s family were in an impossible situation. The first time we sense how much danger they are in comes when they take refuge from an air raid. They had been caught up in Operation Musketeer, an Anglo-French plan to capture cities along the Suez canal, including Alexandria and Port Said. The Aciman family found themselves sheltering from bombs dropped by the allies of Israel. Soon, though, they would find themselves victimized by the Egyptian government for being alleged Israeli sympathizers. Most Egyptian Jews left the country after the war in 1956. The Aciman's stayed for another eight years. They attempted various forms of assimilation. One uncle finds a sympathetic Greek Orthodox priest who baptizes him whilst acknowledging that his practice will be "Communion on Sundays, but Fridays the Shema." André's immediate family takes a different route, trying to become as much like their Arab neighbors as possible. André was enrolled in Victoria College, a public school run on British lines (and the alma mater of Omar Sharif and Edward Said, as well as Hussein I of Jordan and Simeon II of Bulgaria). By this point in history, the school's student body is almost entirely Arabic, and some of the lessons are taught in Arabic, a language André cannot speak. There is one extended scene, which reaches Catch-22 levels of tragico-comedy. Young André’s father is furious that his son isn’t doing any of his Arabic homework, and insists on him memorizing the poem he has been set. The problem is that neither André, nor his parents, nor his governess can actually speak Arabic. So they call their servant, who speaks Arabic but does not read it. He calls his son, who can read and write. His son is ashamed that he has to teach André the poem because it is a crude piece of propaganda about how the heroic Egyptians under Nasser have triumphed over the Europeans and Jews. André is aware enough to realize he is being vilified but nevertheless takes some evident pride in finally making progress in Arabic. (This story, unfortunately, ends even less happily than one might imagine). Despite this, the family persists in trying to be "good Egyptians." André acquires an Arabic tutor, who has him copy out Suras from the Quran. The whole family stands on the Corniche to cheer Nasser's motorcade as it passes. But their situation becomes more and more untenable. In 1965, at Passover, the Aciman family left Egypt. At their last seder, the 14-year-old André refused to read the four questions. His grandmother rebukes him. "Are you ashamed of being Jewish? Is that it? What kind of Jews are we then?" His reply: "the kind who don't celebrate leaving Egypt when it's the last thing they want to do". But leave Egypt they did. In 1965, Passover and Ramadan coincided, so their departure was to the sounds of fireworks. A noisy street festival, as heard by Cavafy's Antony.
