“The Age of Jackson” is more the study of the Age than of the man. Jackson is merely one of many who played their roles, including Martin Van Buren, John C. Calhoun, Roger B. Taney, John Quincy Adams and James Polk to mention a few. The Age of Jackson was an age of conflict: conflict between classes, regions and personalities. It was an era of bank vs. people, plutocrats vs. common man, North vs. South and abolitionist vs. slaveocrat. To author Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. the clash of lasting consequence was that of class, the plutocracy vs. masses. Schlesinger focuses the challenge Jackson raised to the Virginia aristocracy and the patrons of the Adams dynasty who had controlled the White House through the life of the Republic. Jackson turned the political landscape upside down as the broadening suffrage enabled military heroes to compete with the erstwhile political ruling class. The most profound struggle during the Jackson Age was the decision to deny the recharter of the Second Bank of The United States. This work begins in 1829 with Jackson’s ascension to the White House and continues until Jacksonians complete their public service after the Civil War. What I like most about this book is the way it follows the personalities and issues who entered the public stage with Jackson throughout their careers. The reader sees Jackson assemble his coalition, the opposition coalesce into the Whig party, the slavery tension supplant economic issues as fracture lines between the parties that traded power, all while individuals shift from banner to banner. The influence of Jackson and his followers was more long lasting than I realized. I am impressed by the way it involves so many political, commercial and literary figures in its story. I am reminded of Will and Ariel Durant’s series on the History of Civilization. This is clearly a book on a mission. Schlesinger presents Jackson as a popular reformer in the line extending from Jefferson through the Progressive Era that had found its high point in FDR’s administration. I think that at times he stretches the evidence to keep his chain intact. Copyrighted in 1945, it is undeniably a work of its day. Later historians may take a different view of the continuity from Jackson to Roosevelt and the issues selected by Schlesinger to make his case. I found it interesting that the contemporary charge that Jackson erred in his expulsion of the Indians along the Trail of Tears merits no mention in this work. I do not recall any Indians being mentioned on these pages. Schlesinger’s timeline runs from Jackson’s attack on the Bank through FDR’s support of unions, but not through the Trail of Tears to Roosevelt’s relocation of Japanese Americans. The “Age Of Jackson” compels the reader to think about the trend of American history from 1829 to the end of the Civil War. It also makes us contemplate how history is molded by its tellers.
