My fav quotes (not a review): An Actor Prepares (Constantin Stanislavski) -Page 95 | "The exercises which the Director used today had the purpose of making the students conscious of the fact that on the stage, in every pose or position of the body, there are three moments: First: superfluous tenseness which comes necessarily with each new pose taken and with the excitement of doing it in public. Second: the mechanical relaxation of that superfluous tension, under the direction of the "controller" Third: justification of the pose if it in itself does not convince the actor." -Page 107 "Yesterday you and I had a quarrel. I insulted you publicly. Today, when we meet, I want to go up to you and offer my hand, indicating by this gesture that I wish to apologize, admit that I was wrong and beg you to forget the incident. To stretch out my hand to my enemy of yesterday is not a simple problem. I will have to think it over carefully, go through and overcome many emotions before I can do it. That is what we call a psychological objective." -Page 115 "Truth on the stage is whatever we can believe in with sincerity, whether in ourselves or in our colleagues. Truth cannot be separated from belief, nor belief from truth." -Page 117 ""Are you convinced now," he asked the two girls, "that a nagging critic can drive an actor mad and reduce him to a state of helplessness? Search for falseness only so far as it helps you to find truth. Don't forget that the carping critic can create more falsehood on the stage than anyone else because the actor whom he is criticizing involuntarily ceases to pursue his right course and exaggerates truth itself to the point of its becoming false. "What you should develop is a sane, calm, wise, and understanding critic, who is the artist's best friend. He will not nag you over trifles, but will have his eye on the substance of your work." -Page 119 ""Now count the hundreds first, there are usually ten of them to a packet. Oh, dear! How quickly you did all that! Not even the most expert cashier could have counted those crumpled, dirty old banknotes at such a rate!" -Page 163 "First of all, don't worry about the flower, just water the roots, or plant new seeds." -Page 164 "'Don t think about the feeling itself, but set your mind to work on what makes it grow, what the conditions were that brought about the experience. : 'You do the same/ said this wise actor to me. 'Never begin with results. They will appear in time as the logical outcome of what has gone before.*" -Page 192 "If, on the other hand, he found that the animal could not be distracted from the first object of his interest and would make an effort to go after it when removed, the trainer would buy him. His choice was established by the monkey's evident capacity to grasp and hold something. "That is how we often judge our students' power of attention and ability to remain in contact with one another—by the strength and continuity of their grasp."" -Page 197 "How can I reach your mind, your feelings, your attention, your imagination? How can I touch the very soul of such an influential person? "If only I can make him conjure up a picture in his mind's eye that in any way approximates the dreadful reality of my circumstances, I know his interest will be aroused. He will look into me more attentively, his heart will be touched. But to reach this point I must penetrate into the being of the other person, I must sense his life, I must adapt myself to it." -Page 218 ""What about an objective?" I suggested. "Doesn't that influence your creative desire and therefore your will?" "That depends. If it is not particularly alluring it won't. Artificial means would have to be used to sharpen it up, make it lively and interesting. On the other hand, a fascinating objective does have a direct and immediate effect. But—not on the will. Its attraction is to the emotions. First you are carried away by your feelings, desires are subsequent. Therefore its influence on your will is indirect."" -Page 270 ""In the creative process there is the father, the author of the play; the mother, the actor pregnant with the part; and the child, the role to be born. "There is the early period when the actor first gets to know his part. Then they become more intimate, quarrel, are reconciled, marry and conceive. "In all this the director helps the process along as a sort of matchmaker."
