It’s always good to find a new author to shock & entertain me & from the cover blurb ( "America’s premier novelist of terror" from no less than the esteemed Stephen King & "The evil in The Uninvited is utterly convincing" from Peter Straub) I thought I’d be in good hands. Mmmm….mixed opinions on this I’m afraid! Now before I start this review may well end up containing *spoilers* so read on at your peril… Firstly I’ll get my rather petty niggle out of the way as petty it might be but it did niggle at me! From the cover blurb this is talking about Barry knocking a man down in a snowdrift & discovering, quote: "The man was naked. Naked & horribly familiar. She was staring at the stripped, perfect body of her former fiancé Ned." ….only he wasn’t was he?!! Well yes, he was naked but NOWHERE (& I’ve triple checked!) is there any mention of ANY resemblance to Ned. How misleading is that? And…to make matters worse, in her inelegant attempt to seduce this man, now known as Mark, she notes that a certain part of his body is "splendid, like carved faintly blushing ivory" compared to Ned as she’d never cared for the "appearance of his bulky brutish member" Now this can be explained by the fact that " she wished her old love back again but in more perfect form…" however it's still not the " perfect body of her former fiance" as blurb would lead you believe. Okay I know it doesn't really matter but inaccuracies like that bug me. Actually come to think of it that takes me to another niggle…. which is that the title of "The Uninvited" does seem wholly inappropriate given that Mark was brought into being by Barry herself so I’d say he was definitely invited! Gripes over & onto the storyline… well initially I enjoyed the setting of the scene, the descriptions of the area were quite evocative yet I was unconvinced of Barry as an eighteen- year- old & as the story progressed rather than warm to her, I found her rather irritating. After running down the stranger, Barry takes him under her wing & eventually he moves into her family home she shares with her artist father & brother. Although a "creation" of Barry’s he’s no Frankenstein’s monster, becoming articulate & growing in strength with a talent for art seemingly sapped from Barry’s father’s. As Mark’s ability to paint grows, Tom becomes a shell of his former self & while it’s obvious what is happening it never seems to be confirmed, much seems to be left for the reader to work out – or assume – for themselves. There are references to Irish legends of fairy folks & from new acquaintance Alexandra come tales of Tulpas & magic rituals. For me, I would have liked the story to develop more into this paranormal side, as it was it seemed to be in limbo: not enough folklore & mysticism to be what I'd class as a supernatural tale but lacking in shocks & surprises to be a terrifying horror. Of course, poking her nose into Mark’s business has sealed Alexandra’s fate but as the supposed villain of the piece I can’t say I found him particularly threatening – he’s no Pennywise or Hannibal Lecter that's for sure. Mrs Prye, on the other hand, had all the makings of a really creepy character shame she never had chance to really come into her own. Finally, I’m not one for being content with a book’s ending but I did find this one rather satisfying with Barry thinking she was going to get things right this time (guess we’ll never know for sure as there’s no sequel!) However, there were some loose ends left dangling, the stranger in her mother’s car at the time of her death being one thing I’d have liked clarifying. I have my own thoughts on it but it seems to have been a throwaway comment that was never revisited. All-in-all an entertaining enough read but not one that racked up enough tension to have me on the edge of the seat & certainly nowhere near scary enough to have me worried about turning the lights out ;o) This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
