Black people lived in one village, Indians the next. Blacks, Indians. So it went, all along the coast of Guyana to Mahaica. Even if you didn't see people, you could tell which village was black, which was coolie. Black villages had co-op shops; Indians hardware and dry goods. Blacks had unpainted houses and clap-hand churches; Indians paint, front gardens, mosques and temples. Was always people liming on the road in a black village. Mothers and children out till ten at night. Not so in an Indian village. But all had Catholic churches and rumshops by the main road. Was difficult to imagine this broken mosque full of Indians praying and living in Tamarind Grove. Seemed to me, the only way a building could get like this was like in war movies when they just dropped those bombs whistling, straight down from planes. Them Riots must'a been like that. The only warring I could remember was what Mums said was a rally. I remember plenty PNC people running down the street with flames in bottles. And even though they were shouting, faces orange, teeth gold - was a strange silence in the black night. That silence made my parents say nothing. Close the windows and hold us. Hearts galloping. - Buxton Spice by Oonya Kempadoo . . Honestly, i am traumatised. I get that sexual awakening is common among teenagers - they are curious and oftentimes, majority parents especially POC back then didn’t really explain well on the subject matter. However, to start with the first chapter of explicit description of masturbation by mentally ill man was utterly uncomfortable for me. And it did not stop there, we have encountered many sexual violence acts - molestation , assaults and even bestiality. Its not my place to say what author can write or cannot write but i have often wondered what are the intentions behind such stories or scenes. I was more interested with what happened in Guyana in the 1970s- whereby the author used it as a backdrop of a novel but it was not explored in details. We can only assumed that Lula, the main character’s parents are dissidents or intellectuals that made them the target of PNC. We also know that there’s a political struggle and controversy civilian unrest but it was mentioned briefly in the passing. The author also highlighted how diverse Guyana is with Indians, Africans , Portuguese , Indigenous people and even mixed races communities although in the said observation, they are not keen in mingling and interacting with one another hence the areas was divided along the race and ethnicity lines. Oonya Kempadoo can write and her prose is beautiful but i just can’t get over the fact that how hyper sexualized it is. The book have a lot of dialogues in Guyanese Creole to demonstrate the authenticity of the story. As to why the title of the book is called ‘Buxton Spice’ - it is a well known Mango in Guyana. Lula always insinuating that the Buxton Spice Mango Tree often know what happened in the community - from the mysterious death that happened to the pastor wife and the government infiltration via PNC random raids and checking in the area but the tree refused to share it with her. Overall, this is my first book of Oonya Kempadoo and probably will be the last one if she maintained the same style on her other books - fragmented, disjointed and no central theme that uniting the writing.
