This piece is a short monologue written from the point of view of the character Allard in Betsey Brown, by Ntozake Shange: Someone come tie my shoes, please! I’m Allard. Yuck! Betsey and Eugene always be kissing. I bet they get germs. Betsey says people in love don’t get germs. Huh! And Sharon says that’s where babies come from, but I don’t believe we come from no tongue kissing. Grandma says it’s all just some kinda low-down niggah mess. Me, I’d rather make a fire any day—big flame—whoosh! Burn up ghosts; burn up the KKK. Daddy says we ain’t colored. He says the Negro race is a mighty one, and that there’s whole countries that’s run by Negroes they own selfs. In the morning quiz he ask me What is discipline? Sharon an’ Margot thought I didn’t know, but I know discipline is the hallmark of a mighty people. Mama says we not disadvantaged. She don’t like Chuck Berry. But she upstairs with Daddy or she’d say, “shut off that mess!” Charlie, that’s my cousin, he rode me on the handlebars of his new three-speed over to the Catholic girls’ school. There’s no colored over there, just nuns and white girls. Charlie says the nuns have no legs. Two pōlices came and took us home ’cause the big, red-faced one said we was “trustpastin”. They callt us “nigras”. Margot say Charlie like white tail, but we was just ridin’ bikes. Daddy says we have to progress and that means we have to “inegrate”. Mama says that just means you get to pee after white folks. But why do we have to go to they schools? Why can’t the white folks come over here? Gramma says leave well alone, colored should keep where they is. I thought it was no good. I didn’t wanna go off with no white folks. I said “They gonna kill me, Mama, they gonna kill me.” Charlie call me “pickaninny” and say I must be the niggah them white folks talk about, and Mama say Charlie fillin’ my head with mess. I say, “I don’t wanna go,” and Charlie say, “So what, niggah? It’s the law.” I’m not colored, I’m a Negro. I went and I come back and the white folks didn’t kill me. Look, I’m alive! The white folks didn’t kill me! Mama says not all white people are evil, but five of ’em beat on Charlie. If they bother me, I’m gonna set ’em on fire, that’s what I’m gonna do; and they’ll go up in flames to glory. Grandma says she’s not sure that’s where they’d go. After the white folks didn’t kill me, Betsey ran away. I think she was tired of white folks. Daddy brought home Betsey and Arnett’s fried chicken and shrimp! But then Mama run away, and Carrie took care of us. Carrie is big an’ maybe too nice to be ugly but mighty peculiar lookin’. But Mr Jeff, he don’t care what she look like. He handsome and he don’t mind if her hair stand up all over like she got a fright. Mr Jeff come a courtin’. That’s when Betsey kisst Eugene most, while Mama was gone. When Mama come home, she said Carrie had to go. I love Mama, but I wisht that Carrie coulda stayed. Mama says she was niggerish and low-down but I like that church Carrie took us to where we can play the tambourine and get a spirit. Mama says Presbýterians don’t get the Holy Ghost. She says we act like the po’ children in the projects. Carrie never made me talk right like Mama does. I don’t see why we can’t have Mama home and Carrie too. Come on, someone, tie my shoes! Pleeeease.
