I started this book with a bit of prejudice because in my introduction it says: Devoted readers of M.J. Farrell's hunting romances who bought her new novel, Devoted Ladies, in 1934 to lose themselves in her singular and special world, that of Anglo-Irish in Southern Ireland, and one to which she utterly belonged, were in for a rude shock when they first opened this book. This introduction made me want to read her previous books, where she talks about Those famous concerns of her four previous novels - horses, romance, snobbery, the world of the landed gentry in Ireland, the hunt as tapestry, the glorious backdrop to life, and the houses of Ireland lying like temples at the very heart of her books and it didn't make me feel good about reading this book 😄. In the end I found it engaging. In the first part the author introduces various characters and I was just thinking that at a certain point they would all find themselves together when I turn the page and that's exactly what happens. The plot is based a lot on power relations between people. Jessica bullies Jane, Joan takes advantage of Piggy's blind devotion, Piggy bullies Hester about money. Everyone takes advantage of every situation where they are stronger than another person. You do and say mean things, you create opportunities to put other people in difficulty, so that you can then go around telling the anecdote and laughing about it and thus be very funny and modern in front of others. Jessica wants to destroy the story of love between George and Jane not to have Jane but "then one could go away and laugh and tell of it". The most negative character in my opinion is Jessica but the saddest is Piggy, who doesn't even use her real name anymore and uses the nickname that comes from her physical appearance to talk about herself in the third person. I wouldn't have said it was a book from the 1930s, it certainly seems more modern to me, it reminds me more of Muriel Spark and the 1960s. I would really like to see a film based on this book, London in the 1930s and then the Irish countryside, à la James Ivory so to speak.
