It seems many folk complain it's not good enough on many levels. Fact is it's not a biography of J.D. Salinger. It's Margaret Salinger's autobiography, his daughter, and her first novel. Sure she uses some of his character's to illustrate her point of view, and I feel she is entitled as it seems apparent some aspects of her life have been molded into his characters. But it's essentially about how her relationship with her father (& mother)effected her. She does not attempt nor claim it to be a biography of her father. There is a lot left unsaid and rightly I think because she is only writing about her father in relation to herself. When Christina Crawford wrote "Mommie Dearest" about growing up as the daughter of Joan Crawford, people did not expect her book to be a full biography of Joan, nor did they expect Christina to be a brilliant actress either. I don't quite get why so many people are so down on poor Margaret Salinger. She obviously had a fairly troubled childhood, and the fact that she has managed to transcend that is admirable. She makes no claims to be a gifted writer like her father, (as many seem to want her to be going on various reviews I've read on GR) but considering that, the book has a charm as it chronicles her life and and journey to sanity. I have read many books by more talented people in the arts fields where the writing is quite dismal. Granted there were some sections that could have done with serious editing, as it lagged in the middle and the afterword (which was basically notes from another Salinger relative on their family history) could have been incorporated into the body of the work. But I suspect Margaret wanted to give that relative the credit & so it was tacked onto the end. I muse also that if her father had been an average man in the street and not the "God" Salinger - she may not have published the work. It opens up a can of worms though doesn't it, with famous people or their children airing dirty laundry in public. Yet.... but we expect it, we clamour to know every tiny detail. What was it like to have so & so as your father, to live that life? We cry. We hound the famous and their kids and when their story doesn't sit well with us we disparage them. Don't we?. Go on admit it. As the public we want all the gory details to chew over while watching their lives fall apart on tv and in the tabloids and then we call them names and spit them out. Like spoilt brats. The same name that we call them. found today 8/2/2013 1 of 20 books for $10
