The Birth of Modern Satire Dead Souls by Nikolai Gogol is a classic of Russian literature and it is easy to see why. It is fun, satirical and just long enough, not to bore the reader with the concept. For Gogol this was more of a poem, than a novel. The book centres around a middle class Russian named Pavel Ivanovich Chichikov who buys ‘dead souls’, or peasants from the landed gentry who had died but had not been registered as dead yet. He does this in an ingenious way to get rich in 1840s Russia. The landlords don’t want to pay extra tribute for the dead and so sell them Chichikov for almost nothing. They therefore make money on nothing. Chichikov buys 400 such souls and goes to a company which gives loans to landlords, with the serfs as collateral. Thus Chichikov is able to secure a high loan for nothing. His plan is to then disappear. At first the landlords are sceptical about what he is up to, but eventually go along with it. So, the second meaning of ‘dead souls’ comes to light in the novel, as the landlords are now considered to be also dead souls as they have no morality left. As such the world turns in to a spirituality corrupt place. Alas Chichikov is accused of trying to grow his wealth to steal the governors daughter and as such is chased away. Chichikov himself is surprised at the accusation. Here the author explains why his protagonist is not a hero, but actually can do bad things. This is not Gogol’s morals but that of Chichikov. This is an interesting chapter and one that pushes away from the traditional novel that had come so often before. At the time I imagine this to have been quite revolutionary. In the second part of the novel, Chichikov moved to another town to start his scheme again. However, he is again arrested by a prince as he tries to buy a landed estate by forging the will of the sellers aunt. He is set free and runs away again. There is no happy ending. Strangest of all, the novel ends suddenly with the prince’s speech in the Russian government about corruption. There is no explanation or epilogue, just a finish mid sentence. Gogol is a classic flawed genius and an enigma. He famously had no real or describable personal life and even though he is hailed as one of the greats of Russian literature, no Russian blood flowed through his body. In fact he was born in Little Russia, aka The Ukraine and raised in Rome, where we wrote about a provincial Russia he never lived. He complained that his stomach was put in the wrong way around, and that he could only eat macaroni. He disliked other writers who did not get to the point, but at the same time wrote with a lot of ambiguity in his prose. Gogol’s writing in some ways was way ahead of its time, with influences of the Romantic era he was in, but also infused with modernism and post modernism, which we are used to today. All in all, Dead Souls is an excellent book and one that everyone should read. It is a window into the past, a Russia that is gone, but also introduces some great characters and asks bigger questions, such as those on morality.
