I haven't read Janet Dailey in years and years, so it was interesting to get into the way-back machine and see how her books have weathered over time. Overall for this one, I have to say NOT WELL, since wrist-gripping, bruising, bullying heroes like Rian in DM just seem like walking red flags for abusive relationships now. But I have always remembered JD's anti-heroine LaRaine, and it was a ballsy move to take the shallow, selfish OW from not one but two (that I recall at least) books and turn her into the heroine of her own book. So I wanted to revisit LaRaine's story, A Land Called Deseret , which also features OM Travis from one of my fave JD books, Fiesta San Antonio as the hero--but before I do that, I wanted to revisit LaRaine in her role as OW. So I started with the first book in which she appears, DM. Heroine Laurie is LaRaine's Mary Sue cousin, an orphan raised by her uncle's family (but supported with money her father left, so her sense of obligation is a little OTT). Frankly, fiery LaRaine, even though she's only in a few scenes, is way more interesting than "quietly beautiful" Laurie, but the good girl always gets the guy, so LaRaine just gets about as many lines in the book as she does in her "big break" movie role that takes her offstage for most of the book, and we're stuck with the basic heroine. LaRaine becomes engaged to dark and dangerous Rian (total girl name that should be dotted with a heart and not a good alpha hero name, so pfffttt), but when LaRaine is supposed to go visit Rian's aunt for a few weeks while he's off doing tycoony things in So. American, she gets offered a role in a movie and convinces her cousin Laurie to go visit the aunt instead and masquerade as LaRaine. Talk about a bad plan, but JD needed the plot device, so we'll start bailing this holey plot with our little buckets. Big-blue-eyed Laurie inexplicably agrees and she's off to charm auntie, the neighboring judge, and the cute, nice OM next door with her innocent beauty. Of course Rian comes back and decides that he's done with LaRaine, whom he was only marrying for a hostess and some heirs anyway, and Laurie can damn well take her place since she deserves to be punished, one assumes, and she's hot and convenient. We get lots of spats (in which Laurie sees herself as a kitten attacking a panther), punishing kisses, bruising grips, treacherous body syndrome, and true "love" forever more because what Mary Sue can resist a brute in vintage romance? None, I tell you. Along the way, we learn a few things about the forts and attractions of Alabama from the tour-guide-level characters, heee. Did you know that Mobile, Alabama is the true original home of Mardi Gras and has a large but less touristy and tacky celebration? Me neither! Our heroine wears blue eyeshadow, dresses in halter tops, and probably uses a curling iron on her raven locks. Our hero is soon smitten and is determined to force her into marriage (which she seems incapable of preventing for some unknown reason), and finally our pretty innocent runs away, where she is taken in by a kindly couple who do not sell her into sexual slavery or kill her in Los Angeles but instead rent her a room at a reasonable rate while she gets a secretarial job. Rian finds her, thinner and paler, a few months later, and we have a dubious HEA with a potential abuser. The hero was really dated in a cringey way (at least he doesn't have a mustache though), the heroine was boring, and the secondary characters were trite, but it was pretty entertaining overall--definitely had a Dallas/Dynasty kind of vibe. Next stop on my visit with LaRaine: Sonora Sundown (which I remember pretty well, so it must have been a favorite back in the day), where she again provides some much needed hard edges in comparison to a marshmallowy innocent heroine. She wasn't all that bad in DM, actually--just a little self centered and materialistic--and she did kind of get screwed over by the hero, so maybe JD had plans for her from the start and didn't want to make her tooo unlikeable in this one.
