This book is wonderful. It is set in South Africa shortly after the end of Apartheid, when the new government is taking shape. Nelson Mandela is mentioned rarely and only as a marker of time and place; the story isn’t about him or the great shapers of history. This main character is the wife – with her husbands, children and affairs. But the focus is less her personal story than her work in the community and her efforts to make sense of law, history and injustice where she lives. What’s so wonderful about it? The community is re-forming after the struggles. People are returning from prison, from exile, and from the long hard work of revolution. • Two revolutionaries return from exile. One fled because the police were after him. One fled because he was alleged have been an informer and the movement would hold him to account. Are they both heroes? What do you say when you see the alleged snitch in the street? Those allegations were never proven and don’t matter anymore. Now he’s looking for work. What do you do? • Your service to the movement led to your arrest and incarceration. You served time on Robben Island with dangerous scary robbers and street criminals … where you developed bonds of respect, if not affection. Now you’ve both been released, and your comrade needs a place to stay. What do you do? Questions like this provide the backbone of the book. They show the complexity of civil society, personal relationships, and change over time. Or to put it differently, Gordimer explores the answers to questions I never even thought to ask. BTW the main character is a white woman. The characters who fill the community are black, mostly men. What is said, unsaid or implied simply by the demographics of the relationship? I read other reviews. Some people complain about long complex sentences and confusing dialogue that slips between which character is talking, what is only an internal thought, which character is having it, and what just happened in the room. Complainants say Gordimer needed an editor, or maybe post-Pulitzer she refused to take their suggestions. Bah! Humbug! Yes, the sentences are long and sometimes confusing. I could read them quickly, get the main idea, and wish they’d been edited for clarity. True enough. But I could also read them slowly, puzzle the pieces into place, and marvel over how much she’d achieved in two short paragraphs. I recommend Door B. This book is wonderful. Sidebar: I pulled this book from a little free library. It wouldn’t have occurred to me to read it, but there it was. I knew Nadine Gordimer only for July’s People, but I spent time in South Africa both before and after Mandela’s release from prison – so I was curious to learn of the times. I’m so glad I did. Not because of what I learned of the times but from what I learned that’s timeless. Thank you to whoever gave me the book. Have a nice day.
