I read this series back in 1999, when it first came out, and I know I enjoyed it, so I've decided to reread the series so I can remember why I liked it. Firstly, I can say it held a lot more intrigue back then, because we were moving into 2000AD and there was lots of talk about the end of the world and such; so Daniel Parker's Countdown Series was quite timely, considering it is a dystopian series about the year prior to the end of the world in 2000. Countdown: January begins with an attack on a Russian base that holds some sort of sinister military weapon that basically kills off everyone, except for teenagers/young adults. The rest of the world is turned into puddles of clothing and black goo. The story unfolds through the eyes of five characters, whose lives will obviously intersect at some stage during the series. Ariel Collins is a seventeen-year-old girl in Washington, who spends most of her time getting drunk and partying, as a coping mechanism for dealing with the tragedy that sweeps the world. Julia Morrison is another seventeen-year-old in New York City, who we meet with a fake ID in a nightclub, dealing with an abusive partner, who she sticks with because everyone else she knows has disappeared. Harold Wurf , who at twenty-years-old, is the youngest person in history to graduate from University of Texas Medical School and is a resident at University of Texas Hospital with a inflated ego and a sense of self-importance. Sarah Levy is an eighteen-year-old girl who is stuck in Israel with her brother, Joshua, and her Uncle Elijah. When Elijah turns into a puddle of goo, we find that he has the key to the whole series - a scroll with a prophecy, which makes Sarah one of the most important characters (at least at this initial stage of the series). George Porter is a sixteen-year-old prisoner, who is trying to get out of his cell and survive in this new world. This book pretty much sets up the story, so there's not a lot in it other than introducing characters and showing how they act and interact within this new world. Sarah Levy's scroll revelations are interesting, as it begins to show the reader what we can expect. A great start to the series.
