I began this book in 2021 and DNF'd it twice, before finally managing it half a decade later. Already, this is something of a review in and of itself. But, an attempt at a legitimate review: Self's The Quantity Theory of Insanity, in theory, should have nestled itself nicely in my list of favourites. It deals with concepts and areas of study that appeal greatly to me (madness and academic discourse on madness, the drudgery of everyday life, the ins and outs - mostly outs - of ensconsed academics slowly wearying themselves as they chase diffuse papertrails, eroded cyphers, and incandescent theories); It finds itself firmly established in a genre I enjoy - that sort of biting but absurd British cynicism/satire that encompasses both Monty Python and David Lodge; its seperate but interconnected stories promise to do something interesting with form (not unlike the interconnected and nested narratives of Daniel Kehlman's Fame); and, indeed, the shape these stories take is not unfamiliar either ("Ward 9," the second chapter of Self's book, comes off as something of a psychiatric retelling of Dino Buzzati's anxiety-inducing medical tale "Seven Floors," from Catastrophe). And yet, the book... disappoints. It's tedious, really. Self is clearly an accomplished writer. He knows a lot of words that fit the scenarios he details, he plays with form, he has a very dry, very wry sense of humor that managed to land a few unsuspecting hits. And, the book contains some gripping passages -- I was so taken by Derek's encounter with "Some Chants From Failed Cultures," an album of 'World Music' in the chapter "Understanding the Ur-Bororo" that I wrote a whole 7,000 word paper on it for a uni course I took (and which, admittedly, did contribute to prolonging my completion of the book, troubling my initial review). But, I think precisely the problem with Self's stories is that what makes parts of them gripping is the ways the concepts he attempts to wrangle with slip out of his grasp; not simply because they're any more weasel-y or slick or difficult to pin down than other, more accessible figures (though this they may well be), but because of the protective distancing between himself and the text that his satirical tone attempts to provide. If there is one thing that frustrated me (productively?) about Self's book, it's how quickly he changes scene just as things get gripping, just as his impressive (if overhwelmingly derogitory) vernacular begins to falter in the face of the indescribable, as his hold begins to waver in the face of the ungraspable. At once, Self wants to pin down and reduce his figures (the madman, the exotic, the Other) through his language. He wants to describe them from every angle. In some instances ("Mono-Cellular," for instance, and its first person narrator) he wants to embody them, inhabit them and be inhabited by them. But, really, he doesn't; he doesn't want to get too close. These figures are satirical, first and foremost: they're parodies; not real at all, right? Inexhaustible to Self, they swell out of the text in their most provocative moments. Enter ridicule, enter his dissociative gesturing. Self is hopelessly tangled with his figures, but when they threaten to burst free, he disengages entirely, changing the scene on a figure which often doesn't return to the text again. And, interestingly, this is also where Self is most like his characters, the way in which they all stand in for him. In each story, most characters (or at least the protagonists) are bewitched by a frequency illusion, typically of their own making: a paranoid methodological trap that places them in a world where everything is governed by a single process or object, which they see everywhere (think, for instance, what 'waiting' is for Jim, in "Waiting"). They chase it, maddened and maddeningly, until it grows far too big for their comprehension and they have to squash it, succumb to it, reduce it, or escape it, whereupon the illusion either dissipates and reforms, follows them, is replaced by another, or any combination of the three (think, then, about how 'waiting' evolves into the millenium Apocalypse by the end of "Waiting" and throughout "Ward 9"). Self is no different, but unbound from a single story, within the movement, style, and form of the book proper, where the illusions that he constructs and has some control over (among others, the eponymous Quantity Theory of Insanity, published in the famous BJE*), masks the frequency illusions he has no control over, and seems to resent: precisely the figures of madness, exoticism and otherness over which he attempts to proclaim literary mastery. And it really is the satirical thread that stitches these stories which is responsible for the discomfort that unfolds when it comes undone, frayed: when the figured illusion becomes tangible, material, when it presents discomfort rather than wit or humor, and threatens to overwhelm the reader, and Self along with them. Hence, how quickly -- prematurely, really -- these scenes depart and are curtailed, without opportunity to resonate with the reader. When the illusion vanishes, what lingers? Oh and I guess because this is technically a collection of shorts rather than a book here is my individual ratings: "The North London Book of the Dead": 2.5 stars. Funny, but not much happens. Death is as good as life in the drab English suburbs. "Ward 9": 1 star. Frankly, quite tedious. Deleuzo-Guattarian schizoanalysis is bad enough without being so unfathomably misread. "Understanding the Ur-Bororo": 4 stars. I wrote my paper on this one so I got familiar with it, and it payed off. Gripping scene aside, some tolerable writing, if not for the blurriness between Janner's vapid readings of his 'precious tribe' and Self's descriptions of them through Derek's retelling of Janner's conversation with him. "The Quantity Theory of Insanity": 2.5 stars. Fine. Same complaints as "Ward 9" but the form of this one and its role as a grounding anchor for all the stories in the book help it drastically. "Mono-Cellular": 4.5 stars, right up until the end, which was more like 2 stars. This is the most Self stays with his figure of madness, and the satire, or what feels like an attempt at satire, actually does a good job of capturing the indescribable frustration and boredom of destabilising polarity of obsessive, intrusive thoughts. Ascends into a kind of absurd, aphasiatic pastiche by the end though. "Waiting": 2 stars. Fine, and no more than. Probably an interesting case study for a paper, because of the relation it ties between madness, ontological anchoring, and the frequency illusion concept I describe above, but nothing beyond that (for me at least). Anyways. I hope this review was worth the time I took to type it. I had fun at least (more fun than with most of the book). Can I have my Calvino back now? *British Journal of Ephemera
