Reading this 470-page novel by Natsume Soseki was undeniably tough and its readers' concentration reasonably required. I didn't think I'd finish reading within a definite plan since I've usually regarded my reading, especially in search of enjoyment and consolation from some novels by my favorite authors, as something I can keep going whenever I want to. This idea might look boring to some readers, however, I found reading his biography and some of his shorter works like his "The Tower of London", "Botchan" or "Sanshiro" stimulating, earthbound and witty. Furthermore, we may start by reading this informative website: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natsume_... to have an overview background about his literary life and some related details worth knowing and keeping in mind while reading any novel/short story of his with respect and understanding. I think this is my preamble to my brief review on "I Am a Cat" after I finally reached its final page. As always, I thought I'd like to say something (2-3 points) about it, my advice, my ideas, etc. to share with my Goodreads friends who keep reading/supporting me via the internet unimaginable for this worldwide communication some 15 years ago. First, I found reading 'one of the most original and unforgettable works in Japanese literature' (backcover) quite tedious, wordy and unnecessarily lengthy regarding innumerable narrations by the master's friends (i.e. the master of the cat); some went to more than 2 and 3 pages. I knew such length is rare and we need to respect and admire his writing fluency but it's a bid hard for me to keep reading some pages WITHOUT a paragraph, just imagine and you'd see what I mean. Second, while reading this subtly-amused novel, its readers also gain more information and knowledge on various famous English literary men. For instance, "When Carlyle was presented to the queen, he, being an eccentric and anyway a man totally unschooled in court procedures, suddenly sat down on a chair. All the chamberlains and ladies-in-waiting standing ranged behind the queen began to giggle. Well, not quite. They were about to start giggling when the quen turned around toward them and signaled them also to be seated. Carlyle was thus saved from any embarassment. ..." (p. 443) Or "Sir Francis Bacon observed in his Novum Orgnum that one can only triumph over nature by obeying the laws of nature. ..." (p. 443) And "This stage of the literary figure is already evidenced in England where two of their leading novelists, Henry James and George Meredith, have personailties so strong and so strongly reflected in their novels that very few people care to read them. ..." (p. 457) Third, I found the quotes on a variety of complaints about women interesting and humorous since I've never read them anywhere before. For example: "Next comes Diogenes who, when asked at what age it was best to take a wife, replied, 'For a young man, not yet; for the old man, never.'" (p. 459) "The Emperor Marcus Aurelius compares women to ships because 'to keep them well in order, there is always somewhat wanting.'" (p. 460) " ... Valerius Maximus who answered his own question about the nature by saying, 'She is an enemy to friendship, an inevitable pain, a necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desired calamity, a honey-seeming poison.'" (p. 460) Finally, I think reading this homorous novel based on the Japanese context in the Meiji era is worth reading provided that its readers should have sufficient literary background on Natsume Soseki as well as their time, sense of humour and persistence regarding reading this lengthy novel the author's hoped to be. There're still more interesting points to raise and discus in which, I think, we leave the task to those eminent Soseki scholar worldwide. As for me, I can't help admiring his genius ( as well as the two translators') in that this dialog deeply suggests a unique cultural way of respecting her (I mean Japan's) honourable practice between the teacher and his/her students. The section concerned is as follows: "Revered teacher," he muttered from his broken trance, "I'm worried sick. What, what, shall I do?" (p. 395) Compared to Thailand, we also have our ways of addressing to show respect to our teachers but I think it's a bit difficult to find a Thai equivalent with equal linguistic and aesthetic meaning when the boy said, "Revered teacher", I wonder if there're other countries having such a respectful address like this. If any, I'd appreciate your information.
