Mark is a high school video game developer who’s just fallen in love for the first time. Unfortunately, Becky already has a boyfriend, and Mark is hesitant to pursue her. When he meets Vincent, a quiet man who asks for help in play-testing his own video game, Vincent’s beautiful and enigmatic girlfriend takes an interest in Mark’s love life. In fact, Kara seems unusually invested in Mark going out with Becky, even to the point of trying to sabotage her current relationship. What Kara’s real motivations are, and where she and Vincent truly come from, is more like one of Mark’s science fiction games than he ever could have imagined. Spoilers will be clearly marked. Trigger warnings: character death (graphic, on-page), nuclear war, car accidents, asphyxiation, severe illness, violence, guns, blood, threats, infidelity. This has always been one of my favorites of Pike’s standalone novels, but for various reasons, it didn’t quite hit me the same way this time. I love the story that’s being told here, though it edges into science fiction territory, but Pike has always been able to make sci-fi more accessible to me. While things like time travel, cryogenic freezing, and nuclear war are all central to the plot, the truth is that they’re all too vague to feel like we’re truly in a sci-fi novel or to even be sure what really happens, and I’m okay with that. In instances like this one, I even prefer it, since I’m not sure the story works at all if we look at it too closely. And it’s such a sad, lovely story. As always with Pike, the book is really about people, and the small and large roles we play in the universal balance between good and evil. Every small action matters, and what matters most of all is love. As far as messages go, I’m hard pressed to think of a better one, and it’s present throughout so many of his novels. Like most of Pike’s narrators, Mark is a nerdy teenager with a crush, and I wasn’t terribly invested in his relationship with Becky until Kara and Vincent (my love) arrived on the scene. Kara is a variation of Pike’s usual mysterious, headstrong blonde, and I love their relationships with kind, quiet Vincent. While the villains aren’t often on the page, the novel interrogates whether or not being a villain is a foregone conclusion. If just one thing changes, can the whole world change? I still love Vincent’s video game and the moral message there, and the whole novel comes over emphatically anti-war. What bothered me about it this time was the ending, particularly in the treatment of one of the characters, but more on that after the spoilers. I often find myself reaching for Pike’s novels when I’m going through emotional distress, and whatever my thoughts about them, they never fail to comfort me. I need his worlds and his characters to remind me that there is magic and grace in everything, even (and maybe especially) when it doesn’t turn out the way we hoped. SPOILERS SPOILERS SPOILERS. TURN BACK BEFORE IT’S TOO LATE. I always found the ending of this book sad but beautiful, but this is the first time I’ve been a little angry reading it. Throughout the novel, I felt like Becky was being held at a distance, but Pike’s characters often feel a bit distant, and it makes sense since Mark loves her without actually knowing her that well. I dislike the idea that one of our only female characters dies for the redemption of a male villain though, especially when (in her current timeline) she didn’t do anything to deserve that. Kara might be far from innocent, but Becky isn’t. Yeah, yeah, I get that the whole theme of the ending is forgiveness, but I struggle a little with that concept too. (Ray didn’t make any attempt to stop being an asshole before she died.) I’ll always love it, just not quite in the same way as I did before. I review regularly at brightbeautifulthings.tumblr.com.
