If I'd been able to read the Intro before buying this book, I never would have bought it. I believe that the Bible is accurate, but I wanted some further background on Bible Times. This author believes that we have to sort through the myths and legends in the Bible to find what truly happened. He claims that early Christians didn't care about Jesus' teachings, only the Salvation message. Yet the Gospels record many of Jesus' "how to live in the here and now" teachings and not just his death and resurrection. This shows that early Christians DID care about this information. If you prefer a "pick and choose what you like" approach, then you might like his running commentary on what he thinks is accurate and what isn't. For example: We have the details of how Moses and the nation of Israel received the Law in Exodus. The contents of the first five books of the Bible are attributed to Moses throughout the Bible. However, on page 22, this author waves his hand and dismisses this with, "Jewish tradition--the pious Jewish assumption shared also by Christians--says that the Torah existed since the time of Moses, who brought it down from Mount Sinai, when God had dictated these five books. Historians doubt this." (He thinks it was written much later.) He throws around the phrase "many scholars" and "historians" on a frequent basis. Well, I know "many scholars and historians" that don't agree with his claimed timing of the writing of the Torah. On page 58, he stated "Most historians perceive the Oral Torah as a post-Maccabean innovation, a flexible response to difficult and changing times. The traditions of the Pharisees were an attempt to update the Torah for the "modern" world of their time." He believes that the Pharisees were trying to boost their authority by claiming the traditions went way back. He apparently thinks no one noticed that they'd never heard these "traditions" before or, at least, that no one was able to leave a record that the Oral Torah/traditions of the Pharisees were a "modern" fake. Any evidence against his position will be dismissed as fakes or lies. But unless he dismisses any "pious Jew or Christian" as worthy of being called a historian, his claim of "most historians" backing his position is again not accurate. Anyway, I tried to read this for any factual information despite his obvious bias. Unfortunately, his tendency to re-write "the facts" to suit his viewpoint made me doubt the accuracy of anything he stated. I quit around page 60. I don't recommend this book as the information in it is too strongly affected by his bias. It's certainly not as generally accepted as he'd like you to think.
