An early short story by Linda Howard, Bluebird Winter uses a plot device this author played in often- but takes it to a ridiculous level. Kathleen Fields is heavily pregnant and going into premature labor in the middle of a wicked snowstorm on Christmas Day. She is alone and a half an hour away from the free clinic, the only hospital she can afford since her deadbeat husband walked out on her. She makes it a ¼ kilometer before her truck slides into a ditch. Leaving his mother's house after holiday dinner, Derrek Tallifero knew he should have left a day earlier to avoid the storm of the season. But he had a hard time saying no to his mother he doesn't get to see often because of his full work schedule. Before he gets far, he comes across a stranded truck… Fortunate for Kathleen the knight in shining armor who comes to her rescue is a doctor- and not just any doctor, a doctor from the neo natal unit. Derrick falls instantly for Kathleen and baby who begins her life by slipping into his hands and he arranges things to keep them in his life forever. And here we have the ridiculous part of the whole thing. I liked the beginning; Kathleen fighting the elements to save her baby, it all felt very real despite the contrived set up. The fact that Derrick, the exact person she needed at the exact moment AND he happens to fall in insta-love with her? Wehhlll, that was a bit harder to swallow. I think my issue with this one- despite the short length- is that it was obviously LH working out a plot that she would later do to much better affect. I’ve seen the "me-n- y0u against a storm" theme often in her novels and novellas, I really liked it in Duncan's Bride and another anthology story "White out" ( Upon a Midnight Clear: The Teacher / Christmas Magic / Jolly Holly / If Only in My Dreams / White Out ). this one? Yeah okay, I liked the weathering the storm in the midst of a trial thing again, but the character development didn’t add up. Derrick falling for Kathleen and instantly proposing marriage- (and her agreeing to it without freaking out because the guy who delivered her baby must be a total whackjob!!) is also just like a recent re-read I did Mackenzie's Magic . But hey, it's LH, she will always get a pass from me. This one follows her other novels- Sarah's Child and Almost Forever They’re from the 80’s so they are dated, and it’s been awhile since I read them (I don’t think I liked the first so much with Rome and Sarah who do show up in this story)- but I have them on my re-read list so I can get reviews up.
