I love Dr. Seuss. I can recite How the Grinch Stole Christmas! by heart. I don't understand how anyone can not love Dr. Seuss. But if you don't, read this biography, and you will. The authors are journalists from his adopted hometown of La Jolla, CA, and it is clear that they love not only his work, but the man himself. Their biography doesn't ignore his flaws, but it doesn't dwell on them either. Without getting into details, the handling of his first wife is great. If I were ever to write a biography of a friend, I hope this is how it would turn out. It would have to be a pretty damn interesting friend to compete, of course. I want to find a book on Frank Capra's Hollywood army unit in WWII -- in addition to Capra and Geisel/Seuss, it included Chuck Jones, of Looney Tunes fame. I scoured the endnotes of this book, and it looks like the authors got their info on that time period mostly from correspondence and interviews, but there must be a book written about that unit. Right? Right. I love artists who love life; I cannot abide the tortured artist myth that romanticizes depression and suicide. Geisel is sensitive, and a perfectionist, and kind of a loner, granted. But he loved practical jokes and silliness and people. Some artists are depressed, but depression is not artistic. One of the few lines I still remember from my times on the Gallery poetry staff went "talent is more erotic when it's wasted." That is such a stupid sentiment, I still want to punch someone in the face for thinking it. But I digress. My point, is that Geisel is the sort of creative personality that doesn't depress you, but inspires you to be creative. Reading about his creative enthusiasm, I look at all my blank walls and want to get a sketchbook and do something about them. Then I remember that I can't draw. Oh well. My copy is all marked up now, and I couldn't possibly list all the parts I found notable, but I do have to mention one part I loved: "Among Ted's first fan letters at Judge was a curt note from a condemned murderer on death row in Huntsville, Texas, written on the eve of his electrocution. 'If your stuff is the kind of thing they're publishing nowadays,' the prisoner took the time to write, 'I don't so much mind leaving.' Ted was enraptured with the letter and kept it in his desk throughout his long life, always feigning fear of running into the felon, whose sentence had been commuted at the last minute." (62-3) I kind of hope I'm that vindictive on my death bed.
