The Captains is mostly about the adventures of Craig Lowell but the other three main characters from the Lieutenants, now captains—Felter, MacMillon and Parker have big roles. Most of this story takes place during the Korean War and all four of our leads get to play hero. MacMillon rescues some guys, Felter runs secret missions into N. Korea and is horribly wounded, Sherman leads a tank company and shoots an officer who is fleeing from the front line. He is later court marshaled for this act. Lowell ends up with a spot promotion to Major and leads a tank column in a spectacular movement against the enemy and becomes famous among the troops. One thing about this series and I notice that people complain about it in the reviews, is the gratuitous sex. Lowell, now a widower, has sex in a tank with a movie star on a USO tour. Our four heroes are always on the verge of trouble or disaster but since they are “warriors” seem to get protection from certain generals who look out for them. For example, after his court marshal, Parker gets sent to a horrible dead end assignment and it takes Lowell’s cousin’s influence with a Senator to get him reassigned. Yet at the end of the book he gets married and the top brass from the Pentagon, old buds of his dad from WWII show up. Where were they when he got assigned as a housing officer? The people who hated book one and said so were mostly mad about the racial and anti-semitic comments. Sherman is a large and very black man. Felter is most often described as a “little Jew.” These books will no doubt soon be pulled from libraries as characters also refer to homosexuals as fairies and faggots. Folks, the era is the 1950s. Take solace in the fact that the author likes all four of his main characters. As I’m not into Book 3 I am willing to label these books as military procedurals. There’s a system (the military establishment) and the goal is to beat the system. Book 1 haters probably didn’t like the autocratic behavior of colonels and generals. They haven’t been in the military. All types of personalities rise to the top of the chain of command. Often, the most aggressive and obnoxious rise highest. I’ve seen a full Colonel throw a salt shaker at a mess sergeant because he didn’t like his powdered eggs. There’s all types and one has to be institutionally clever or have a great support group or both to make ones way up the military ladder. Our four heroes seem like they are going to make it. We will see in book 3—The Majors.
