Casebook of the Black Widowers is the 3rd collection of short story 'mysteries' by Isaac Asimov . I have enjoyed 3 of the collections, although not in published order. The stories are such that they don't particularly have to be read in any specific order. Basically this is the premise. Once a month (not specifically designated, it might be another time period) a group of middle - aged men meet for dinner at the same restaurant. The group is based on a group that Asimov, himself, actually met with, called the Trap Door Spiders. The group in the series consists of six diverse characters - a. Geoffrey Avalon a patent lawyer b. Geoffrey Rubin, a mystery writer c. James Drake, a chemist d. Thomas Trumbull, a cryptographer e. Mario Gonzalo, an artist (Mario usually draws a caricature of the invited dinner guest) f. Roger Halstead, a high school math teacher. The group is served dinner by ever-present waiter Henry. Each meeting a guest is invited by one of the members, that night's host. After dinner, the guest must answer questions from the others. Generally, one is designated as the initial questioner. During the questions a 'mystery' usually comes out, or, at the least, a question, that the Widowers try to figure out to help the guest. In every case, after discussion, they turn to Henry, who having listened to the conversation, comes up with the salient points to help the guest with his problem. The stories are always interesting. In this collection, we have a spy story, a murder mystery, discussion about sexism, a Sci-Fi'ish story and even, in the final story, the ghost of a previous founding member, presents a riddle. There is no action, just a good meal and a discussion from this irascible collection of individuals. Sometimes you can figure the 'riddles' out yourself (I think I got the gist of a couple 😁), sometimes they seem a bit nebulous, but in all, the story is an enjoyable, fun, cozy read. So there you go. Check out the series. It's nice to read something besides Sci-Fi from Asimov. (3.5 stars)
