Dawn’s Wicked Stepsister Sharon and Richard finally tie the knot and Maryanne catches the bouquet (which Dawn isn’t happy about). Now Maryanne and her Dad will be moving in with Dawn and Sharon. After spending the night in the Spiers old house and being spooked by the old house’s sounds it’s moving day. Dawn is excited and Maryanne is nostalgic and emotional from having to leave her own house. Her bad mood carries over to the new house and she’s bitchy all day about Tigger (who’s also having adjustment problems). It gets a little better Dawn and Maryanne dress in each clothes the next day, but at the meeting Mal gets sick. It turns out she has chicken pox and they have to schedule her jobs out to the other members. Maryanne and Dawn argue over who gets to sit for the Perkins and Kristy makes them draw straws. Maryanne gets the job. Myriah, Gabbie, and Laura are so cute tho that all it takes is Maryanne telling about what the girls did and she and Dawn make up. BTW Dawn wanted the money to get Maryanne a special “now we’re sisters” present. The Pike triplets also come down with pneumonia. Dawn is trying to get use to Richard’s rigid, routine also. Sharon is trying to convert him and Maryanne to get healthy. Richard announces a Spring-Cleaning Day and Sharon really isn’t good at cleaning so she kind of just moves stuff around. Maryanne follows behind her with the Dust buster which Dawn things is rude. So she rearranges Richard’s sock drawer and puts stray tissue on his bed. They’re all getting along until they’re watching a movie and don’t agree when to clean up. Maryanne is about to leave and spend the night with Kristy but Tigger throws up all over the rug. This pisses off Sharon and Marynne just stays home. There’s a school dance and no one’s asked Dawn, but Maryanne throws it in her face and makes snide comments so Dawn calls Jeff only to find out a strange woman answers the phone. Jeff says it’s Carol their Dad’s new chick. Then they both vent about their new families. Dawn feels better and when Maryanne gets back they make up again. When Stacey sits the Pikes, Vanessa falls off her bike and gets a sprained ankle. Now there are six injured and sick Pike kids. At the BSC meeting they find out Maryanne’s old house got sold and now Claire and Margo are sick (making it all eight),Maryanne and Dawn have another falling out when they’re trying to do homework and Maryanne needs total silence but Dawn can’t concentrate without music. Richard takes Dawn’s side and Sharon takes Maryanne’s. Maryanne ends up leaving and doing hers in the guest room, Mr. and Mrs. Pike join the rest and get injuries. Dawn goes to Kristy and she gives her some helpful advice that all the adjustments she’s going through now are normal. Dawn decides that she and Maryanne need their own rooms, but to save face from admitting she was wrong because she suggested they share a room she’ll use the secret passage to scare Maryanne out of the room. Dawn sneaks in and out the passage (ringing the doorbell so Maryanne will leave)leaving a silk rose and a chicken bone on Maryanne’s desk. This freaks Maryanne out and she thinks it’s the ghost of Jared Mulry This works like a charm and she helps Maryanne move to the guest room. Then she gives her a gift (a pin shaped like a cat). Richard suggests they all have a chore chart, Sharon suggest they each have separate meals, and Dawn suggest they’re all more honest with each other. Sharon even starts to like Tigger and lets him sleep in her lap. My Thoughts: Even though Maryanne was *supposedly* the “Wicked Step sister” (which really was she?) Dawn was the one who irritated me mostly in this. 1) What did she need to catch her mother’s bouquet for? She doesn’t even have a boyfriend. And then if anything the events of this book should have shown her that maybe she shouldn’t even be *thinking* of being married at 13. Not wanting Maryanne to have it was just petty! Then how was Maryanne wicked for feeling emotional over moving? She’d lived in that house her whole life? Now she was a little bit bitchy for cleaning up behind Sharon and throwing up Logan in Dawn’s face (that REALLY wasn’t cool) But she was not wicked for wanting silence to concentrate. I’m kind of sensitive about this because I have misophonia and people do not take that serious and make you feel like just deal with it. Some people NEED quiet! Also, I thought that what Dawn did was a little immature instead of just talking to Maryanne. So if Maryanne *was* the problem. Dawn was equally a problem. She even immaturely to get back at Maryanne rearranges Richard’s socks. Which made NO SENSE AT ALL! Luckily I’ve never had to live with my sister. I’ve never even had to live with a roommate when I was in college. If they gave me one id switch and this is the reason. I learned a long time what it took Dawn the whole book to learn. Rating: 5 This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
