The reason I keep reading Silverberg books is right here. The best more than makes up for the disappointing. These “best of” Silverberg stories were chosen by the author, and span his career. It starts with “Road to Nightfall”, which was not his first published story, but was one of the very first ones he wrote. He wrote it for a contest in 1953-1954 and then neglected to submit it. It’s quite good, and still probably the least of the stories in this book. It’s very much a mid-fifties story, taking place after some sort of limited nuclear exchange that has cut off most of the parts of the United States from most other parts, with the result that it is impossible to get food from one place to another. Each story is preceded by an introduction (which you might want to read after reading the story; most times it doesn’t matter, but it does for the first one and probably a few others). When I decided to add this book to my shopping list, I added it with the very strange cover by Alan Magee, because I liked the cover in general. After reading the stories, I might rather have gone for the Gerry Daly cover on the 1980 paperback. The latter is an illustration from the story “Nightwings” which is a great story, one of the best in the collection, in the dying earth genre. It follows a trio consisting of the Watcher guild, whose sole job is to use retro radio equipment watch the skies for pending invasion, a magical Flier guildmember, who has faerie wings, and an unguilded amateur historian. The world also has strange alien creatures already living on the world, with a variety of jobs; in one case a room is “concealed by streamers of quasi-sentient outworld gauzes”. All of the stories are very good; the other two highlights are “Sundance” and “To See the Invisible Man”. The former starts out as a bog-standard anti-imperialist story, an American Indian scientist on another planet taking part in the biological extermination of an alien race. But throughout there’s the sense that the character is taking the logic too far; the ending flips everything around so many times there’s no telling what is going on except that it’s not the expected. “To See the Invisible Man” is about a justice system that can impose invisibility. An invisible criminal is not actually invisible, but everyone must treat them invisible on threat of being treated as invisible themselves. With stories spanning 1954 to 1969, it’s not surprising that there is a lot of optimism even in the least optimistic stories. In one of the grimmest, “Hawksbill Station”, time travel is possible by 2004 at the latest. The same story has space travel so commonplace that people take lunar honeymoons by 2029.
