Kitty's review posted on Guilty Pleasures An Historical Romance by Kerrelyn Sparks? Oh, my, yes it was! But, it’s no ordinary. British ton, duke’s and lords, ladies and gents kind of book. This is set in America during the time of Paul Revere, the Boston Tea Party and the British invasion. Quincy and Virginia were wonderful! The first chapter of the book set the tone for everything that would happen between them. The story starts off with Quincy trying to buy Virginia on a ship that has just sailed into Boston Harbor filled with “indentured servants”. The description of him in his lavender clothes with the lavender wig and high-heeled shoes to match and her horror as he is looking her up and down making rude comments was hysterical. And, it goes on from there. He’s always insulting her and she is constantly badgering him right back, and he’s apologizing. See, Virginia doesn’t know that it’s just an act – he’s actually a spy trying to get into the good graces of the British Army while trying to protect his own shipping business from being seized by his father. And, what he doesn’t know is the Virginia is spying with her Aunt as well. All the while the spying is going on by both of them, there is the “Boston Burglar” to contend with, Quin’s brother Clarence and Uncle Edward, Ginny’s Aunt Mary and sister Caroline, Mr. Johnson, and Josiah. The Tories, Loyalists and Redcoats, too. And, would it be a Kerrelyn Sparks book without a strapping Scotsman, no….enter Virginia’s father, Jamie Munro. You felt sorry for Quincy and his childhood and cheered for Virginia when she fell in love with him and kept trying to show him that he wasn’t a “bastard” and was worthy of her. I thoroughly enjoyed reading “The Forbidden Lady”. You didn’t know what was going to come out of Quincy’s mouth next that would insult Virginia and watching Uncle Edward pine over his love for Aunt Mary just had you turning page after page to see what was going to happen next. There are some twists and turns that have you thinking you know who the Boston Burglar is then something else happens that has you thinking it’s someone else. Classic Kerrelyn Sparks – always keeping you on your toes and waiting right until the end to give you the whole story and the happily-ever-after that we fully expect from her. Now, when I see the name Kerrelyn Sparks, I think of the Draganesti’s and loveable, fun vampires but, “The Forbidden Lady” has shown me a totally different side if this wonderful author. The Forbidden Lady had characters that made you smile, laugh and just have a grand old time in 1700′s. A lot of love, some mystery and lots of humor. Ms. Sparks did not disappoint me at all. The book was filled with the usual wit and humor that we have come to know and love about her writing. Characters that jump off the page at you and make you feel that it’s okay that you are living their story with them.
