I wanted to read Hervey Cleckley’s The Mask of Sanity because it is referenced in other psychopathology books as the leader of psychopathology for its time. Robert D. Hare’s Without Conscience , a book on psychopaths I’ve read a few times, references it and I thought I would check it out. To be clear, I read the fourth (1964) edition. I found this book fascinating for probably all the wrong reasons. To put this book in its proper perspective, the bulk of the book (research and writing) was done in 1941. This is before the Second World War, before Elvis, the Beatles, and (essentially) television. People still had servants (those who could afford them) and families of distinction could trace their histories back to colonial times: “the patient’s remote antecedents had lived in or about Charleston, SC, in colonial times. They had never been famous for wealth…but in the Revolutionary War, as well as the in the War Between the States…” (101). Women, for the most part, were expected to get married and have children. Men had jobs. People still drank highballs (it’s a cocktail of some sort and it’s mentioned surprisingly frequently in a textbook about psychopathology) and smoked cigarettes. In other words, it was a totally different era and I found it an amusing, fascinating, naïve, and disturbing world. There is a certain innocence to the America in this book. Deals are considered legal contracts by handshakes and man’s word is gold. The government seems to care about its citizens. Cleckley often mentions how lawyers and judges and police officers have a certain amount of sympathy for the patients he’s worked with; they know these people aren’t quite right because they keep committing idiotic crimes that really have no pay-off, but they aren’t legally insane. When the patients show up in mental hospitals (this is when America still had a large network of hospitals to treat the mentally ill—how quaint!), the psychologists and psychiatrists know they don’t meet the legal definition of insanity and can’t justify keeping them locked in an institution with clearly disturbed patients. Lawyers, judges, and politicians would write letters on the behalf of the patients asking for them to be released from mental hospitals (and loan them money!). This surprises me because I can’t imagine that happens often today. There’s a real sense that everyone involved in dealing with these patients are concerned about them and wanted to help them become better people and citizens and gave them numerous chances to do so (and of course, since they are psychopaths, they always disappointed their benefactors). What I found most disturbing about this book is the overwhelming sense of paternalism and male chauvinism. While women are mentioned as having jobs, it’s understood that of course they do that until they follow the natural course of life and get married and have children. A case study of one woman was particularly horrifying to me. The woman was considered to be a “deviant” and show signs of psychopathology merely because she was a lesbian and had the audacity to say that she did not want to be married. No worries—she was soon “cured” of those two unnatural conditions. Deviant behavior abounds in this book. There is a terrible chapter titled: “Homosexuality and other consistent sexual deviations.” Wow. I know, it was written in the early twentieth century, but this chapter is amazingly wrong , full of incredible stereotypes, and horrifying. There is also a certain amount of “white man knows best” kind of racism too. It’s not overt, but when Cleckley mentions “Negros” his tone is insufferably smug. I’m not going to debate Cleckley’s research or anything like that. I am not an expert in any way in the field of abnormal psychology; I just find it fascinating and have read a few books on the subject. I mostly want to make observations on his writing style. What I was most surprised about when reading this is that I (due to the amount of knowledge available now about psychopaths) know more about psychopaths than he does! At the time this book was written (even with the later fourth edition I read), psychologists don’t know a lot about psychopathology. Some psychologists think patients do all the socially-unacceptable, illegal things they do because they are guilty about having bad feelings/impulses and want to be caught and punished by the law or put in a mental institution so they can receive help. They just don’t know they want this because the emotions/thoughts are buried so deeply. Cleckley thinks that’s a bunch of nonsense and that the evidence and research don’t support this theory. He’s not sure why they do the things they do, but he’s very close to the modern theory when he proposes it’s because they don't care . The mental health community is still trying to decide if it’s lack of emotional development or a lack of biological (underdeveloped brain) development. The modern theory is the brain is underdeveloped and thus psychopaths will never be able to be cured. They just don’t have the brain parts. The part of you that allows you to feel strong emotions, to have a conscience, to worry about the consequences of your actions, or to even have a deep interest in a hobby is missing from psychopaths. They are incapable of feeling strong emotions. They don’t care about the consequences of their actions, don’t care what others think of them, and don’t recognize emotions in others. When you know this, the things that psychopaths do make sense. One of the biggest dilemmas (and probably still today) facing the legal system and the mental health system is that psychopathology is not curable. However, psychopaths (or sociopaths) are not clinically insane. They know the difference between right and wrong, legal and illegal, ethical and unethical. They just don’t care. So they take actions that are often harmful to themselves or others (and I don’t just mean violence; most psychopaths are not the serial murderers you see on television or in movies. They are often just your average criminal and their crimes are non-violent but can cause many problems to the people around them) without thought of the consequences. They do what they want because it is a passing whim, a way to stave off boredom. But how to handle these people? The legal system (at least when this book was written) couldn’t/wouldn’t keep them in jail for long. The mental hospitals that often took them couldn’t treat them because they weren’t ill. So these patients were shuttled between jail and mental hospitals, neither of which could deal with the root of the problem (psychopathology). Today, with our decline of treatment options for the mentally ill, these people are often in prison (or working on Wall Street. Robert Hare’s Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us discusses this). Is that where they should be? Maybe, maybe not. That’s still the problem. They know what they’ve done is illegal. But due to their psychopathic condition, not only are they incapable of stopping their harmful/illegal activities, they are not inclined to stop them. But that doesn’t mean they should escape justice. Who knows if there will ever be a solution to this. However, aside from the subject matter, what I found most fascinating (and often funny) about this book is how it is written. Cleckley phrases even the most distasteful statements so delicately (and in an old-fashioned, scholarly way) that I couldn’t help laughing throughout this book. I don’t think he is attempting to amuse, but he does. He is a good writer and expresses himself eloquently. Some examples: Cleckley is drawing the line between people who are mentally ill (out and out nuts) and those normal, average citizens who, for some reason, fixate on something and go temporarily nuts. He’s using as an example people who believe in “end of the world” prophesies and are reasonably sane until the doomsday arrives and they go bonkers: “Indeed, conviction was so great that at sunrise many leaped from cliffs, roofs, and silos, one zealot having tied turkey wings to his arms the better to provide for flight. Those who had hoped to ascend found gravity unchanged, the earth still solid, and the inevitable contact jarring” (22). His tone is so understated and calm; I don’t know if the man had a very dry wit or was oblivious to the humor, but that is funny: “the inevitable contact jarring.” Indeed. I bet it was jarring. And the guy with the turkey wings is either a) a complete moron or b) not trustful of his god or c) both. If he didn’t trust god to have the power to just grab him up and take him straight to heaven, did he really think turkey wings would give him that extra “oomph” god needed? Of course, there’s no sense in applying logic to a situation in which a guy is willing to jump off a cliff with turkey arms tied to his human arms. I mean, do turkeys even use those arms for flying? Whenever I see wild turkeys in a field, they’re walking . I’m not sure what social life was like in the pre-WW2 days, but apparently brothels, casinos, and other socially-unacceptable places were well-known and (apparently?) legal. Here’s a description of a patient’s problematic social routine: “If not through his daily and nightly brawls or uproars in various low grogshops, dancehalls, ‘juke joints,’ etc., then by putting slugs into slot machines or serving as fence in some petty thieving racket, he brought the police in search of him down on the ‘house of joy’ which maintained him” (53). Max’s wife is the owner/operator of a brothel and what’s so funny is that Cleckley, while not approving of the brothel, is much more dismayed by the problems Max causes for his wife and the ladies at the brothel: “No one realized better than his wife, a woman of experience and good judgment in these matters, what an unhappy effect these antics had on her clientele quietly seeking pleasure behind doors before which Max roared and paraded [Max is a noisy, pugilistic drunk]” (53). And because Max is such an entertaining psychopath and Cleckley writes so amusingly about him, here’s one more sentence, this time describing Max and his wife’s fights: “She often fought back vigorously and, though she seldom succeeded in landing a telling blow that would discourage her marital opponent, her resistance made the fight much more lively and greatly augmented the uproar of thuds, slaps, crashes, oaths, grunts, and honest yells of pain” (53). Who writes like this anymore? No one. This is superb writing. Cleckley eloquently handles farting: “On being approached, he cursed, sobbed feebly, and was brought back to bed, passing intestinal gas with frequent loud and unpleasant effects, grinning almost triumphantly at the nurse who had hurried to him at each detonation” (77). Had this guy been born later in the twentieth century, he would have made a great novelist. Cleckley’s complicated and awe-inspiring way of saying, “Yeah, boys like to hang out and when they do hang out, they talk trash and make a lot of poop/sex jokes”: “Numerous small groups of boys, sometimes only three or four, sometimes more, banded by a common interest in postage stamps [Philatelists! Kinky!], firearms, a secret shack in the woods where they met to gamble, or in some other affair, often reserved for themselves a peculiar connotation in bits of familiar language or devised codes of slang, verbal, digital, and postural, to transmit among the elect understandings of special recognitions best reserved from the surrounding masses..Groping among confused and paradoxical concepts of virility, some boys could find stimulus (or protectiveness) in neologisms and fresh innuendos pertaining to the act of excretion and its subtle relationships to insult, sexuality, and infinite defilement” (127). I wonder if Cleckley would be disturbed to discover that men (boys) still joke about sex and poop, still love their guns as much as their dicks and continue to engage in posturing? Probably not. This book is chock-full of these nuggets of awesomeness. I have several more folded over pages of underlined passages I could quote, but I think any reader of this way-too-long review has comprehended my message: this dude’s writing style has tickled my fancy. Of course, he crafted just as many not-so-amusing sentences regarding homosexuals and how they go against the natural and biologically correct order of life (man has the outey, woman the inney—what about that can’t gay people get, he asks?) and describes in a very long chapter how immoral, unhappy, and confused gay people are due to their “deviant” sexual practices. That chapter, and the subtle “awww, women want to be independent and have jobs? Silly women!” tone regarding his discussions of some of the women patients angered me. I realize that at the time Cleckley was considered correct and culturally in sync, but reading his thoughts on those subjects makes me thankful for being alive now, even if we still have a lot of progress to make. This is quite a (long) interesting book to read. Anyone wanting to read about psychopathology however should avoid this book and maybe start with Robert Hare ( Without Conscience ). Columbine by Dave Cullen also has an outstanding discussion of psychopaths. Plus, it’s a great book about the Columbine shooting. Okay, damn, I can’t stop myself. One last funny sentence: “Another conventional and well-adjusted adult recalls an incident after a beer party following the last football game of the season when a fair proportion of the celebrants went out together to a pasture and there pursued and constrained a number of cows in efforts to achieve sexual relations with the patient but reluctant animals” (285).
