Set in Lofts' favorite fictional setting, the environs of her imaginary Baildon, Suffolk, this novel is divided into two parts: Part I, set in the author's present, in which a modern family moves into the titular Gad's Hall only to find that there are certain strange manifestations there, connected to a locked attic room with no key; and Part II, set in the mid-19th century, in which we learn what exactly went on in that room and why it came to be locked permanently. The reason, as Lofts implies, involves something more than purely natural horror. Norah Lofts, of course, was primarily a writer of descriptive fiction -- especially historical fiction; Part II showcases her mastery of that genre. Her work is typically characterized by concentration on family and social relationships; incident-filled plots; realistically drawn, very human characters who are compends of positive and negative qualities (in different degrees) and who cope with their problems in ways that we can understand, whether we see them as constructive or not; an attitude towards life that's neither bleakly despairing nor filled with Pollyanna- style optimism, but which recognizes its challenges, and above all its continuity as an ongoing process over lifetimes and generations. But she also, even in her descriptive fiction, at times exhibits an interest in the supernatural, the psychic, the paranormal dimension that may or may not touch the natural world here and there. All of these elements are present here, in both parts; we're introduced to two families and their web of relationships, and much of the storyline is very realistic fiction about people whose lives you get immersed in and come to care for. It's not a book that's all about bumps on the stairs in the night; it's also about coping with crippling injury, a romantic triangle, loveless marriages, alcohol addiction, the way that miscommunication and misunderstanding messes with our lives, the choices people make in their interactions with others, the rampant sexism and sexual double standard of Victorian society, etc. But while the supernatural element doesn't constantly make itself felt, and is low-key and usually subtle when it does (and so won't please some genre fans who prefer more overt and grisly-gory manifestations) it's more marked than it usually is in Lofts, and indeed casts a shadow over the entire book. For the secret of that attic room involves a story of Satanism, with lethal consequences --and the Satanism here was more than simply a misguided superstition. Being a fan of Lofts, I found here the kind of qualities I enjoy in her writing elsewhere, and found it a deeply absorbing read (which had me very worried about the characters much of the time!). One caveat, though; the resolution here leaves room for some questions, which are presumably answered in the sequel, The Haunting of Gad's Hall . (That's on my to-read list!)
