"One of the great tragedies of mankind is that morality has been hijacked by religion" A.C.C. Almost every time I reread a book after a couple of decades my impressions are much changed. However, that didn't happen after reading Clarke's novel. Everything I enjoyed the first time around still works for me, everything that bothered me I still find irksome. Of course, it is impossible for us to 'unlearn' and forget all the Sci-fi movies, TV shows while reading this novel. Many elements seem way too familiar...But, we must not forget that "Childhood's End" came out in 1953, long before any of the well known Sci-fi sagas. It is the ideas, concepts, outlined premises that make this book significant after 70+ years. So many tropes we take for granted originate from Clarke (or H.G. Welles even earlier). At its core "Childhood's End" is a first contact story. It is divided in 3 parts with substantial time passing in between. The aliens (called The Overlords) aren't aggressive at all and wish to improve life on Earth. But, what is their ultimate goal? That is the key enigma and the major plot point of the book. Of course, I will not spoil it for you. I am sure that you will be quite surprised when developments start to roll... And, now a bit of criticism. This novel (or any other classic hard Sci-fi) will hardly much impress readers who prefer character driven stories. In this book characters are simply necessary to push the story forward over more than a century. Even the moments which should feel emotional or deeply sorrowful don't have much impact. Of course, that's just the way Clarke handled his narratives. Also, I do respect authors who allow their voice and personal ideas to flow through the stories. But, I don't enjoy preaching all that much. Even if it is secular spiritualism in this case. Clarke was a man of science, but he was also a homosexual (abandoning the UK in mid 1950s because of possible prosecution and moving to Sri Lanka) and his dissatisfaction with the current state of affairs shows in abundance (eg. inevitability of nuclear destruction). Also, some of his ideas in this novel are way too simplistic. For instance, eliminating all the established religions because not all of them can be right anyway (!!!) and achieving that goal swiftly by showing people on TV screens the origins and history of their religions. Clarke simply didn’t understand what faith was all about... Also, if you are rather opinionated about religion, especially "western" ones, but then you use the ouija board as a major plot device, that hardly makes any sense - especially with your high profile as a scientist. The whole scene I found rather artificial. Also, he "refreshed" the novel on several occasions to address some of the technological breakthroughs in the 1960s and 70s, but that wasn't necessary at all - the book was fine as it was. Finally, there is a pretty enduring dispute among Sci-fi and Clarke specialists, regarding the ending. Is it hopeful, or excessively bleak? It's open to personal interpretation, of course. There is a lot to talk about. This book certainly provokes thinking and discussion. It is a good way to start with classic hard sci-fi because it's pretty short, tight and relatively light on science compared to many other books.
