I used to read Danielle Steel when I was 13 and 14. By 15, I was onto her and over her. She wrote very formulaically and she was also a dork, the latter being less forgivable to a highschool sophomore. While on my honeymoon in Costa Rica, I ran out of books to read. I blasted through my books during my flights and layovers and early mornings when I couldn't sleep and he could. We visited a coffee shop we loved several times while in La Fortuna and they had a free bin of books. Josh was feeling a little deprived of the Olympics while we were gone and they had a television playing coverage constantly, so while he watched highlights of the mens basketball team, I read The Klone and I. I knew it would be bad, but I was hoping for a little flash of what I used to enjoy. And maybe a threesome between the heroine, her lover and his clone. Something entertaining like that! This book is ridiculous, but I feel ridiculous typing such an obvious statement. Bits of the same old formula gave me momentary bits of nostalgia (Hey New Yorkers, is the restaurant 21 the place to see and be seen? Her characters' lovers have been taking them there to show off for years.) This woman had to lose what she thought she would always have and then, once she'd given up on ever finding love again, find an even better love. Check, check, check! Then she had to resist the hell out of him. I finally read between her lines, now that I'm an adult, that it reads a little creepy when she does this. But the lady always figures out that she does want, no NEED the man. Once she lets her guard down and accepts it, the klone shows up. Her beau, who works in bionics and drives a Jaguar and wears white jeans and Gucci loafers, has developed a klone of himself and sweetly sends him in his place while he's on business. A klone is apparently an android of some sort, with wires in his neck but real human flesh, somehow kept alive despite a lack of a heartbeat, even while his head is taken off during his downtime. (She has obviously never read sci-fi.) The problem (or the bonus) is that this klone's kinks have not been worked out. The real man acts like Cousin Larry and the clone acts like Balki Bartokomous, should Balki ever wear skin tight, lime green Versace pants and a black mesh shirt with a diamond peace sign necklace, made especially for him by Cartier. The clone is a slippery little devil, taking his master's American Express card and going nuts--buying her rubies, buying himself leopard print g-strings and having the silver Jaguar painted yellow with red wheels. This guy is out of control! But he brings out her wild side, impresses her children and falls in love with her, causing her pause about which "man" she really should be with. He knows he's in love because his neck wires hurt. Here is why Danielle Steel is a dork, if I haven't convinced you by now. She tries to portray both "men" as great lovers, with the real man being more tender and naturally sexy but the clone being outright kinky and dangerous in the sack. She is so vanilla, though, that the only kinkiness she can muster is acrobatic in nature. The first time she and the klone "do it," he surprises her with a move called The Double Flip. Mid-coitus, they tumble through the air, defying gravity, with him landing on his back and her neatly on top. Her beau, calling to check in, is very upset about this dangerous stunt, telling her that if he suggests The Triple Flip or Quadruple Flip, she needs to say no! It's too dangerous! He's jealous, of course, but he continues to send the klone when he's on business because she can't be expected to live without him for 2 weeks while he's gone. She does not resist the Triple, or the Quadruple flip, though. Oh no. They do it every night, all night. Such ecstacy! Flip, flip, flip! Tumble, fly! SOAR! Crash! Come on, Danielle! This is not erotic. Just have him stick a finger in her asshole, or something! I will not spoil the ending for you. You're welcome. When I got to the ending, I hated myself, but every reader is different! Which lover would you choose?
