Not having read much about Martin Luther I came into this with few expectations. It was a Goodwill find and I dove right in. As a full chronicle of Luther's life, look elsewhere, as this book focuses on his life and the watershed events up to and shortly after what came to be called the Reformation. But as the author avers, these are the crucial years to understanding the man and the momentous changes he initiated and forces he unleashed. For a more comprehensive biography he mentions Roland Bainton's 1950 tome 'Here I Stand' and several others. When assessing someone as controversial and divisive (at least at one time) as Luther, it is necessary to at least acknowledge the apparent biases of the author. Several reviews complained that he didn't seem to 'like' Luther but given the normal tendency of biographers to adulate their subject that would not bother me. Richard Marius came from an Christian evangelical upbringing but ended up a Professor in Arts and Sciences at Harvard, hardly a bastion of any Christian faith now and even during his tenure there (1978-1998). Apparently he was considered an 'expert' on the Reformation however and has also written a biography of the English Catholic Thomas More, an early opponent of Luther. He also frequently discusses the tension between the great Medieval scholar Erasmus who was an early sympathizer but later opponent of Luther. Anyway, to me it came off as a remarkably well-balanced and very informative account and while Marius may go off on 'tangents' at times, they are invariably interesting and insightful. There is plenty of criticism of the state of Roman Catholicism at this period of history. It isn't so much criticism but a summary of the facts which are well-known but still amazing to read about. Not just the corruption within the Papacy and clergy but the associated traffic in indulgences which became nothing short of crazy for a period. Marius even suggests that the idea of indulgences that might cover millions of years became a sort of watershed in modern thinking on the nature of time. The notion of millions of years was simply not part of the Medieval thought process, when the age of the earth was believed to be only several thousands of years at best. Despite this, he is able to present the 1,500 year history of the Catholic Church and it's connection to the first Christians as a respectable and often worthy counterweight to the ideas emerging from Luther and others who came along such as Zwingli and Calvin. To my mind, he fairly presents both the ideas of Luther, his early allies and those of his opponents which is not a small achievement in an arena that I imagine is full of tendentious accounts. Despite being full of weighty issues and often arcane and complex theological ideas, the book moves along at a fairly rapid pace in terms of events. From his early life (b. 1483) to the 95 Theses at Wittenberg (1519, and which were probably not actually nailed to the church door), the Leipzig debate (1519), the epic Diet of Worms (1521), to the Peasants Rebellion (1525) and all the intense debate and drama inherent in these and other events. Nor does he ignore the geopolitical implications that led to 100-years+ of religious struggle and warfare that dominated Europe and especially Germany. It is impossible to summarize adequately the breadth and depth of this book but overall a highly recommended read!
