The more accurate title would be "The Rise and Then Somewhat Depressing Train Wreck That Could Be Seen For 200 Pages of Silas Lapham". Silas Lapham is a self-made millionaire from the very wrong side of the tracks who doesn't know what to do with his money. His only passion is his paint and his morality. Oh...his morality. Do we ever read about his morality. Apparently, early on he bought out his partner who brought capital to his business. The partner wasn't helping the business and didn't have the vision Lapham had. This colossal sin (!) sets up the rest of the novel for which Lapham pays with his business, house and all his fortune. Of course, Lapham could have forestalled the bankruptcy at least 8,467 times by my count if he would have done a little moral jiu-jitsu that business people do every day. We're not talking Simon Legree here. But no, Howells sets up Lapham as the man who can't do wrong even as his paint empire spills out of the bucket. And this is the Paradise Lost paradox - we care about (or are more interested in) devils more than the saints. Here is an apt quote from a Balzac book that I'm reading after this one: The moralist cannot deny that, as a rule, well-bred though very wicked men are far more attractive and lovable than virtuous men; having crimes to atone for, they crave indulgence by anticipation, by being lenient to the shortcomings of those who judge them, and they are thought most kind. Lapham's sole wickedness that I can ferret out is that he loves to brag about his paint and his coming up from nothing. We get some comedy out of it, but it is still middling stuff. The side plot of Lapham's daughters and the aristocratic Tom Corey is the best part of the book, if a little melodramatic. Everyone gets to self-sacrifice to their hearts content and it is fun to see them trying to beat each other to the pyre. There are a lot of unsubtle digs in the novel at novels of the day and their unreality and sentimentality. It is obvious that "Lapham" is a rejoinder to those novels - but I'm not sure that it is much of an improvement as it is not terribly exciting without the "amping" up that unreality and sentimentality can give.
