5 stars (5/10 hearts). Now THIS is fun. I fell in love with the Trixie Belden series the first time I read them two years ago, and I love them just as much now. The setting is just delightful—just a little country town, with nice, hardworking people, small farms and a little town, a mystery house, and a rich man’s mansion. The writing style is simple but clear and well done. And the characters are the best—all very alive and carefully crafted with personalities, backgrounds, and story arcs. Jim is such a nice, admirable boy with a heartbreaking past; Honey is just a pure sweetheart; and I can’t help liking Trixie. She gets on my nerves, but she has grit, character, and a very warm heart. I love how she admits + apologizes for her mistakes and works actively on fixing her flaws. She’s so real! Her parents are both fantastic—some of the best parent figures I’ve ever met in a book—and little Bobby is the cutest thing and very accurate. And finally, Miss Trask and Regan are just awesome. The plot was super fun. It was realistic and fascinating, and it ends on a terrible cliffhanger. I loved how the kids are normal and no brilliant, beautiful, privileged Nancy Drews—just children living their lives and trying to help each other out. I’m not a fan of Trixie’s sometimes doing what she’s not really supposed to do, but as a rule when she does the wrong it's out of pure forgetfulness or because she has a good intention (going into someone's house to lock it up for them because they're at the hospital, for instance) and again, she admits to her shortcomings and tries to make up for them. Overall, it’s a super cute, sweet, wholesome, exciting mystery and I am sooo excited to continue the series! Content: quite a few euphemisms; a character runs away from a very abusive stepfather (nongraphical mentions of his abuse are mentioned). A Favourite Humorous Quote: Bobby squealed with delight. “I’ll take a norange one AND a labbender one,” he said happily. “Labbender is sometimes almost always my very favrit color.”
