This is where Norma Klein really jumps the shark. She fell from being the queen of portraying realistically normal teenage girls in relatable situations to the depths of the worst kind of teenaged girl fantasy malarky. "Tatiana" is a 14 year old of other worldly beauty and blatant pre pubescent sexual attractiveness. She is adored to the point of worship by her parents and her parent's friends. Her dad is especially agog over his perfect daughter's attributes. She is faultless. A Brooke Shields like beauty of monumental proportions but at the same time innocent and sweet to the bone, a great student, a good daughter and a talented actress. She is chosen out of the thin air to star in a major movie, where she proves herself to be talented as an actress but more importantly as a burgeoning film star nymphet. She even has a "nude" scene which she carries off with tastefulness, sincerity and aplomb. To top it off, although she is portrayed as childlike and without affect, she is having a full blown sexual relationship with her boyfriend. At FOURTEEN. Fully sanctioned by her parents and by the world in which this book devises to revolve around it's fantastical main character. Even Brooke Shields stayed a virgin until an adult. This is a departure from Klein's earlier books, wherein the young girls stay true to type and are almost exclusively not sexually active or at least they are conflicted about it. Tatiana is just in a fully fledged adult relationship, then skips off to school in her pigtails. The other egregious part of this book is the fact that Tatiana has an older sister, Delia, who is ugly and therefore completely unimportant to their parents or anyone else in the book other than her dad reminding his pretty daughter that her ugly sister is pitiable so treat her kindly. Poor Delia is described as having glasses, a huge nose, cystic acne (which is untreatable even by the top doctors in NY), and frizzy tufts of mousey brown hair. Tatiana has a perfect complexion, a chimeric mane -unparalleled in life or fiction - of crimson hair, giant, wolflike gray eyes, a tiny nose and a perfect body. Unbelievably, Delia is not even a better student than Tat, she doesn't even have the ugly yet smarter sister thing going for her. She has nothing. Needless to say Delia is not the parent's favorite and is largely ignored. She is, rightfully, resentful of her sister but not to the point of slashing her face and hacking her hair, which no one reading this book would fault her for. This book reads like the author's fantasy, and is ridiculous, creepy and irresponsible.
