I’ll start off with praise for the book. The story is simply amazing and the woman will go down in history as one of the most tenacious survivors at sea. Just her navigational skill is something to be admired by 21st century sailors who rely on the whims of the electronic world. She was a little slow to get moving in the metaphorically correct direction, i.e. getting her act together and getting the boat in order. I can’t believe that she would have had a water shortage in such a luxury yacht like the Hazana (by the way, I think it's hazaña, not hazana – Spanish for fate, deed, or exploit, at least I read the boat spelled that way before ). The same would go for food. If she ran low on food that was from poor planning before setting out on a trans-Pacific voyage. Even considering that some food would have been lost, she still should have had plenty. I’ve never been in a really bad storm at sea, at least not in such a small sailing vessel, and nothing like the storm she faced even in a big passenger ship. I can’t even imagine how terrifying that must have been for them. At the end, she said the boat was totaled by the insurance company, but I’d wager someone got it back in ship-shape in no time at all. What a fine bit of advertising for that ship maker. I watched the movie first, and it wasn’t bad at all. In the movie as well as the book she didn’t seem too concerned with bailing the boat out. Just to have something to occupy my time I think that I would have been pumping my brains out as well as cleaning up that cabin to have a more comfortable time of it. The whole bit about rationing water is also lousy information in a survival situation. I was taught at the USAF survival school in Spokane, Washington, to ration your sweat, not your water, meaning to take it easy during the daylight hours but drink as much water as you need. Drinking a cap-full of water every two days like they do in the movies will just dehydrate you faster. So in the end she had enough water, and should have had even more—a boat that size must have a few hundred gallons of fresh water. Rich people probably expect to have two fresh water showers a day in such a luxury craft. Just compare this true story to the fictional account in the Robert Redford film, All is Lost. He was a total idiot who brought on all of his problems. He was in the modern era of communications, yet he didn't have a simple two-way radio. I don’t know why she wasn’t able to communicate with her radio, but she did well under extremely bad circumstances. The down side of this book, and it was a big side to the story, was her dumb romance to the dead guy. It just went on and on and was boring or worse, stupid at every turn. And what if she just made it all up? Like when he proposed to her? She is the only one who can back up that story. What if they had a huge fight on the first day of the voyage and she hated his Limey guts? It would have been a better book for me. Of course, there is no way of ever knowing, but you have to wonder about the fate of Richard. How did he lose his tether? Did he drown immediately or did he bob around for a few hours dog-paddling in those terrible seas? I never feel sorry for people who die doing things they love. Sailing across the Pacific in a sailboat, even one as big and majestic as Hazaña, is inherently very dangerous. It’s the same for mountain climbers. People die doing that all the time and you can’t be expected to feel sorry for them. If they wanted to live longer, they would have avoided such dangerous hobbies. I’d rather go out like Richard, or fall off a 1,000 feet shear mountain face than die in a car accident—the most meaningless way to die imaginable. Some of the technical aspects of sailing weren't written very clearly, at least not in my opinion, and I know my way around a sailboat. *It was difficult for me to even find this book for review on Goodreads. My version was re-titled “Adrift” as part of the movie tie-in. She wasn’t adrift as she rigged a sail. Another book recounting this story is called “Lost at Sea” and she certainly was never lost.
