3.5 stars, rounding up: this is an unusual story that has grown on me. A Civil Contract is a marriage of convenience tale, very different from Georgette Heyer's other Regency novels that I've read. There is a romance at the heart of it, as usual, but it's practical-minded and a little bit heartbreaking, as well as heartwarming. It’s much more like real life than your typical romance novel. Captain Adam Deveril, now Lord Lynton, returns to his ancestral home from the Napoleonic wars when his father unexpectedly dies. Unfortunately, he also returns home to a mountain of debt left by his profligate father, more than he can ever hope to pay off. Initially Adam decides to sell his estate and any valuable assets, but that will still leave him with insufficient funds to take care of his family, a mother and two sisters. The only alternative: marry an heiress, suggests his money manager. Adam finds the idea completely abhorrent, especially since he's just broken up with the lovely girl he loves, Julia Oversley, because he can't afford to marry her. But Julia's father has the same idea as Adam's manager: if he can't marry for love, he should save his land and home and marry someone with money. Oversley introduces him to an impressively vulgar but good-natured middle class businessman (or "Cit"), Mr Chawleigh, whose wish in life is for his shy daughter to be able to marry a man with a title. And when Adam's teenage sister starts talking about marrying an old man for his money or pursuing a career as a stage actress, that's the last straw. Adam agrees to the marriage of convenience with Jenny Chawleigh, a plump and dowdy girl whom he barely knows. Chawleigh buys up Adam's mortgages and debts and gives the couple enough money to take care of their needs. Adam is trying his best to be kind to Jenny, but he resents her father's showering them with ostentatious gifts, and he's still in love with Julia, who never misses an opportunity to let him know that she's also still painfully in love with him. Jenny (who's actually been in love with Adam ever since she met him through Julia) is trying to make the best of their marriage as well, but it's difficult when you're rather shy and unattractive and your husband is in love with your beautiful, vivacious best friend ... who doesn't want him to ever forget that he REALLY loves her. A Civil Contract was a group read for the Georgette Heyer group, and we've had some rousing discussions in the discussion threads about whether Adam made the best choice, whether Jenny was a terrible person for marrying the man her best friend Julia was in love with (but forbidden to marry), and whether this is even a good book. Opinions vary widely, but I found both Adam and Jenny to be honorable people, trying to make the best of the circumstances they're in. The choices for both of them were very limited by their circumstances and the social restrictions of the time. Georgette Heyer was a bit of a snob and regularly dealt in stereotypes. Jenny's brash, vulgar father, and Jenny's own physical and social shortcomings, seem to support the disdain the gentry had for "Cits," the working class. But at the same time, both of these became very real characters to me, and the story wouldn't have been the same if Adam's choice of wife had been an easier one to adapt to. The romantic part of me wished for more of a Cinderella moment for Jenny and/or more of a glorious Happily Ever After for her, but Heyer handled this in a more realistic way. Julia and Jenny are, personality-wise, quite a bit like Elinor and Marianne in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility , and Heyer's characters mention that novel several times, just to make sure we don't miss the point. Julia, like Marianne, is a bit over the top, but I always did sympathize more with sensible characters in my books. This book won't end up on my favorites list; there's a little too much pain and not enough joy and humor for me to really love it as a romance, and there's also a heavy dose of Napoleonic history toward the end that, frankly, I started skimming through. But I did find much to appreciate in it, not the least the importance of behaving with kindness and honor despite adverse circumstances.
