The world's first, and possibly still the BEST, novel written by a known author! How can I not recommend this? (There are novels preceding Genji, such as Utsubo and Ochikubo, by unknown authors. They are pretty good, too, by the way.) It was written in the early 1000's (impossible to pinpoint the year because it was written and released over many years), primarily for the court ladies. I have read several versions of modern Japanese translation, part of the original text, and I have a copy of the Tyler translation. I have not read other English translations, but I can say Tyler's translation is fair. Translation is a sophisticated work. It's not just about swapping Japanese words for English ones. The translator must have healthy understanding of the sociocultural background of the original novel. In a case like this, the translator must also know the difference between classic Japanese and modern Japanese; a word that is still in use might have meant something else before. Then the product must read well as English prose. The Japanese language often omits the subject of the sentence. (A sentence always has a subject in meaning. However, in Japanese, the subject is omitted to the point that omission is the norm.) This means the audience must be able to figure out what the subject is. Due to cultural changes over the years, this isn't easy even for Japanese readers today when reading classics like this. And the sentences in the original are extremely long, so even when the subject is stated, it's easy to get confused by the time you reach the verb, which is placed at the end of the sentence in Japanese. The English sentences, on the other hand, must have subjects to be structurally correct. I think Tyler translation works out a good solution, being clear while also keeping some of the original beauty. I am pleasantly surprised to find that quite many people are enjoying this novel, and not just for the exoticism. With all the differences between Genji's world and our modern world, there is something so relevant, something that attracts us. We haven't changed much in essence; we still fall in love with the wrong person. We still suffer in love. We get a strange kick out of our romantic suffering. And life goes on while we are caught in the drama. Was Genji a womanizing jerk? I don't think so. Note that this novel was written by a woman, primarily for female audience. Yes, he gets into many relationships, and many are "wrong" kinds. The readers still sensed his genuine kindness and brilliance. That's why we've been reading it for 1000 years. A word about Young Murasaki One of the main female characters, Murasaki, is about 10 years old when Genji, about 18 yo, spots her and decides to take care of her. Are you outraged? Easy, their consummation takes place years later. Also, we might want to take into consideration that people matured much faster in the old days. Genji is supposedly 12 when he first marries to Aoi, 16. By the way, men read this novel, too. The very reason Murasaki Shikibu was hired as a lady-in-waiting for Empress Shoshi was to keep the Emperor's interest with this novel. Male courtiers eagerly made copies of this novel; in fact, the oldest existing manuscripts are made by male calligraphers -- done in their private time. In their day jobs as court officials, they wrote official records in Chinese characters.
