I'm having a hard time untangling my responses to this novel: part of me dislikes the dismissive way in which le Carré's female protagonist is portrayed: her childish 'I'm a rebel, me' politics, her self-absorption, her naivety, her arch dialogue: in le Carré's defence, I guess, we have to remember this was first published in 1983 and can't help but be shaped by the gender politics of the time. I was also slightly amused that this is essentially a 'caper' plot, albeit more serious than that label frequently signifies. The civilian trained up by the security services, here Mossad, to infiltrate a terrorist cell is a mainstay of many commercial thrillers and always requires a certain level of suspension of disbelief - I particularly found it hard to swallow Charlie going from small-time actress to being able to resist two-day interrogation by hard-core Palestinian fighters in the snap of a finger. Yet, for all that, this is a powerful book, all the more so for the slow build up of detail that so many of the negative reviews complain about. It's true, this doesn't have the immediacy and grab of so many of the Smiley novels and there were times when I was tempted to speed-read (especially since I started but abandoned the recent BBC production). With hindsight, though, it's the very slowness that hooks us, giving the story a depth and labyrinthine feel that comes from the accumulation of small moments, intricate details that may or not be important. At the heart of the book is the tragic impasse that still exists in the Middle East (though with a renewed and heated resonance in 2019). The section set in Lebanon is especially powerful as Charlie has her rather easily-ingested and shallow views challenged in all directions. We do, too, as acts of terrifying violence are committed on both sides of the divide, as refugee camps are bombed, as children watch their father blown up by mines, as an Israeli moderate speaking out for a Palestinian homeland becomes, counter-intuitively, a target. It's this sort of doubleness that gives rise to the most interesting part of the book: the way that Joseph/Michel, Israeli hero and Palestinian fighter, become layered onto the same person - and Charlie's relationship(s) to both men. While, ostensibly, one is 'real' and the other merely the product of acting, the whole thrust of the book questions that, not least with the continued repetition of the phrase 'theatre of the real'. Is 'Joseph' any more real than his Michel? Does Charlie's love story with him have any more foundation than the one he creates for her with Michel? What does that imply for the ending: saccharine and schmaltzy romantic fall-into-each-others-arms - or something far more sinister? So this is slow and requires patience from its readers, with a sudden speed up of the plot towards the last 25% or so - but then this isn't trying to be an airport thriller and we need to adjust our expectations accordingly. It's the psyches of the combatants on both side of a seemingly unbridgeable divide that seem to be le Carré's real focus of interest: the instability of the deeply and irreparably wounded which leapfrogs any easy panacea of 'justice'.
