Original 2016 Review: This was a true epic western and I loved it from start to finish. I've only ever read "Thunder on the Plains" before and wasn't hugely impressed so I'm glad I decided to give this one a try because at the end of the day, I just can't resist a good western romance. What I loved about this one though was that the romance was sooo well done and real. I LOVED that Miranda didn't doubt jake once, she never stopped believing in the man she knew he was and it didn't make her weak in the slightest. I am always afraid with stories like this that span over many years but even when they were separated for a bit, it was bearable and done out of love and not some stupid misunderstanding. The story jumping ahead at points really helped moved things along so never did I feel like any part of it was dragging and that's a big deal for me. Usually with long sagas like this by 400 pages I'm growing weary of the story but not so here! Everything kept you wanting to read more and see where it was going and how it could be resolved. The one thing I didn't like was Lloyd being a little punk but at 18 I guess that's how it is. However i was still annoyed because he didn't have to go through a fraction of what jake did in his childhood and he still decides to go off and kill men because his dad used to? And they explained why! It wasn't like he was misinformed, he was just pissy about Beth. So that was my one quibble. The ending did feel a little rushed where Lloyd was concerned but since there is now a book 2, I'm not worried at all and can't wait to see how things develop further. Highly recommend to any western romance lover. Don't think this is just some cheesy western though, it's got real depth and beautifully written characters that grow and go through an amazing journey together- loving each other the whole way through. Going to buy book 2 now! 2020 Re-Read: I only read part 1 again, but man, was this just as good the second time around! I had to return it to the library but eventually I’ll continue with part 2 and then re read the other books. 🤗
