Okay, so Pretend you Don't See Her is my first Mary Higgins Clark book I've ever read, and after having just finished it, I can guarantee it won't be my last. The writing just perfectly flows together, and the mystery, oh my the mystery keeps you hooked! I can't tell you how many times something was revealed in the book only to leave me speechless, which isn't exactly easy by this point in my life, I've seen a LOT of tropes. And another thing I find absolutely dazzling is how the little details are hidden in the text for you to pay attention to, Clark adds enough one-off details on the regular that to an untrained eye, or at the least, a least suspecting eye, the tell-tale details go unnoticed until the reveal they're related to. As you can tell I'm trying desperately to not give any spoilers, which isn't exactly easy because heavens the things that happen in this book kept me on the edge of my seat, particularly in the final few pages. I had 8 pages to go at one point and I was hoping and begging that this wasn't going to end on a massive cliff-hanger (It didn't, thankfully). But anyways, back to the writing, I absolutely adore this style! It's not one I run across too often, it's definitely not vintage, but certainly an older style than the modern books I typically read nowadays (I wish I could find a word that describes the style more flatteringly but this is the best I've got at the moment), but it's a lovely style, and I would daresay Clark uses it to the fullest. And the characters! Most books have an issue of only the main character(s) feel fleshed out, but in Pretend You Don't See Her, you'll get enough little one-off details here and there about the characters (That fit excellently into the story without slowing down or hindering the speed of the plot in the slightest) to make them feel like actual real people. You can feel their personalities, their humor, and all of their reactions feel perfectly human and natural. This book quickly made it's way to my list of favorites to put it simply. Tl:Dr is if you're looking for a good mystery suspense book, this is definitely one to give a shot. I sincerely doubt you'll regret it.
