3.5 stars This was something different from the regency romance books that I usually read. At first, I found it similar to another book I’ve read before: Hitched to the Gunslinger. But it was slightly different. This book moves into the life that happens after Jake and Miranda got married. Firstly, the characters. A misunderstood man who had a tough front and did not know love, finally meeting a woman who loved him unconditionally? Check, I’m in. It was very heartwarming to see Miranda just loving Jake through the ups and downs. Constantly reminding Jake deserves to be loved and can love others as well, despite his horrible past. Their marriage was the exact definition of sticking with each other through thick and thin. It was strong, with Miranda’s determination, never giving up, and Jake’s love and protectiveness of Miranda and their family. They would literally die for each other. Secondly, the plot and romance. I didn’t expect this story to be so sad at times that it had me tearing me. All the times Jake and Miranda had to be separated broke my heart over and over. Their love was really amazing. It just shows that no matters how many obstacles came their way, no matter how far they were apart, they were able to weather it together. I also didn’t expect the book to include stories about Jake’s and Miranda’s children. It did however drag the story down a little as I had wanted the story to focus on Jake and Miranda. I really enjoyed their lovemaking scenes, they were always very romantic and bittersweet. As much as I enjoyed the book, there was a few issues I had (1) I found that Jake’s self loathing went a little too far. He was always thinking he was not good enough and Miranda had to remind him countless times. He kept needing her to tell him, which honestly annoyed me a little. Like how much does he need to hear from Miranda to finally feel he deserved all the happiness? For god’s sake, Miranda married him, had his children, waited for him 2 years, then waited again for 4 years. How many more signs did he need to see to realize she was so in love with him? (2) Miranda had a habit of comparing Jake’s lovemaking and her first husband’s lovemaking. Why would she think of her first husband’s lovemaking when she was making love with Jake? (3) the story got draggy towards the end with all the action & the children’s stories. I skimmed the last few chapters. All in all, it was a pretty good book that had me at the edge of my seat, wanting to find out what happened next. The love was on another level, an everlasting love.
