3.75✨ I really enjoyed this one. Like really really enjoyed. It kept me engaged, managed to maintain my curiosity until the end althought it took me a bit of time to actually finish it (that’s just because my time for reading is quite limited lately due to work). This is the first book of a series that I’ve been meaning to read for quite some time (glad to finally be able to start it). It follows Will Graham, a profiler working with the FBI, trying to catch a serial killer nicknamed The Tooth Fairy. Now, the pacing was alright (I did, however, have a few moments when I felt like it was dragging a bit). I think that the writting style which is devoid of any emotion, very matter of fact is perfect for this book considering the genre and the subject. Also, the descriptions were so vivid, I actually liked how the author described the murder scenes, I feel like that really added to the dark vibes of this book. The characters were very well written, I think the author did a really good job here. It left quite an impact on me, there were some scenes so graphic, you could just see everything like you were there in person, loved that. I found Will’s ability to connect with the killer’s mind, to understand and see how the murder took place, what was the method used and what were the steps that the killer took in committing the murder to be fascinating. Really, those parts were my favorites. :)))) Now, besides the pacing that on some parts was kinda slow, I do have one major issue to address. I should point out that this is only a matter of personal preference, you might enjoy this one despite that. The thing is that, this being a part of a series called Hannibal Lecter (emphasize on this), I was kinda expecting to see more of Hannibal Lecter, you know what I mean ? I mean, yeah, he was present, had a couple of appearences, was mentioned several times but… that was it.😔🫠 I just wanted to see him more, I wanted him to be more present, more implicated in the investigation. The truth is that I got the feeling that he wasn’t even a side character (like even those appeared more often than him). He was just not present enough. And his meeting with Will (which I was so excited for, I literally couldn’t wait to see their interaction) felt kinda bland to me; very unsatisfying, so poorly written. I repeat. This is just my opinion (and a matter of personal preference), you might not feel the same. I don’t want to discourage anyone from picking up this book, I think it’s well written and deserves attention, I just feel like I should express my disappointment at least, so I can be at peace. 🦦 I am looking forward to reading the next books in the series tho (and hopefully seeing more of Hannibal as well). I even started the tv series and so far I really enjoy it. ✨
