Those of you who liked Joy Williams' short stories (see, eg., The Visiting Privilege: New and Collected Stories ) should also like this novel. It's almost as if there are running stories spliced together here. And I mean that in a good way. There are familiar themes, settings, vignettes: an old age home, plenty of dogs, marriages crumbling or already crumbled, precocious children. Read this and you will recognize that we are all a little off. I do not think that Joy Williams would find me inappropriate; or, yes, inappropriate, but what else are we going to fill this zoo with. The cover (at least of the hardbound edition) is bizarre enough that you can't say you weren't warned. And the title enigmatically warns that there will be death, a lot of death; although Williams is often amused by it. The county coroner, who had arrived with the ambulance, was not of the school that fed the foolish hope that a person could die instantly. Neither conciliatory nor compassionate, he had been educated by Jesuits and as such might as well have been raised by wolves. At its core, the plot is about three teenage girls ( a not quite harmless-looking group . . . ) who, prior to meeting each other, lost their mothers, although one mother, Ginger, comes back nightly to torment her husband. This running dialogue and storyline will probably be the highlight of my reading year. Things pop up when reading Joy Williams: snippets of philosophy and little primers on suicide, animal husbandry, medical conditions, botany. Plants were lucky because when they adapted it wasn't considered a compromise. It was more difficult for a human being, a girl. Williams has this remarkable sense of detail. A couple can be having lunch in restaurant in the Arizona desert, the temperature 110 outside, but there on the wall, above their table is The Icebergs by Frederic Edwin Church: [image error] By Frederic Edwin Church - Dallas Museum of Art Uncrated , Public Domain, Link "/> (Church added the wrecked masthead after no one liked the original painting. Now you know too.) Emily, who is not one of the group of three girls, tells a man who asks if she is eight or nine that she is "a mature eight." She watches her still-alive mother spilling the dense gray matter in the vacuum bag over the living room floor: "You're supposed to change that when it's no more than two-thirds full," she said. "Otherwise, you'll damage the machine. Steward, my colleague at school, the one who's retarded and likes to vacuum, he told me that." "You don't have colleagues, you have classmates," her mother said. "Where does all this shit come from?" There is dialogue like that on almost every page. So, yes, this is highly recommended for the irreverent, the afternoon drinker, the sayer of inappropriate things. You know who you are.
