Well, this is an expansive book. Schlesinger describes the evolution of the American liberal tradition from Jefferson thru Jackson and the civil war. In this attempt, though a serious history book, it is first and foremost an abstract argument that uses history as its data, rather than a primary effort to reveal the character and foibles of individuals within history. So I think the book should be evaluated as a historically motivated political philosophy rather than a detailed history and it does better on that count. I’ll reserve several critiques that I agree with for the end. So what is the argument? Basically, Jackson used executive power to support Jeffersonian economic and political principals against a powerful business/ financial class. Generally, this exertion of power will always be necessary to check strong groups, generally business. First chunk. Jefferson favored individual liberty over federal power. However, he failed to imbue government with sufficient power to protect that liberty. As a result, business and financial interests dominated economic and to a lesser extent political power by 1830. Jackson used the power of the executive to check those financial interests (eg dissolve the bank) and thus matched Jefferson’s economic ideals with a new source of political power to defend them. Second chunk. Of course the real jeffersonians felt this strong executive shouldn’t be necessary and went back to feeling states rights and disparate power should be the norm. Schlesinger fees this was naive. Power loves a vacuum and absent any check, federalist pro business approaches shaped much of the institutions of the early 19th century, despite their dearth off formal political power. This is S’s core argument for a powerful executive to protect Jeffersonian interests, or whatever form those should take in a modern society. Third chunk. Then the civil war and industrialization sort of obliterate a tenable Jeffersonian ideal. Moreover the whigs / republicans win that war with a pro business, federalist philosophy and so the the liberal tradition disappears from American political influence for a while, Jackson’s progress dissolves. Schlesinger ends by explaining that business interests always fail the test of government and sow the seeds of internal dissatisfaction. A powerful counterbalance to those interests cannot be avoided and do he ends with a veiled defense of Roosevelt as the logical reemergence of that balance. So the obvious criticisms: 1) the author sorta overlooks that Jackson was a terrible dude in many ways (treatment of native Americans and minorities most obviously, but in other aspects of his personality as well). He’s the protagonist and so no time for that. I think if this is viewed as political theory rather than history, that omission is easier to swallow, but it’s still pretty bad. 2) this isn’t really history. There are good guys and bad guys and they are generally always good or bad. History doesn’t sweep away complexity , it reveals it. This is aspiring to be good theory and I don’t think it does a bad job of that. But it commits some basic sins of history and since it claims to be a history book I think you’ve gotta hold that against him. Anyhow, good book. Four stars.
