I almost rated this 3 stars, but decided to go ahead and up it to 4 stars because the character Rolfe was so great. This book was at its best when Rolfe was present. Rolfe was one of my favorite types of alphas, consistently confident, at ease, and more likely to laugh at a situation gone awry than lose his temper. The dialogue between him and the heroine was great.The language used was appropriate for the time period. It's clear the author has done lots of historical research relating to this setting. Sometimes she included too many details relating to how people dressed or how rooms were decorated. I ended up skimming 2-3 paragraphs at times that were just descriptions. I almost dnf this, but at p.200 the plot really picked up and got interesting, I'm glad I stuck with it. Lots of fun tropes and events were in this book: - mistaken identity - abduction! (The heroine is abducted at least 3 times) - strip poker!! - 'forced seduction' common in bodice rippers I noticed many of the 1 and 2 star reviews are because Rolfe rapes the heroine several times in the beginning. I mean, I basically expect this in bodice rippers, and depending on how the author writes it I'm either extremely turned off or can deal with it. For instance, I hated the rape in the book Lemonade. It was brutal and then right after they both decide to get married. I was like, WTF?? This is one of the most violent rapes I've read and now they're getting wed? The heroine was passive and sniveling and just went along with it. Very annoying. Well, in this book, Rolfe initially thought the heroine was his brother's mistress and responsible for his murder. So Rolfe kidnaps the girl and rapes her. After he discovers she's a virgin he apologizes, then still rapes her several times afterward but is gentle and apologetic. So he's kind of an asshole for that. The heroine is basically like, 'Well, he's hot and good at sex, so I'll just enjoy it and wait patiently until I see an opportunity to escape.' Other than sleeping with the heroine whenever he wants and holding her hostage, he's kind to the heroine. I was mainly relieved to see the heroine make attempts to escape and move on from Rolfe. It's always annoying when the heroine is raped and then immediately falls in love with the guy or becomes a passive victim. - Exciting midnight escapades, escape and assassination attempts - A sweet Cinderella ending, including a ball and 'fairy godmothers' Favorite quotes: His desire, directed by fierce intelligence and unbending will, created an onslaught that she could not hope to equal. She felt her senses giving way before it, absorbing the bruising strength, responding with honeyed sweetness. And in that one last flash of clarity she knew with instinctive, ancient wisdom that the ploy could not be bettered. Woman's answer to man's hard force had always been a soft encompassing. To fight him, knowing her strength to be less than his, was to invite defeat. But if she met him instead with yielding grace, he might be disarmed and left vulnerable, open to other, less obvious weapons Release your hold on remembered dread and banish the phantoms of the night. I have you safe and will not let you go, not even in the final morning of life, nor will I ask of you what you cannot give. Trust me, then, and forgive me, that what I have done in the past awakens inside you an echo of the treatment meted out to you this night. Take my love for buckler and shield, and with it vanquish the scaly dragons of the mind, sustaining...peace. She walked with a sense of freedom, but also with perplexity and wonder at her own foolishness. There was no security anywhere. That which seemed to beckon in wedlock was an illusion; witness the widows of the world, alone and bereft. The only safety was in the citadel of oneself, from which fastness the disasters of the world could be countered with courage, whether for victory or defeat. Once that bastion was manned, it was fine to sally forth, to meet others in friendship and love. Those who were weak within themselves, those who crumbled at the first challenge and needed constant bolstering, were never able to savor the glory of standing alone, or meeting an adversary, male or female, on equal ground.
