Happily John goes to the Oxford as a freshman… He is young and quite on the timid side… On arrival he finds himself sharing a room with a man from a higher social stratum… A dismal melancholy was beginning to expand inside him, a great loneliness. It was the knowledge that he had nowhere to go more friendly, more intimate than this room that depressed him so, and particularly because the room was not his alone. Naïve and inexperienced John needs someone to lean on… So he becomes influenced to a great degree by his roommate – a selfish and indolent rake with no scruples… John looked cautiously at his glass. Whisky? Would it make him drunk, would he stagger about and see pink elephants, walk home crookedly and perhaps be sick? If he were sick in front of Christopher he would die of shame. Telling his roommate about his sister John suddenly starts fantasizing – he makes the girl younger and very different… Later his imagination makes him elaborate the appearance of his fictitious girl… He calls her Jill… He writes a story about her… He pens her made-up diary… And one evening, entering a bookshop he sees there a girl of his vision… And it is love at first sight… He saw Jill. She stepped out from behind an alcove, working her way slowly along the shelves, moving eventually in his direction. For a moment she bobbed back into the alcove for a second look at an unseen book, but then reappeared, shifting gradually along the cases. It was not a question of thinking: that girl is something like Jill. There was nothing casual in the resemblance: it was so exact that for a second his mind could not remember who it was, this over-familiar face. And he was too bewildered to think as the realization came upon him. He tries to follow her… He becomes obsessed with her… He wanders the streets attempting to encounter her… When at last he manages to meet her and begins to inquire his acquaintances they turn him into a butt of ridicule… All his efforts to date her fail… His despair makes him behave foolishly… He put his forehead against the wall: his misery was imprisoned in him and he was imprisoned in his misery. Fantasies don’t come true and visions remain visions.
