I have been rereading John le Carré’s George Smiley series. I don’t often read series, and I would not classify this as a true series. This is the fifth in the series and the first where George Smiley takes center stage as a spymaster. However, George Smiley was not in the early drafts of the novel. There are a few recurring characters from previous novels: Peter Guillam, Inspector Mendel, Control and George’s wife, Ann. George Smiley is retired, having been fired from the Circus, the British Secret Service, but is asked to identify a possible Russian mole in the Circus. As is typical of these novels, only a few of the characters have much depth, but the plot is intricate, and the spy craft techniques are described in detail and feel real. The little revealed about some of the characters contributes to the feeling that the world is painted in shades of grey, everything is murky, including characters’ intentions. This was easily the best of the first five novels I have reread in the Smiley series. It is the first of the so-called Karla trilogy, but I tend to think of this novel and its two successors as the true Smiley series and everything else, while very good, as just complementary. I know this is a weird comparison, but as Bram Stoker did with Dracula, John le Carré creates an aura in his spy novels that is difficult to match. When I read one of these novels, particularly alone and at night, I find myself occasionally looking up, glancing around, wondering if I heard something. These novels create a layer of life that feels unseen, undetected, by most. In George Smiley le Carré has created a unique hero. George is physically unattractive, unlike some of his peers, but his mind is his superior asset. He is very intelligent, but not in a traditional or ordinary way. His unique skills are of a soft nature: the ability to follow a series of actions or events, real or imagined, to determine where they might lead; the ability to question someone in a manner that will yield the greatest information; the ability to determine when someone is telling a lie or the truth. He is what we would call today emotionally intelligent. He is truly an introvert but can play a role socially when necessary. George has a wayward wife, Ann, who he still and will always love; for this, we pity him but also sympathize with him. I am looking forward the next in the series, The Honourable Schoolboy. While I have previously read it, it was long ago and will feel new and fresh when I pick it up.
