Rating: 4.55 First published in 1983, Duncan's debut is by far one of the most off kilter blends of Mark Twain, the Odyssey and strange as it may seem, fly fishing. A dysfunctional family of epic proportions, the journey of Gus Orviston is humorous, curious and toward the end, enlightening. Separated into FIVE books, its offbeat yet intriguing plot coupled with quirky characters makes for an unusual experience. Henning Hale-Orviston, a renown British author of "The Complete Angler" is referred to as H2O by Augustine, aka Gus, and "Hen" by Gus' mother, aka Ma who years later gives birth to Bill Bob, the antithesis of this disjointed family. H2O is the advocate of fly fishing, Ma, is all about bait. The story takes place on the Tamawanis River in OR, its origin linked to a Native Indian tribe which may also be fictional. The story is told through Gus' isolationist/atheist/all about fishing POV which is strange, educational and often hilarious. As Gus matures, his skill at creating fishing rods, flies and technique elevates beyond his father. Over time he grows frustrated with the continual battles of his parents and manages to procure a cabin on the Tamawanis where he creates the "Ideal Schedule". This is the beginning of the obtuse odyssey that leads the reader onto his path of discovery, fishing and toward the end, love. A sort of 'Don Quixote', he realizes the path of the Tamawanis looks like the word "Why" and with it, a spiritual awakening. Attempting to share the epic cast of quirky characters is akin to an encyclopedia due to the width, breadth, back stories and fishing journeys. Stories are intermingled with fishing anecdotes, book quotes, poems and spiritual enlightenment making it difficult to summarize concisely. For a debut novel, its long in the tooth, yet engaging. To those willing to delve into this unusual world, you'll find yourself laughing out loud and wondering. I personally enjoyed the majority, but felt it would have been better if it edited to THREE books rather than five. You don't have to know or be interested in fishing to appreciate this oddball character driven story, but you'll laugh, learn and enjoy it nonetheless.
