3.5* It was ok. The ending was kind of a twist. I kind of got bored of Ebola after awhile. Ebola is a filovirus. It causes blood clots then fucks up the organs. It was kind of hard to enjoy this book when I keep hearing how inaccurate it is (over dramatized) and then in real life this guy I work with who is a scientist says he has read the book and it's not really realistic. I feel like this book is "entertaining for non-fiction". Also I think this book would be a lot of fun for people who are super visual readers and see scenarios clearly in their head. A lot of this book is people/monkeys getting fucked up by Ebola OR being in constant anticipation of being fucked up by Ebola. I don't feel like I learned a lot, but I did learn the basics of Ebola. See this is where the fun is ruined for me. I don't know how much I learned is true. The science in this book is very easy to understand. Much easier than a Wikipedia page. This is kinda random, but I like HIV more? So every once in a while there's a comparison between HIV and Ebola brought up because they emerged at around the same time. Pretty much Ebola is really crazy and HIV is also just as bad but in a less crazy way? I just love the concept of HIV more. So it's willing to very slowly kill the person, but have a guaranteed kill and I love that. The worst strain of Ebola is Zaire and it's a 9/10 shot, but after it went on it's rampage it faded back into the background. All throughout the story one of the big sources of Ebola that transferred to humans came from monkeys. So while I was discussing this book with people I was thinking about Curious George and what if The Man with the Yellow Hat brought him to America with Ebola. So Curious George would just show up in America and start wiping people out and it would be crazy. A concept. Then someone else suggested that Curious George would more likely have SIV (monkey version of HIV) instead of Ebola and then I thought of another concept where The Man in the Yellow Hat brings Curious George to America, fucks him, and then becomes the guy who originated HIV in humans.
