Though he was ignored and even ridiculed in his time, financing the publication of his works with a fortune inherited from his father, Raymond Roussel would end up having a massive influence after his death. As a forbearer insofar as concerns certain trends or tendencies in literary modernism it might not be too bold to group Roussel with Joyce, Proust, and Kafka. (Of course, Proust himself originally self-published his RECHERCHE and the near totality of Kafka’s work would not have an opportunity for any kind of publication until after his death.) Roussel’s influence can be clearly discerned in the work of the Surrealists, the Oulpio, and the Nouveau Roman movement of Alain Robbe-Grillet & co. Roussel also had an influence on American writers. John Ashbery, Harry Mathews (also a member of Oulipo), James Schuyler, and Kenneth Koch briefly edited a magazine called LOCUS SOLUS, named for the novel currently under consideration. The influence is ongoing. The New Directions edition of LOCUS SOLUS contains a blurb from Ben Marcus placed among others on the first page, and Roussel’s influence on Marcus strikes me as self-evident. Though a few years younger than Proust, Roussel was a few years older than Joyce and Kafka. He demands to a certain extent to be appreciated as a product of fin de siècle Paris, and it is worth noting that not only was he six years younger than Proust, but only four years younger than Alfred Jarry, wild libertine inventor of ‘pataphysics. LOCUS SOLUS has some things in common with Jarry, what with its extremely complicated quasi-nonsense logic, and if it looks forward to André Breton (Father of Surrealism) and Raymond Queneau (Father of Oulipo), the men who in large part rescued Roussel’s legacy from obscurity, it also seems to prefigure the dada movement by a couple years. LOCUS SOLUS takes place on the large estate of Martial Canterel, an estate for which the novel is itself named. Over the course of the novel, Canterel guides the narrator and some other guests through the multiple bizarre attractions he has consolidated at Locus Solus, filling in much of the backstory. One might call these “attractions” something like extremely unusual Rube Goldberg contraptions, one involving “human teeth placed at intervals in all directions,” another involving electrodes applied to an embalmed head. If the lengthy descriptions of the elaborate contraptions are unmistakably dazzling, they also make for somewhat challenging reading, especially if one is inclined to seek a stable picture of the mechanics at hand. What are being constructed in terms of the descriptions of the estate’s attractions are somewhat inchoate tableaus. One remains struck by the prodigious feat of the author’s exercise of imagination while at the same time being overwhelmed by the extremity of his performance. I imagine that this is a book with a tendency to go unfinished, to defeat readers. It is a highly unusual book and the pleasures it affords are likewise decidedly uncommon ones. Again, though much of the book consists of descriptions of outrageous contraptions, Roussel consistently places these contraptions and the tasks they perform, often involving the repurposing of historical narratives, in such a way that stories sneak in through the back door. “Dreaming of some further application of the aqua-micans, the professor conceived the notion of making, for the great diamond’s interior, a collection of Cartesian divers capable of rising to the surface automatically by means of an air pocket in each of them in which a portion of oxygen so abundantly diffused in their environment would eventually be accumulated—then, when the gas collected in this way was suddenly released, they would descend again to the bottom.” This technology is used to depict a number of stories, such as “An adventure from the life of Alexander the Great narrated by Flavius Arrian,” the tale of a dwarf named Pizzighini, and Voltaire’s lone experience of “mystical emotion” etc. Roussel in turn gives us these stories (in more or less abbreviated form). Subsequently we visit dead persons “transferred to [an] enormous ice house” and subject to “a cranial injection of resurrectine.” Eight of the dead persons are inventoried at length. Again, we get the stories. They in fact comprise the novel’s lengthiest section. Basically the novel consists of descriptions of the scientific attractions on display at Locus Solus and all kind of narrative fragments, generally of a pronouncedly bizarre nature, at one point summarized as “certain consequences of a remote historical fact.” We meet Lucius, a man who went mad in the aftermath of seeing his daughter trampled to death by dancing brigands and who came in his grief to believe that he was Leonardo da Vinci. We meet a Sudanese woman and some unusual eggs along with an “astonishing bird.” “The Bluebells of Scotland” is performed in what we are told is its original key of F major. Finally there is Noël, who practices divination with the assistance of a “lively cock” named Mopsus. Of all the writers influenced by LOCUS SOLUS, I was especially struck reading it by the extent to which it looks forward to Raymond Queneau and Georges Perec, the two most famous French members of Oulipo. Oulipo, or L'Ouvroir de littérature potentielle, advanced the use of mathematical and other formula to produce literary compositions beholden to generative constraints, and the extent to which Roussel presages such techniques is plainly evident from reading his work, although the full extent to which this is the case seems to have been elucidated at length in his posthumously published text HOW I WROTE CERTAIN OF MY BOOKS, wherein Roussel explains just how complicated the rules informing the composition of LOCUS SOLUS in fact were. I am a huge fan of Queneau and reading LOCUS SOLUS forever changes how I understand the context of his work. The influence of LOCUS SOLUS on a novel like JEALOUSY will also be clear to fans of Alain Robbe-Grillet. Roussel’s revolutionary approach to form is genuinely pathbreaking in a manner that is exceedingly rare. He is one of those writers who committed himself to challenging the idea of what a novel is or can be. His work constitutes something of a kind of a frontier, plainly ahead of its time. Perhaps LOCUS SOLUS draws attention above all else to its author’s brain. I will confess to experiencing awe in relation to evidence it appears to supply of impossible-seeming neural connections.
