A++ concept... meh execution. Ignoring the art (and my god does it annoy me when the women are barely clothed and all of the men need full body suits), this book was just not that interesting. I love the idea of a comic made up of a team of misfits with a common goal. Even more interesting, this series involves throwing these characters into alternate realities where they don't know who to trust. In reading this summary, I'm thinking "how could anyone fuck that up?" Unfortunately, this just did not hold my attention. The characters are all rather forgettable to me. I could really remember what anyone's powers (or names) were from issue to issue. One of them dies shortly in and I could not muster any fucks to give. The series made that familiar choice that never makes sense to me: a team full of experienced warriors but the bland white guy must lead because reasons. Thankfully, they rectify that towards the end there. Mostly, this book seems like it would've been so much stronger if it had cut ties with Marvel canon completely. Aside from the similarities to X-Men the team has, the hardships they face on these missions are due to the team being unable to separate the versions they knew in their world from the versions they encounter in these alternate universes. It's meant to have some emotional conflict for the team but, I just thought it would be a much more interesting story if they just focused on the mission without those attachments. When the stories are tied so closely to canon, it just seems as though Winick wanted to rewrite his own versions of these arcs and it just felt like a needless rehash. I'm speaking specifically about the Dark Phoenix story in particular. That may partly be due to the fact that I didn't find the Dark Phoenix arc all that interesting to read. Or it might be that + the fact that it's been rehashed in the comics a few times and 2 separate films have tried to rehash it, as well. So, A++ concept, but the execution was not entertaining for me. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
