My first opinion of this book is that I found it disappointing. This 336 page book is the first by the extremely talented, Vietnam veteran, Tim O'Brien set during the Vietnam War. Since O'Brien had experienced all the horrors of being an infantry soldier I was expecting a gritty account of a soldier's life. How in the world this brilliant young man becomes an Infantry soldier is puzzling since only the lowest I.Q.'s were steered into this deadly occupation. A soldier with the lowest I.Q. could still have a lot of common sense which would make them excellent soldiers, if properly lead, but poor O'Brien must've been a fish out of water to begin with. The story is told by Private Paul Berlin, a new arrival to his infantry company as he muses over his past experiences in Vietnam while relating his present circumstances. Berlin's present storyline is confusing to say the least as a few members of his company are tasked with finding the AWOL soldier, Cacciato, who is heading overland for Paris to escape the horrors of war. The whole company had been traumatized as their buddies have one by one met horrible deaths in battle and Cacciato has apparently gone over the deep end. As Berlin relates the current task of finding Cacciato he muses over each and every death in gory, horrific detail. Things become very confusing as they continue their quest into Laos without reporting to their commander where they are going. They liberally begin to spend money all along the journey chasing Cacciato to Paris. Where is this money coming from? This and other peculiarities made me start wondering: Are they really dead and don't know it? Have the horrors of war made Berlin lose his mind and is he relating his tale while undergoing psychiatric therapy? As I plowed eagerly through this book to find out what was going on, O'Brien ends his story with Paul Berlin awakening from a dream. Anybody remember the TV series "Dallas" and Bobby's dream season? I felt a little cheated with this ending to be honest and couldn't help but think is that all there is? Most of this novel is set during the present with Berlin's dream sequence, which was WAY too long, leaving me wishing the author had included his audience a lot sooner than the last few pages as to the reality of Berlin's situation. The good news is that O'Brien has enormous talent and I would definitely read more of his books. Anyone curious about the Vietnam War will find this book interesting and educational as O'Brien makes that era come to life with realistic characters that are unique and memorable.
