Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? is still being broadcast. You might not know it, but it really is. Long past its prime time, well, prime, and a half dozen hosts later, Millionaire has now joined the anonymous ranks of daytime game shows that had reduced the concept to so much cultural trivia, Millionaire originally serving as a reversal of that trend, a revival of a classic television tradition. Brad Herzog sort of debuted in Millionaire 's heyday. He was one of the early contestants, when being a contestant on Millionaire meant something (fans will always remember, for instance, the first winner, John Carpenter, who used his only lifeline to brag that he was about to become rich). States of Mind had just been released, and Brad used his appearance to plug it, and that put the book on the map (so to speak). All these years later, having found a used copy, that's in fact the reason I read it. The Brad who appeared on Millionaire should probably have become acquainted with someone with that kind of vantage point. He recounts meeting a lot of people during a trek across the country, but he seems to have gathered no real perspective from it. Funny, because he has a gimmick about picking small towns with virtues for names, and he attempts to find wisdom and "the real America" from this approach. Yeah, not so much. He's apparently, when he wrote this, incredibly well-read, and a regular historian, but he infuses so little of himself (and his wife, who mostly pops up asking supplementary questions now and then) into the proceedings, except to remark when he feels like it where exactly he's traveling through... Really, it's a tale about a state of mind, Brad's, which is just as relevant in 2017 as it was in 1999, when the book was originally published. The disconnect between urban and rural lives has if anything expanded in the years since. Brad is no more equipped to understand why at the end of the journey than he is to explain why he went on it in the first place, a sort of smug gesture of privilege he shrugs off while condescending his stops all too frequently. But again, this is itself an unintended conclusion from his exercise, the observer effect. By writing a book about it, he has quite literally woven himself into the narrative, one that hindsight has made all the more clear. I wonder how much of his experiences are actually what he wanted to see rather than what he discovered. As a wanderer myself over the years, I've seen a lot of the country as a resident, having for instance transplanted to Maine early in life and heard what relatives feared, in the 1980s (no indoor plumbing!). But Maine is quite civilized, thank you, and there's more to it than lobsters and trees, although you wouldn't know it by reading this book, the thought process of which is to simplify into stereotype whenever possible... But again, it's from a clear perspective, perhaps a prototypical one of the new millennium, the flattening of the age, where increased awareness has brought greater isolation than we could have possibly imagined. So in that sense, it's valuable, as a signpost. Or a warning. One we clearly didn't heed. But hey! Who wants a million bucks, right?
