Re No Way to Begin - Michelle Reid's second outing in HPlandia proves she can do the old skool with the best of them. Unfortunately for my tastes, she is about ten years too late and this book is a bit jarring in the semi-vintage echelons of HPlandia as it was written in the 1990's and really reads like it should have been from the 1970's. Shades of Margaret Pargeter and Anne Hampson come to mind. This 20 yr old h is the adored only child of a doting father. Her mother died several years earlier and her father is not well. The family firm is in jeopardy and the h essentially sells herself to the H to save it and her father's mental health. Did I mention this h also has a fiance and she has to dump the man to marry the H? Well she does and she did. Then the plot thickens, cause this H is uber Greek Alpha demanding and physically assaultive with extra gropeyness. He also has a bevy of lady buffet beauties chasing after him. Cue up the obligatory OW and the cat fight at the pool where the OW makes it clear that the H is only with her for the property her father has - which is true as far as the h knows. Then the h gets her digs in by saying at least she is a virgin with a lot of property and the H would never marry such shop worn goods as the OW is selling - which is also true. Thank goodness the h was wearing a swim suit cause she lands in the pool. The H is enjoying the spectacle of the ladies fighting over him and sadly the h just can't help but respond to his magnetic manly lurve club mojo -- tho he pretty much tells her she will have no life, will have to give up her beloved music studies and be his devoted doormat that might get throw rug status if he gives her an allowance to dress well enough. The h doesn't want to give up school, but buy-able blow up dolls don't get choices in HPlandia and this is what the h has chosen to do. Then we get to meet the H's mother, and wow she is a total really, really bad word here. She calls the redheaded h a disgrace and her condescending disapproval that the h isn't Greek and her entire determination to complete the h's subjugation process lasts the entire book. Her only advice is to grovel and abase herself to the H and maybe she might get a child or two, but the h should have no hope for respect or anything else as she simply isn't worthy of the manly magnificence of the woman's beloved God like son - it was rather creepy when I think about it. So the H and h marry and while the prose is fuchsia and the passion is fierce, it isn't enough to override the truly disgusting verbiage that comes out of the H's mouth. How he bought her and owns her and lots of other objectifying, debasing statements that just seem out of place for an h who is really about as savvy as a baby sea otter. Unfortunately this h can't just get her little furs fluffed and become unsinkable in the stormy seas of the HP angstfest, she is soon drowning between the lies her father and former fiance sold her and the news of her father's final illness and impending death. We find out that the h's father got into trouble because the h's former fiance, that the H bought off, was blackmailing him for ridiculous sums of money. The reason for all this? The h's mother was running off to live with the h's ex fiance's father and she was killed in the process. The h's father couldn't bear to have his ego dented by admitting his wife ran to his mortal enemy, so when the ex fiance threatened to tell the h the whole sordid story, the father caved and ruined himself financially to keep his image intact in the h's eyes. So the h's father dies. The H's mother is a sewer gulping pustule with really degrading advice that the h just needs to lay down and get stomped on by the H and the h realizes she is preggers. The h had been staying at her father's house and refuses to return to the H's house when he demands she return. So the H's mother has to run her trap again and tell the h that she is just going to have to suck it up and forget about any decent treatment from the H to fight for her man. But the slime encrusted sewage pump is delighted that the h is having her grandchild - you could tell she was already plotting how to extract the child from any influence by the h, but that would have to happen in the sequel when the h finally grows up and realizes that she is a total idiot. The h does the HP standard h mopey moment and goes to the H's house to beg the H to at least be nice to her and let her stay, even if he will never love her. Then she walks in on him ticking the OW's tonsils with his tongue. As he himself says, she chose not to perform her duties as his wife and he isn't the kind of man do without. The h freaks and more vicious words about how the H owns her and she is his to do as he wishes and he will keep her child to are vomited out of his mouth. He goes on to say this: ' I bought you, like a slave girl in the market place, just as you always accused me of doing, and until I have everything I want from you, including that child you are so lovingly nurturing, with me is where you will stay!' The h runs off after exclaiming how horrible the H is and how she mistakenly thought she loved him. The H chases and she accuses him of deliberately getting her preggers to take her baby and planning the whole thing with her father. (The father left everything he had left to the H, to be held by him for their first son.) Then the H utters this classic line : 'There is no child on this earth I would condone being used in any deal!' he ground out harshly. 'What kind of man do you think I am that could do such an inhuman thing! (Which always makes me burst into hysterical laughter at the utter hypocrisy the H is affronted by. He has no problems treating the h like a piece of property to be pumped and dumped, but he draws the line at a child that allows him to control the h and keep her groveling at his feet? MR just spent the entire book with the H proving that line to be a lie beyond any credibility. ) Then of course the H has to do his big declaration moment and we get a pretty decent speech about how he took one look at her and fell in love, yadda yadda and the OW is really only an old family friend who just announced her engagement to another old friend. The h finds out how much money the H paid to have her by bailing out her father and she decides that she is now okay with being pimped out property, cause at least she is very high priced property and she claims she got a bargain with the H for the HEA. This book just squicks me out with all the utter stupidity , egos, lies and female objectification and Every Single Character in this book irks me to no end. I mean really, how hard is it to be a hot Greek Alpha dude and ask a girl out and wine her and dine her and maybe try a few flowers or something? I wanted to bang them all upside the head with toilet seats AND skillets. Needless to say, that is not my idear of a fun HP outing. MR isn't good enough yet to claim the H didn't mean something when he clearly said it and acted upon it, so I figured every time the H's lips moved, he was lying. However, there is a ton of angsty drama wreckiness in the best old skool treatment here and if that is your cuppa then you really need to read this book. MR does the traditional with her own unique style, so it is worth a read in the annals of HPlandia. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
