I read this book in year 11 for Literature. It is a 440-page tome, but the extent of our analysis was: “So this is a memoir. How much of memoir is true and why does it matter?” I was a bit disappointed. Why did I do all that reading to ask such a basic question? There’s obviously a lot more to get from this book, and re-reading it eight years later I appreciate its richness. Morgan starts off with a chronological story of her childhood and growing up, right through to getting married, having kids, and starting the quest for Aboriginal identity that forms the basis of the book. There is a lot of talk about ‘the book’ in the actual book. It starts to take on this almost mythical quality. People in the story are so doubtful that Sally* will actually write the book that I was drawn into this framework to the point that I disbelieved its very material existence even as I read from it. Needless to say, this was a strange experience. The structure of the story is circular. It starts in the past and comes up to the present, but within the narrative there are chapters written from the perspective of other characters, based on transcripts from interviews. A lot of these different perspectives are about the same places and times, even the same stories from a different perspective. It is like drawing a circle in the dirt, and then going forward, but then going back to the circle, running back over it, going deeper into the dirt. I love this story style. It is not painful and hard to follow like flashbacks can be; it is a rich way of telling a story. Sally’s Nan grew up on a station in Northern Western Australia. When the family moved to a big house in Perth she went with them. It was there that Sally’s mother was born. I’m not going to go into the story much more, except to say that all the narrators in the book tell it like it is. They don’t make caricatures of villainous white station masters or anything like that. Even the worst-behaving characters are not one-dimensionalised. In a way, this stark stating of fact can make terrible things that happen even worse than if it were overdramatised. A central theme of the book is the fact that Sally even writing the book is a really radical idea. She never even knew she was Aboriginal growing up. Her mother and grandmother were very keen on secrets. They had seen first-hand what it meant to be Aboriginal and did not want the children to suffer like they had. So for Sally to write the book was very hard, badgering her family to open up. Sally was adamant that they needed to tell things from their perspective. Things had only ever been told from the white people’s perspective. When I finished reading, I made the mistake of looking online to find out something that had been obliquely referred to in the text. I stumbled upon what turned out to be a website that set out to argue that the Stolen Generation wasn’t real, or at the very least was not as bad as it had been made out to be. I discovered that the white family from the station, who Sally’s Mum and Nan had grown up with, were very upset and hurt by the things she had written in the book. One of the daughters had written a response book, telling the story as she and her family knew it. Ties between the two families, once close, were now severed. The book is not vindictively written. The white family is not portrayed as evil or anything like that, though not everything written about them is flattering. I can understand why they would be upset. However, what stunned me about reading the family’s responses to the book was their white privilege. In the history of white settlement of Australia, all the history books written and stories told by white people have been from the perspective of white people. That is white privilege. But the thing about privilege is when it is challenged, its nasty cousin, entitlement, arks up. By writing My Place, Sally Morgan changed the monopoly of pioneering history in the area from 100% white perspective to a measly 99.98%. And yet the backlash is vicious. It’s not all negative. My Place is a best-seller, and it’s taught in schools – hopefully usually better than it was taught in my school. Having the story from an Aboriginal perspective is incredibly powerful, and helpful for relations between Aboriginal people and Settlers. What always strikes me about memoir, especially memoir written by women, is the sheer bravery of it. Being willing to risk face and relationships to tell your story because it’s the right thing to do. My hat goes off to Sally Morgan for a well-written and powerful book. *It is normally disrespectful to refer to authors, especially female authors, by their first names, but in this case I am referring to Sally the character in the story, not Sally Morgan the author.
