Short, anecdotal, character driven stories of small town life filled with simple truths. I laughed out loud a couple times and even wept a bit, but then I am a sentimentalist. A folksy, witty style of writing that seems grounded in real life. In this case, it is the life of a Friends Meeting. What kept me reading was the common place situations that occur in every congregation. There is always the "traditionalists" who speak loud over their fear of any change. There are the wounded who occasionally seek shelter from the world. There is the all powerful women's group that can guilt the males into doing most anything that they think needs to be done to further God's work whether it is to shod the barefoot Choctaw Indians or to get a water saving toilet in the ladies room. The book wouldn't be so special if it weren't for the wonderful turns of phrase. About sitting in the same pew every Sunday: "My wife and I considered having another child, then realized we'd upset the fragile balance of the meeting. So our family is small, due to Quaker family planning-parents ought never bear more children than the pew can hold." About serving on church committees: "You serve six years, then are paroled, having done your time." About the sermon critics: "Complaining about the service was a weekly ritual for Fern, a deep joy, almost a sacrament. During worship she would sit in the 6th row and scribble furiously. At first I thought she was taking notes, but what she was doing was gathering evidence." About Home: "When love takes you by the hand and leaves you better, that is home. That's the place to stake your claim and build your life." The result is a warm, cozy book that could be described both as profound in its simplicity of describing the best of Christian living and as 'Christianity Lite' in small town Midwest. If you prefer the heavier theological, intellectual, tough life "grey area" morality studies, try "Tattoos on the Heart" by Greg Boyle. It is another anecdotal, character driven examination of Christian action and reflection based on life in the world of East LA.
