This is Barbara Tuchman's first significant published work, released in 1956. For once my unfortunate combination of slow reading speed and propensity to be distracted from my reading by the pursuit of other avocations (e.g. I'm currently trying to use a computer program to teach myself to play the piano), has worked to my advantage as - at he time I started reading Bible and Sword back in April - conflict between Israel and it's Palestinian (and other Arab) antagonists was on the back burner of media attention as Secretary of State Kerry struggled without success to restart some kind of peace process for his boss, Pres. Obama. However. as I was nearing the end of this fine read, the Israel/Gaza conflict was a white hot topic across the media spectrum as hundreds of Hamas missiles slammed into Israeli territory daily and a ground invasion of Gaza (that finally came to pass) was imminent. Even for someone already fairly well versed in the historical antecedents of the current conflict (see my reviews of "A Peace To End All Peace" by David Fromkin, "Righteous Victims" by Benny Morris, and "Jerusalem A Love Story" by Simon Sebag Montefiore), Tuchman's focused take on the single nation, England, that can arguably be said to have raised the very notion of Zionism well before the Jewish people themselves had reached a point where they could conceive of actually doing anything to get themselves back to the only true homeland they had ever had (rather than just sit and absorb endless abuse while waiting for G-d to fulfill his promise to send the Messiah to bring them home), laid the intellectual and political foundation for it, encouraged in significant ways the growth of the Zionist vision by encouraging it's early Jewish advocates, injected an open declaration of support for a Jewish homeland in Palestine and gave it the status of an official treaty obligation by making it part of the League of Nations Mandate, but then, succumbed to the demands of "real politíque" to cynically renege on the promises and obligations set forth in the Balfour Declaration by denying further Jewish Immigration into Palestine thus prompting Winston Churchill to say: "This is the breach, this is the violation of the pledge, this is the abandonment of the Balfour Declaration, this is the end of the vision, of the hope, of the dream", ultimately leading to the final shame of an English warship firing on the S.S. Exodus, a private vessel filled with Jewish refugees from the horrors of the Holocaust. All this Tuchman brings to light with what would come to be known as her characteristic command of the primary sources, and a writing style that makes real history as readable and arresting as a novel as she imparts, not just a parade of what events occurred, but the all important motivations - the why - as best as it can be understood from the actual thoughts and deeds of the principals. This would be a perfect time to read this fine book.
