We're back! Weis, and Hickman [if for some reason you didn't know] took a "break" from Dragonlance due to issues with the parent company. Thus, after establishing the dragonlance universe, and setting up events up through the Dragons of Summer Flame book they dropped off the dragonlance radar. Several years later they returned to pen the next step in the advancement of the dragonlance story. Hence; The War of Souls. Before this series said parent company tasked author Jean Rabe to continue on the world building. A monumental task to say the least, and one that although not to the same degree of quality that dragonlance fans had come to expect from the core narrative of this universe; it was a serviceable trilogy. With that out of the way I will say this; sadly the trilogy by Jean Rabe is pointless. That isn't to say you shouldn't read it. By all means check it out, and see the way the world changed between Summer Flame, and this book, because if nothing else we spend more time with characters like Palin, Usha, Goldmoon, Caramon & Tika [albeit these last two are kind of short cameos]. HOWEVER, the first 20-30% of this book is spent establishing what happened in Weis & Hickman's iteration of this universe. Yes, that means that the first 20-30% is basically them saying "Yeah, Rabe's trilogy isn't really important, because this is what happened." At least that's how I interpreted it. That also means [if you're a weirdo, or just don't know any better] that this could be your entry point into the Dragonlance universe. By essentially resetting the lore after their time away, Weis & Hickman took the time to set the stage at the beginning of the book, so newcomers could dive right in. Sure they mention the war of the lace, and the chaos war. The original companions, and the old gods, but those points aren't TOTALLY integral to the overall story. Jump in, enjoy this particular narrative, and go back to the other events for more perspective. Genuinely don't do that though. Read the books in their order, so you can get all the little easter eggs. "Oh they mentioned Bup, and how Raistlin magicked Tasselhoff into a pond full of ducks!" That type of stuff. We get returning characters of the original companions, and even returning characters from Dragons of Summer Flame like Palin. What I felt was a nice twist; Palin has started to become more, and more like his uncle Raistlin. Read the book, and you'll see what I mean. The new enigmatic Mina is a standout in this book. Which makes sense when you realize she would get her own spinoff trilogy after this. Silvanoshei is the son of Alhana, and Porthios [OG characters], and heir to the throne of Silvanesti [also Qualinesti technically], and he seeks to establish himself as more than a man child whom is doted on by his mother. Gilthanas, son of Laurana & Tanis [OG characters] has become the "puppet king" of the Qualinesti people, but considering his lineage; is he really under someone's thumb, or simply maintaining a facade? Gerard is a solamnic knight who want's to prove that the knighthood hasn't crumbled into garbage. He holds true to the measure, and is a good parallel with OG Sturm Brightblade, though not as ridgid as Sturm. Once that 20-30% is out of the way; that's where the story gets going. This isn't a simple "There's a new big bad, and our heroes have to save the world" set up. Rather, there isn't really a MAIN antagonist aside from the usual "armies are trying to gain territory, and dragons are being tyrants trying to take everything away from everyone." Rather, and I don't know if this is a spoiler, but the ending to Dragons of Summer Flame? Didn't happen. Well, it happened, but not in this world. Not in this timeline. You heard me: this TIMELINE. YUP! We're dealing with time travel, and alternate timelines! This is only book 1, and if memory serves [I initially read this trilogy almost 20 years ago] Weis & Hickman are going to take us on a journey to restore that original timeline. I could be wrong, IDK it's been a long time since I read this trilogy. As always Dragonlance books never disappoint. They were my gateway into fantasy back in my middle school days [circa 1997-1999], but two decades later I've read SO MANY other fantasy books/series, and nostalgia goggles aside Dragonlance has a certain magic to it. Simple, yet satisfying.
