I read the book from beginning to end to obtain a full view of Walsch's god of the New Age/Spirituality. He basically deconstructs the God of the Bible, uses scriptures selectively, but no one would notice unless they read the Bible for themselves in context, not pulling some words here and there to destroy it by misrepresenting it. I took so many notes on the contradictions within the book itself. It is basically a collection of words to manipulate the mind, and yes, we have seen it being propagated in educational institutions at all levels... because as the book says, "The way to control a population is to control a population’s mind, and the best way to do that is to begin with the young." (p. 302) The intentions of the book seem good for humanity, except you find out that nothing really matters even though you have to CLIMB that mountaintop infinitely. Why since "nothing matters"? It is basically a manipulative piece of writing to make one feel at peace because nothing matters and that makes you your own God. Looks like chaos on the horizon and it's quite worrisome to the naive. "Nothing matters. What an amazing message for my soul to receive from the unified soul that is all of Life." (p. 379) Read the Bible for yourselves... then you can make a proper judgment on how he changes its teachings, and basically dismisses it, but he calls it EVOLVING. Scripture shines a light on evilness and is the beacon that is a light unto our path. Thus, it reveals the secrets of the heart and exposes darkness. Proverbs 30:5-6 Every word of God is pure; He is a shield to those who put their trust in Him. Do not add to His words, Lest He rebuke you, and you be found a liar. The Bible does not change. Those who change it don't want to accept it. So that's a personal choice. We all have Free Will. But every action produces a consequence and if the Bible is not real, then you won't have to worry where you spend your eternity since "nothing matters," but if the Bible is indeed real, and what Jesus taught us is real, then so is the kind of eternity we will spend. He made us a way... He told us how to live and love, but the pride in us is fighting to live good and right. It is a battle of the mind.
