― “It is man’s glory to be the only intellectual animal on earth. That imposes upon human beings the moral obligation to lead intellectual lives. The slothful are blind to the glory and neglectful of the obligation.” ― Mortimer Adler, Intellect: Mind over Matter ― “A Christian mind is not one that is filled with exclusively religious topics but one that is framed within a Christian worldview.” ― James Sire, Habits of the Mind My interest in reading James Sire’s Habits of the Mind: Intellectual Life as a Christian Calling has much to do with what I have witnessed in American culture and especially within the church. Why are so many people, including many Christians, opposed to science and captivated by conspiracy theories? American culture seems to have recast the role of the intellect as a vice instead of a virtue, diminishing knowledge while glorifying the plain sense of the common person. Anti-intellectualism within the church is especially troubling given that we are commanded to love the Lord our God with all our heart and soul and MIND (emphasis mine). The Bible does not encourage an anti-intellectual view. In my reading of Scripture, it seems that thorough reasoning that is disciplined, analytical, curious, and hungry for truth is indispensable to loving God. Scripture applauds education and knowledge (Proverbs 18:15) and commends those who seek wisdom (2 Chronicles 1:10–12). It encourages cautious skepticism (1 John 4:1), careful thought (John 7:24), and fact-checking (Acts 17:11). ― “Critical thinkers must be critical not only of the views of others, but of their own views as well.” ― James Sire, Habits of the Mind A number of evangelical scholars have noted this trend toward anti-intellectualism in the church, including author and theologian Os Guinness: ― “Anti-intellectualism is a disposition to discount the importance of truth and the life of the mind. Living in a sensuous culture and an increasingly emotional democracy, American evangelicals in the last generation have simultaneously toned up their bodies and dumbed down their minds.” ― Os Guinness, Fit Bodies, Fat Minds When self-serving desire begins to dominate, the author cautions that “the mind will not perceive the truth,” and “will succumb to falsehood masquerading as truth.” Entertaining false thoughts about anything will fail to bring us into fellowship with God. Christian philosopher John Henry Newman taught that “obedience to the light we possess is the way to gain more light.” While I found some chapters worthy of five stars, other chapters hardly merited three stars. In the first four chapters, Sire is writing to those who want to develop a Christian intellectual life. But he defines an intellectual as someone who is capable of being published. While I desire to learn all that I can to be of greater use in the kingdom, I feel no calling to write or be published. Sire relies heavily upon John Henry Newman (Anglican minister who converted to Roman Catholicism) as a model in these chapters. I did not find these chapters particularly helpful. However, beginning in Chapter 5, “Habits of the Mind,” Sire underscores the significance of reading widely and deeply as a cornerstone for cultivating the intellect. He encourages reflective reading through a deliberate and thoughtful approach. He suggests strategies for engaging in reflective reading. Sire also emphasizes the importance of a diverse reading diet. This will broaden one's intellectual horizons and stimulate cognitive flexibility. This approach will also promote intellectual resilience by exposing one to different viewpoints and challenging one's preconceived notions. In chapter 6, Sire stresses that the love of truth should be central to intellectual pursuit. The dedication to truth will spur the reader to discover important insights that might not be readily apparent. In the current culture, where there is an abundance of information but also an abundance of misinformation, the reader needs genuine wisdom to discern what is true and what is false. Sire emphasizes the importance of intellectual rigor by avoiding superficial answers and engaging deeply with difficult questions. Scattered throughout the book are wonderful quotes from scholars past and present, such as the ones from Mortimer Adler and Os Guinness quoted above. ― “To think well is to serve God well.” ― James Sire, Habits of the Mind ― “We need to reclaim Christianity from the politicized moorings of a mindless caricature of faith that bears little resemblance to the Jesus of the Gospels.” ― Peter W. Marty, editor/publisher of the Century
