UPDATE Jan 3, 2018 This book is a mine of details, not only what was done but how. The IBM machines and the systems engineering process described in the book was still essentially utilized in the early 1960's when I began my career as a junior systems designer with an accounting firm in Philadelphia, so I can relate personally to much of what Black describes. It is stunning to realize that IBM under Thomas Watson's direction gained monumental profits from both Hitler and the Allies. Watson could have severely disrupted the German military and the operation of the death camps by stopping IBM's support of Nazi data processing systems. He never did that, and it seems the US and Roosevelt never asked him to. Of course I can't use much of Black's marvelous detail in the sequel I'm writing to A FLOOD OF EVIL. But I can use some, and more important, the understanding I have gained of how the Nazis managed the logistics of mass murder has suggested several powerful plot points for my characters: How did Anna survive at Auschwitz? How did Berthold find her and rescue her? A few quotes from this remarkable book ... ... after the German invasion, IBM maintained its Polish punch card printing operation using paper brought in from Germany … produced 10 million cards per year ... Dehomag's profits in 1939 doubled the previous year … RM 3.9 million ... records maintained on 2.5 million conscripted and slave laborers … extract list of technicians with particular skills and language abilities … then move where needed ... only IBM could print the cards which were compatible with the IBM sorters and other machines … special presses, paper and storage facilities were needed … any competitors were shut down with court orders … contracts with German clients required use of Hollerith cards printed at IBM owned and operated printing facilities ... billions of cards per year ... each card could be used only once ... production required a sophisticated network of IBM authorized pulp mills, paper suppliers and transporters ... IBM field engineers custom designed every application … beginning with an extensive study to determine data gathering from various sources and multiple card layout requirements … system implementation required a constant interaction between IBM and client personnel … all plug and dial tabulators were set only by IBM systems engineers ... punch cards were custom printed for each application, with column headings, logos, etc ... ... because of its grip on punched cards and spare parts, and its ownership of all machines, IBM exercised control over Nazi Germany's ability to plan and wage war ... even as IBM was supporting Germany's war effort, it was also vitally involved in US and British war projects … including Enigma at Bletchley Park … tracking millions for the draft and captured Axis prisoners … neither side could proceed without IBM's technology, punched cards, and systems support ... every Nazi concentration camp operated a Hollerith Department … at Dachau two dozen sorters, tabulators and printers were installed … other facilities punched cards for transport to central locations ... coordinating the logistics of genocide across dozens of cities in more than 20 countries … including train timetables, locomotives, boxcars ... no delays … precision timing and scheduling … tracking stopped when Jews boarded trains ... no escape was possible, there was no need for further tracking … Jews were no longer worth the price of a single punch card *** MAY 21, 2017 ... This is truly a shocking book, dealing with indisputable facts that IBM (and Tom Watson specifically) knowingly helped Hitler prepare for war and identify Jews for annihilation, in return for enormous profits. These actions will be dealt with in the sequel to A FLOOD OF EVIL. So far, I have read the portion of the book to the year 1937. Much more to follow. NOTES from IBM and the Holocaust ... ... When Hitler came to power, a central Nazi goal was to identify and destroy Germany's 600,000-member Jewish community. Only after Jews were identified could they be targeted for asset confiscation, ghettoization, deportation, and ultimately extermination. To search generations of communal, church, and governmental records all across Germany— and later throughout Europe— was a monumental cross-indexing task ... IBM Germany, known in those days as Deutsche Hollerith Maschinen Gesellschaft, or Dehomag, did not simply sell the Reich machines and then walk away. IBM's subsidiary, with the knowledge of its New York headquarters, enthusiastically custom-designed the complex devices and specialized applications as an official corporate undertaking. ... IBM NY always understood— from the outset in 1933— that it was courting and doing business with the upper echelon of the Nazi Party. The company leveraged its Nazi Party connections to continuously enhance its business relationship with Hitler's Reich, in Germany and throughout Nazi- dominated Europe. ... Just meters from the Belsen crematorium, off to the left, near the kitchens and the cisterns, down a muddy path, stood the block leader's house. Inmates sometimes called this place "the lion's den." Within "the lion's den" was a room for the Arbeitsdienstfuhrer, the Labor Service Leader. That is where the Hollerith punch cards were processed. ... Watson was awarded Hitler's medal, bestowed by Schacht … he wore it, draped by two swastikas … the ceremony was well recorded by US papers
