I've been meaning to read this book since it came out in 1969 and have only gotten around to it now because of my excitement about the 2016 primary campaign season. 1968 was, until this year, the most exciting presidential campaign I've been involved in. The only comparable campaigns to these were the Chicago mayoral campaigns of 1983 and '87. Although I was only a high school kid in '68, Eugene McCarthy's campaign, like that of Bernie Sanders currently, was substantially soldiered by young people. Indeed, although five years too young to vote, I worked for Gene in both Illinois and Hawaii, serving both as a precinct captain in Hillary Clinton's hometown (visiting each home in the precinct up to three times) and as a 'security guard' for the candidate at the Hilton Hotel during the convention (meaning that I handed out press packets and joined arms with other youngsters to allow McCarthy to pass from caucus meeting to caucus meeting). Idealists all, no one was paid. This book is about a very different candidate. Richard Nixon had been a congressman, vice president and Wall Street attorney, distinguishing himself as a Red-baiter and foreign policy hawk. In '68, having lost both the 1960 presidential and the '62 California gubenatorial races, but having cultivated the Republican party machine in the meantime, Nixon was off again. The trick was to overcome his right-wing, loser image and, most importantly, his colorlessness. Nixon was a glamorless foreign policy wonk. In came the 'experts', men such as Roger Ailes, founder of Fox, to establish an attractive Nixon image in the new (color) television age. With them there was little or no concern with policy. Their concern was to make him all things to all men (except minorities, identified as a lost cause): a moderate progressive like Nelson Rockefeller in the Northeast, a good-old-boy like George Wallace to southern racists and a radical conservative like Ronald Reagan to the West and Southwest. To do so they had to control the environments within which Nixon was seen to operate, showing him at his best, hiding a good deal of the man and his prejudices from common view. Some of this book is written in first person and framed as a struggle between the media experts and the political experts in Nixon's campaign. The author's interests side with the former and with their perspective on the hacks, not that he agreed politically with any of them. Nixon himself is represented as a difficult-to-manage character, his own worst enemy. As giving insight into the cynical manipulation characteristic of most well-funded campaigns, this book remains relevant.
