Satan wakes up, confused: What is this place? What happened? Why does my head hurt? Who are these people? Demons: Blah blah Satan: There’s a rumor that the Big Guy decided to create new creatures and love them more than us! We need to investigate! Who volunteers? Demons, silently looking at the ground. Satan: Ok, I’ll go Demon: Now that I am not risking going, I volunteer! Satan: *son of a bitch! He wants my power!* Satan meets his daughter Sin, who after the night of lust gave him his son Death, who after raping his mother Sin now watches as the monsters she gives birth to every hour devouer her bowls. Sin: I must guard the Gates of Hell and I have this key. But you’re my daddy so here, take it. Satan: Oh fates, why are you so unfair! I want to go back home to heaven but my bros won’t respect me! But then even if I get back and be forgiven, I just know that I’d be bored again soon and rebel again! I’m so bad, why am I so evil, why, Big Guy, why?! Satan goes to heaven, gets a direction to Eden, goes there to investigate. In Eden. Eve: Lalala, I’m so happy with my man, I have straw for brains, I need to serve him well. Adam, salivating: Oh Eve is so hot, I will need to wait after the prayers to have sex! Satan: Damn, she’s hot. The angel in Heaven: Wait, that dude who asked for directions was suspicious… Hey! It’s Satan. Angels drag Satan from Eden. Angel: Hey dude, you look unwell since you were banished into Hell. What’s up with your face? Satan: *Argh!* I was just tired of the place and was house shopping! Checking out properties. Angel: You lie! Both are preparing to fight. The Big Guy: Hey, get lost! Satan: Bye bye The Big Guy: Hey, you, go to Adam, tell him all about Satan and that he must not seek knowledge or it’s death! I am warning him that it’s his choice even though I know exactly what happens next! But I don’t want to think that anything is my fault! Raphael to Eve: Hey, beautiful, go take a walk, let men talk about important things. Go look at yourself in a mirror. Eve: lalalala I’m so dumb. Oh hello, who’s that beauty in the reflection? Raphael: Ok, Adam, I’ll tell you about an epic fight in Heaven with no stakes cause nobody can be killed, so we just threw dirt at each other and then The Big Guy ended everything. So about Eve, you know she’s suspish? Adam: Oh she’s so hot, I want to make sweet sex to her all the time! But it’s like she’s her own person. Not very smart or funny, but gorgeous! She’s so gorgeous that I sometimes think she might be better than I think she is. Raphael, slaps Adam: Stop it, she’s an idiot, women are just like that! You’re better and smarter, you must take control. She’s hot but stop with your lusting! Adam, blushing: I think she has a great personality and I love her! *when he’ll be off, I want to have sex* Raphael, suspiciously: All right, no harm in love, we in heaven love each other so much, our Spirits all join in rapture. Adam: Mmm, what? Raphael: Anyway, I must go. The next day. Eve: I want to walk alone, if you don’t mind. Adam: I don’t know, there’s Satan lurking. Eve: Please trust me! Eve eats the apple. Eve: Adam, here, have a bite. Adam: I love her, what else can I do? Damn women! Makes them ultra horny and they go have sex. Eve: Adam, why did you leave me without supervision?! It’s all your fault! I’m so dumb! Milton: See, women are the worst. Men’s only sin is wanting them so much. Why did Adam choose Eve over God?? Stupid weak minded women! They need to be completely subservient! Then I lost interest, it became very Christian and there was not enough Satan. Maybe I'll finish it one day. All best lines are said by Satan in his monologues. My favorite Satans from pop culture: Tim Curry’s Satan in Legend; Elizabeth Hurley's hilarious Satan in Bedazzled; Al Pacino’s Devil is hamming it up gloriously in the mediocre Devil’s advocate; as is Jack Nicholson’s in The Witches of Eastwick, but that’s Jack for you; I even recall the creepy Satan played by the daughter of Adriano Celentano! Oh, and Peter Stormare whose Satan is as over the top as every other Peter Stormare’s character. David Grohl’s Satan plays metal though.
