"Betsey shook her head as if she were shaking off her color and all the problems not being white made. Why, there was the sky and clouds that bubbled up in huge towers above her head, and soil smelling of tomatoes or sage, the warmth of the sun on her arms, and here she had to worry bout white folks too? No, not today. Betsey waved bye to her compatriots and made off fo her favorite secret place." ⁣ ⁣ Betsey Brown is a seventh grader growing up in St. Louis, Missouri. The novel is set in the fall of 1959--the year St. Louis began desegregating schools. Shange's delicate words draw the reader into the lyrically written daily life of Betsey Brown: popping bubblegum with friends, peer tensions due to class difference, familial conflicts, dreams about love & first kisses, floating away from adolescent troubles sitting in the branches of her thinking tree... we see Betsey's world as a whole, along with her growing pains... the wounds of memories. ⁣ ⁣ The signature aesthetic quality of Ntozake Shange's works, colorful images of foods, poets, Black musical traditions & references to important Black historic figures, also glow within the pages of Betsey Brown. Through Shange's creation of individual characters, she showcases collective experiences: the integration of schools, shared chaotic family mealtimes, portraits of Black womanhood, & nods to the history of St. Louis. ⁣ ⁣ When court-ordered integration forces Betsey out of her neighborhood school & into a white one, Betsey's already present teenaged self-consciousness is heightened by having to navigate a landscape unknown, "another country" -- without her friends to jump double-dutch, without "dill pickles wrapped in brown paper or candies like Mr. Robinson's." However, to say this is a book solely about school integration would be a disservice to the exploration of Betsey's coming-of-age. ⁣ ⁣ There was a feeling evoked in me while reading Betsey Brown that was somewhat reminiscent of how I felt while reading Maud Martha by Gwendolyn Brooks -- both beautiful works that intimately render lives of Black women. Poets writing prose is always magical.
