Uh, I’m pretty sure it’s a metaphor. Just kidding. I never read reviews of a book I’m about to gobble or have just finished, lest they unduly influence my perception. Last night, however, I did make the mistake of looking at my friends’ reviews of this (you’re all good) and accidentally glanced at the opinion of the Goodreadersphere-at-large. Holy moly, talk about divisive! The few I read indicated that the vox populi of GR place Crash somewhere next to cancer and the Holocaust on the list of world evils. To which I have two responses: 1) the problem is not the book, but the audience it found in you; and 2) you’ve never really fucked , have you? The human body and its liquids really aren’t that bad, and this is coming from a red-blooded Catholic-American boy (unilaterally regarded as the subgroup with the most prominent super-aversion to the sexual 'humours' of the flesh). Crash is brilliant—a hammering, cold meditation on death strung around the leitmotif of auto-erotica (literally; cars and sex). Ballard’s arpeggiated sentences and intense repetition intentionally drive the book’s thesis straight into your lobe, the allegorical car/commentary destroying your gray matter. Lazy critics call this a lack of variety on Ballard's part. I call it a calculated numbing agent. If I’m onto anything, it’s that Crash uses the symbol of the car less as commentary on technology (as every book blurb ever will insist) than as a ‘vehicle’ to analyze the human peculiarity of the death-fixation. The characters in the book are all deeply-damaged people, nominally due to car crashes. Their insatiable lust for every permutation of sexual congress is then a confirmation not of Life, but of non-Death. Or, to quote the great philosopher of the 14th-C, Peaches: they’re trying to fuck the pain away. The cataloguing of bodily ephemera—glans, cleft, node, et. al—is as dispassionate as the inventory of, wait for it, a car’s countless bobbles and binnacles. But don't just stop there, that's still surface. To see or judge these people—as so many do on GR—as depraved, aberrant perverts is to deny them their humanity. They have passed through death in horrid wrecks that have left them void, and all they want is to feel something . This isn’t a fight club—it’s an Alcoholic’s Anonymous meeting with lots of spittle-flecked blowjobs and sperm of Moby -ian proportions. I could go on, but why? Who cares what I think? I’ll say that Crash doesn’t have a ding on its flawless chassis, an ounce of fat anywhere on its constellationally-scarred belly. It might not be your thing, but it is its own thing. Originality used to be quite appreciated, you know. OR I suspect that many male readers were fine with the lesbianism but decided they HATED this book when homosexual anal sex occurred. A bridge too far! Why’d he have to do that? I was kinda turned on till now! Seriously guys, if you thought that chapter was about The Love That Dare Not Speak Its Name, all I can say is—well, you know those weird tingles you get in the shower at the gym? Yeah, we might need to talk, honey. I’m going to speak your language: two bros can totally fuck and the world doesn’t have to end. By God, you can even allow yourself to enjoy the voyeurism without suspicion. Hi-five and see you in the locker room, all-star! OR I’m still pretty sure it’s a metaphor.
