I have always really liked science and animals and someday I would like to be a veterinarian. This book was a lot of fun for me to read because it taught me a lot about birds, where they come from, how they look and what perspective I should look at them from. For example, if I had to do a medical procedure on a raven, I would have to put it under very heavy anesthetic so that it wouldn't come back in the middle of the procedure and kill itself accidentally while trying to get away. This book also taught me about warbles and what kind of bird they are. Warbles are like finches but more colorful and some of the species are actually so colorful that they blend in with all the reds in the rainforest. If you are a non-colorful species like the ones we find in North America, you would stick out like a sore thumb in the jungle and the jungle species would not blend in very well or camouflage. I learned about Allen's Hummingbird species which is interesting because it's orange which is my favorite color. These birds are native to New Mexico, the coasts of California and Oregon. Their sizes range from 3.75" at the largest to 2.2" or 10cm at the smallest. My other favorite bird was the sparrow because these birds kill their prey the same way that hunters do by swooping down and impaling them on thorns in bushes. I found this interesting because it showed me how intelligent these birds are, especially with how well they clean up after themselves. Overall, they're the opposite of the hummingbirds because they're so violent. Lastly, my other favorite bird - the tanager. In the adult stages, the male is very vibrant so that he can attract mates and lure predators away from the female and the nest. The tanagers are native to Mexico's coastal regions and they grow to about 7.25" to 5.25" at the smallest. Overall, this book was one of my favorite books because it had a lot of information and it had pictures to go with it so that I could identify the birds when we drove to camping trips and for weekend adventures.
