If you asked me 2-3 years ago how I felt about networking events, I’d tell you “love ‘em, piece of cake”. Now, after a pandemic and switching to remote work, I think we all have become a little rusty. It was time I got some practice. I stumbled across this book among a “top 25 books for business professionals” list. Having understood my social game could use a top up after being secluded for so long, I dove in. I wish I spent my time with another book. My social skills could only have gone backwards with this one. Let me explain why below. The author is an engineer. As an engineer myself I can only begin to describe the lack of social skills most of my kind have - and it is a bit of a stereotype. Really, any technical profession lacks in this department as they’re so bogged down with numbers and analytical data they soon start morphing into a computer themselves. If I were to choose an academic background to write this book, it’d probably be an MBA or something of this sort. On another note, the author also states she tried becoming a conversationalist after gaining some confidence and divorcing her husband. This left a bad taste in my mouth. In a chapter on starting a conversation, the author gives some examples of opening lines, encouraging you to try them on a victim. I use “victim” because I feel sorry for the person who’s approached by someone and asked, “Presidential campaigns seem to start immediately after the inauguration. What do you think of the campaign process?”. Or, “If you had to pick someone to play you in a movie, who would it be and why?”. Yes, these are real examples from the book on lines the author suggests to use. There is some useful stuff in here (obviously it’s not the example opening liners) - more so the useful tidbits are plagiarisms from Dale Carnegie’s ‘How To Win Friends And Influence People’. Seriously, just read that book instead of this one. You’ll gain far more insight into the world of socializing. The last few chapters were confusing (I didn’t DNF, it was so short I had to finish. And I wanted to see what other hilarious open liners the author gave). One was on being single and mingling. It felt very out of place in a book on small talk in a professional setting. The author jumps into rants on dating, and how to navigate the scene. It had me laughing once again at the horrendous advice, one of them being “leave your phone in your car”. Yeah…don’t do that. Especially on a first date. I think what the author was trying to say was “don’t look at your phone while on a date”. Not “throw away your only lifeline to the outside world if the date goes bad”. I can barely give this book a one star. Only reason I did is it gave a page or two of rip off advice from How To Win Friends and Influence People. Please read that book and not this one. The Fine Art of Small Talk will only set you back (far) with your socializing skills. I envision the talking points / opening lines being used in a prank show to make the viewers cringe from awkwardness.
