When it comes to the Silverwing series by Kenneth Oppel, I am instantly intrigued and interested. They are spectacular. This one, Firewing, is the last one in the series that is about Shade, is about Shade, who in this book is a father of a child named Griffin. Griffin slips through a rift in the ground into the Underworld, where is is told to find the Tree to return home. However, in this world, he is the only living one. Other bats in the Underworld are dead, and can steal your life. Shade must venture on a journey to the Underworld to find and save his son. This book was very surprising to me. It was probably the worst book I’ve ever read. The plot is horrible compared to the first two books (which, if I may mention, were phenomenal - definitely go check them out), and the story is confusing and uncaptivating. When reading this, I wanted to throw the book off my bed, it was so bad. The fact that the female main character, Marina, is not even important in Firewing, just makes me cringe. She was the second main character in the first book! The fact that Griffin, being a new character, plays a huge role in this story makes me cringe and shake my head. The theme of the story is a good theme - it focuses on how Shade goes to save Griffin, his son, from almost certain death, when even his own father abandoned him in a search to satisfy his curiosity. Shade is constantly worrying about his son even though he hadn’t met him yet! The setting of the story is also interesting, because it is set in the land of the dead, whose god is Cama Zotz. The setting makes for an interesting story as it is possible to get your own life ripped out of your body and make someone evil alive once more. The action was not compelling AT ALL. The fact is that it was only interesting at parts when the gods were mentioned and the “fights” (if you can even call them that) were going on. The whole story was just dull, with the switching of characters at awkward places and not knowing what time is during the story. The fights were not exciting at all, may I mention, involving one character running away while another chases with a murderous intent. Not fun at all. The setting was extremely unclear. You can get that you are in the Underworld, but the visualization and other literary skills, which usually just come to me, didn’t in this case. It was hard to see where the characters were and their correlation with time compared to the other characters. Since it was a story about journeying, and all of them were on the same route, it was hard to track where they were at specific times when another point of view was introduced. The “camera switches” were difficult to understand. I think this is the major component in making this title not a fun read. In most stories, you can clearly tell who is the main character. Not in this book. Oh, no, you have to be between Shade and Griffin, and they are both given the same amount of speaking time, so how can you tell who is more important? In the previous two books, it was obvious that Shade was the protagonist and Marina was the sidekick, even though they were traveling together and Marina was older. The ending, should I say, was absolutely trash. I read it and literally wanted to cry by the way Kenneth Oppel ended the Silverwing trilogy. This was just a horrible ending. You would honestly be better off not reading this book and only reading the first two books. I would recommend all readers to pick up the first two books in the series, Silverwing and Sunwing. They are absolutely stunning in the way they are written and the way the plot carries out. You won’t be disappointed. This one, though, you will definitely be disappointed. Firewing will crush your hopes and dreams about everything in the Silverwing universe. It wasn’t a fun read, it was confusing and unfollowable, and overall a bad book. I wish to save you the wasted time and energy that will be used to pick up the book and read it. Overall, I believe that Kenneth Oppel could’ve and would’ve and should’ve chose a better ending to the whole series. Firewing was frankly a waste of my time and will be a waste of your too if you read it.
