This volume comprises a collection of fifteen ghost stories by Dickens. As with any collection, it is a bit of a mixed bag. Some are superlative, some are less than mediocre. The Queer Chair : A man takes shelter in an inn and falls in love with the widowed (and moneyed) innkeeper, who is courted by another man. A chair in his room helps him succeed in his quest. - 5 stars A Madman's Manuscript : Story about an abusive man. Really boring. - 1 star The Goblins who Stole a Sexton : A miserly sexton is taught a lesson by goblins on Christmas Eve. - 3 stars The Ghosts of the Mail : I loved this one. A man kept travelling in a coach from a different period and ends up in cahoots with a woman who ... well, read it! - 5 stars Baron Koëldwethout's Apparition : Another one about an abusive husband who marries out of greed. At least this one had some character development. - 2 stars The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain : This was the longest of the book and the worst. I am not sure what this was about except for some sick college kid, a "pure" woman who couldn't be touched by evil, and a haunted man. Boring beyond belief. - 0 stars To Be Read at Dusk : A woman sees a man's apparition on the eve of her wedding and then the man shows up in person. What gives? - 4 stars The Ghost in the Bride's Chamber : Two men spend a night in an haunted house and encounter a man who narrates the story of a woman abused by her husband. - 2 stars The Haunted House : A brother and sister move into a haunted house as an experiment. It all goes well until the brother changes his room. - 2 stars The Trial for Murder : The ghost of a man on trial keeps confusing everyone in the courtroom. I couldn't keep track and found this boring. - 1 star The Signalman : A signalman hears a warning and keeps seeing an apparition signalling him to clear the way. He hopes he is able to save a life but finds out that the signals are wrongly interpreted. - 3 stars Christmas Ghosts : Random snippets of ideas for ghost stories which have neither basis nor character building. A very lazy effort. - 1 star The Lawyer and the Ghost : The best of the collection! A lawyer persuades a ghost inhabiting a haunted house to leave and find better housing. - 5 stars Four Ghost Stories : Four decent stories set during Christmas time. The first three involve apparitions of dead people. The fourth one is rather unique - a woman from a noble house sees a dream in which she stands godmother to some "little people" and is rewarded with some metal, which brings the family prosperity and happiness. - 4 stars The Portrait-Painter's Story : This is an elaboration of the first story from Four Ghost Stories mentioned above. A portrait painter meets a young woman who insists he do her likeness. Only she refuses to sit for him. - 4 stars Much of Dickens' ghost stories involves apparitions and aren't really scary. They are more stories about paranormal occurrences than about anything evil or scary. This is probably the reason why I didn't enjoy them as much as I might have. Of course, some of the stories are really good and imaginative, but I found many of them a dead bore. Even though I rated some of the stories pretty high, the overall collection was pretty mediocre. I couldn't even finish The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain , which took up a large chunk of the pages, it was that bad. So yeah, not the best of books!
