There will be some spoilers and I'm not tagging them because this book is over 20 years old, and also I'm saving you from having to read it. Tagline: A haunting love story in the tradition of the movie GHOST. This book has literally nothing in common with that movie. No grisly murder (not until the very end, but it happened in a "memory"), no danger, no Whoopi Goldberg, and barely even a ghost. Not to mention that the movie came out in 1990 and this book was published in 1992, so it was hardly a "tradition" at that point. For the majority of the time I read, I absolutely hated this. There were the barest bones of a decent story present, but the writing sucked and OH MY GOD, the protagonist, Lauren, was a horrible person. The way she treated waitstaff and the workers who came to her house was appalling. The fact that she saw nothing wrong with buying a house and expecting her would-be fiancé to live in it without even consulting him, and then getting mad when he didn't want to, spoke volumes about her character. She was SUCH A BITCH. I don't hate heroines lightly and I don't just throw that word around, but she was horrid. Also, she thinks a city of just over 200,000 people is a big city. AND she has a weird, out-of-nowhere obsession with remaining youthful. When Lauren started to be influenced/possessed by a dead woman, Laura, her plight was not sympathetic in the least. I'm pretty sure this was less a ghost story and more the story of a woman's deteriorating mental health (along the lines of Turn of the Screw .) The most interesting part of the book was Lauren's sudden recollection of how she died in her past life as Laura. She was murdered by the sexy gardener! She had flirted with him but he took her flirtations seriously and ended up raping her. Since she couldn't tell anyone, she ended up bribing him to leave her alone, thereby incurring her husband's suspicions that she was being unfaithful. So one night she tries to pay off the gardener for good, but he knocks her in the head and drowns her in the lake. Now THAT is an interesting story, damn it. Unfortunately, it was told quickly in just a few pages, so there was no sense of mystery. That'll teach me to buy random books at the thrift store. ... ... ... No. No it will not. For an actual good ghost story along the same lines (haunted house, past events, possession, etc.), I recommend Julian's House .
