The Dark is Rising is a memorable and imaginative fantasy novel by the British author Susan Cooper, first published in 1973. This novel, for readers of maybe 9 and above, gave its name to a series of five contemporary fantasy books written between 1965 and 1977. They form an Arthurian quintet, in which the forces of the Dark and the Light are pitched against each other in a battle for humanity. The Dark Is Rising , although the second novel in the series, remains the most popular, and it is possible to begin the series with this book. The Dark is Rising has a different set of characters from the first one, “Over Sea, Under Stone” , and introduces us to Will Stanton, the seventh son of a seventh son, and an Old One; the last initiate of an ancient order of benevolent immortals. He is destined to seek the six magical signs of power, which will enable the Old Ones to triumph over the evil forces of the Dark. Susan Cooper is not as well known as other British children’s fantasy authors writing around her time, such as Alan Garner, or a little earlier, C.S. Lewis, with his Narnia Chronicles, J.R.R. Tolkien with “The Hobbit” , or much later, J.K. Rowling’s “Harry Potter” series. Her mood pitches betwixt the darkness of Alan Garner, and the fantasy books of C.S. Lewis. Her writing is steeped in mythology and Celtic folklore, especially the Welsh “Mabinogian” and, like theirs, feels very British. In a way, this series is subtler than either, with its moral dualism of the Light and the Dark. It is not as comfortable and clear-cut as the reader expects. There are family domestic scenes, common to most books of this type, ostensibly geared to older children, and has a child as the protagonist. However, Susan Cooper’s descriptions are powerful, and parts of this book leave you spellbound with her beautiful prose. As in all her novels, there is an underlying sense of menace. A perfect time of year to read The Dark is Rising is Winter, as much of the story is steeped in the snow, and parts of this book chill you emotionally too, with a hard, relentless, freezing cold. It begins on the eve of Will Stanton’s 11th birthday, 21st December or Midwinter’s day, and like many children, he longs for the snow to fall. Will is part of a noisy, bustling cheerful family, with 11 members; Will is the seventh child of nine. They live in a rambling farmhouse, on the edge of the Thames Valley near the Chiltern Hills. Will imagines great white blankets of snow, covering the land around the old farmhouse, and bringing everything to stillness and silence. And yet even during this festive day, when Will should be doubly excited because of what will happen the next day, he is uneasy. The weather seems brooding and threatening with its lowering sky. “It’s a horrible day … It’s—creepy somehow.” People seem to be behaving oddly, and even his neighbour, Mr Dawson, does not seem the same cheery man he usually is, with his mysterious dark comments: “The Walker is abroad … And this night will be bad, and tomorrow will be beyond imagining.” And why should Farmer Dawson give him an odd sort of old belt buckle: “a kind of ornament made of black metal, a flat circle quartered by two crossed lines” as if it were somehow, significant. Even the rooks seem to be behaving oddly. And Will thought he caught sight of someone a few times—just a flicker of movement out of the corner of his eye. It’s all rather mysterious, and worrying. Eventually, the day comes to an end. Next morning Will is woken by delicate trills of music, so enchanting that he doesn’t want it to stop. It slowly recedes, and yet Will is convinced this strange music was not a dream. Even more oddly, something weird has happened to his family. He goes around to several other bedrooms, and can see all of his family members, but even though he tries to wake them, they can’t see or hear him. Will is soon distracted though, when he sees it has snowed overnight. He goes outside, and hears the strange music again, and senses that the world is not right. Will meets one of the farm workers, who is working at an anvil to make horseshoes, while a magnificent black horse waits by patiently. There is also a strange figure in a long old-fashioned robe. This man has a curious accent, and also says strange things, full of foreboding, just as Mr Dawson had done. Susan Cooper conveys everything which is happening as if it has an unearthly, dreamlike quality. A woman Will does not know, comes up and offers both of them bread. The strange man accepts it, but although Will is hungry, for some reason he also feels suspicious, so he doesn’t take it. The man offers to take Will wherever he wants to go, on his horse, as the snow makes it so difficult to get anywhere, but Will refuses. Startling himself, Will says: “I am out to find the Walker” . The stranger tries to grab Will, and force him onto his horse, as he sneers: “But now the Rider is abroad” . The smith intervenes to save Will, though he still does not understand what is happening, as the smith too seems to be talking in riddles. The arrival of a white horse, a “reverse image of the Rider’s midnight-black stallion” does little to clarify things. Will’s head is once more filled with the mysterious music, which makes him feel sick and giddy, and then he realises he is on the horse’s back. But he is not ready to ask the mare to take him anywhere, so jumps down. When this horse has been shod, and gallops off, Will notices that her hooves are replicas of the cross-quartered circle that he now wears on his own belt. Will carries on walking, trying to make sense of things, and comes across the same old tramp he had seen with farmer Dawson, and senses that this is the Walker, and that somehow the rooks are involved. He is beginning to learn more, and reveals the strange sign, when the black stallion with the man on it rushes up, threateningly. The white mare arrives in the nick of time, and speeds away with Will on her back: “Then all at once greyness came around them, and the sun was blacked out. The wind wrenched into Will’s collar and sleeves and boot-tops, ripping at his hair. Great clouds rushed towards them out of the North, closing in, huge grey-black thunderheads; the sky rumbled and growled. One white-misted gap remained, with a faint hint of blue behind it still, but it too was closing, closing. The white horse leapt at it desperately. Over his shoulder Will saw swooping towards them a darker shape even than the giant clouds: the Rider, towering immense, his eyes two dreadful points of blue-white fire. Lightening flashed, thunder split the sky, and the mare leapt at the crashing clouds as the last gap closed. And they were safe.“ This strange symbol is certainly important, and powerful. But why does he, Will, have it? And why do people seem to recognise him, and know he has a destiny? These first two chapters, with their magical prose, set the tone of the novel. The overall feeling remains mysterious and foreboding. Unlike other older children’s fantasy novels, Will’s quest is a solitary one: he is very much on his own, despite his huge family. And it is a sort of Quest, as well as a most unusual coming-of-age novel. Chapter 3 in a way forecasts the rest of the story. Through a subtle indication that we will view different parallels in time, we are introduced to two other key figures, an old woman termed “The Lady” , and a man named Merriman (who is clearly Merlin). They explain to Will that his eleventh birthday has marked the moment when he steps into his destiny as one of the “Old Ones”, outside Time: “I will tell you only this: that you are one of the Old Ones, the first to have been born for five hundred years, and the last. And like all such, you are bound by nature to devote yourself to the long conflict between the Light and the Dark.” These Old Ones must prevent the Dark—personified in this book by the “cloaked rider on a midnight horse” —whom we have met, from “rising” and gaining power over the land. Will is told he find the six signs of the Light, which will help him defeat the Dark, before Twelfth Night, when the Dark will be at its peak. They are circles quartered by a cross in wood, formed from bronze, iron, water, fire and stone. “For the Dark, the Dark is rising. The Walker is abroad, the Rider is riding; they have woken, the Dark is rising. And the last of the Circle is come to claim his own, and the circles must now all be joined. The white horse must go to the Hunter, and the river take the valley; there must be fire on the mountain, fire under the stone, fire over the sea. Fire to burn away the Dark, for the Dark, the Dark is rising!” Will is still doubtful about his powers. He is just a small boy, How can he be an “Old One” . But it starts to make sense to him, when Merriman and the woman tell him to think of something, and make it happen. He doesn’t believe them at first, but then he imagines a fire, and one magically appears in the fireplace. As the book progresses, we move with Will between warmth and safety and a much darker, uncertain world, as he learns more about himself and his own powers. Sometimes he is part of his family’s comfortable and familiar seasonal traditions, such as lighting the yule log fire, and decorating the Christmas tree, and others, in a strange uncharted territory, compelling but increasingly terrifying, trying to come to terms with his new self; powerful but isolated. Will struggles with his new identity, and readers see him mature. Increasingly he finds, to his horror, that he is obliged to choose the greater good over the fate of any single individual. At one point he is mortified, when his actions appear to have caused the death of “The Lady”. Several times he is desperate to protect his family, but must choose a wider purview: acting so as to right the greater wrong. We also deepen our understanding of the other characters, such as Merriman, and “The Lady”. I felt particularly sorry for Hawkin, the tragic Walker, who seems to have made one mistake and then be condemned for eternity. In a way he parallels Judas in Christianity. His earlier behaviour had sentenced him to walk the earth for centuries. Hawkin is a casualty of the struggle between good and evil. In the present-day world, the snow-covered land is quickly turning into a catastrophe. The snowstorm continues, and outside the door, the snow covers roofs and lanes. The snow continues to cascade down, blocking the ways, stopping all travel, and eventually preventing people from leaving their homes. The land seems to be locked in snow, and somehow the dark seems to have something to do with it. The snow becomes so bad, that the local shop almost runs out of food. All the families gather at the Manor with “The Lady” and Merriman, whom they think is her butler, to stay warm. But Will’s mother is left at home, looking after a tramp, who had seemed to be ill. Only Will knows that the tramp is in fact the dangerous Walker—and Will still has all the signs to collect. Merriman is there of course, to help and support him, and warns Will that there is an epic battle being waged all around him, regardless of what he can see. As we follow Will’s quest, finding the signs to defeat the Dark, the events become more and more savage. They are personal, challenging Will’s determination and tenacity, as well as his new-found powers. There is death, and there is transformation. There is an accident, a kidnapping, and a pretended friendship, making Will act according to his conscience and defy his parents. There is temptation—when Will attempts a rescue of someone he loves dearly. This is another Christian parallel, of the temptation of Christ on the mountain. There is a mysterious exotic Christmas gift, from Will’s eldest brother Stephen, who is in the army abroad. It is a carnival mask, which Stephen had been given by a stranger, who seemed to know all about Will. This mystified Stephen, but he had promised to send it on. Will somehow knows that the mask will help him to defeat the Dark—and moreover that he must hide it from the Rider. Sure enough the carnival mask proves essential to future events . There is an ancient magic book, “The Book of Gramarye” , which tells Will that Dark is always around, just like the Light. The Old tongue it is written in, sounds like gibberish to humans, though Will finds he can understand the Old Ones who speak it perfectly well. There is a battle, with a deadly surprise and a paradox. The Rider comes to fight the Hunter, but is Herne the Hunter good, or evil, or both? The snow is ever-present and a powerful metaphor. Will begins the book as an innocent, on whose birthday, the snow is “smooth and white and inviting” . There is the cold beauty of the Light when the snow glimmers and sifts. But the most powerful metaphor is when the blizzards never let up. The snow has a malevolent edge, pushing in through windows, and piling up at doors, representing the threat of brutality as the Dark grows stronger. For all its similarity to those essentially Christian allegories of C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien, for all her biblical parallels and stress on good versus evil, we are blindsided when the White Rider appears again, only to turn out to be just as villainous as the Black Rider . Susan Cooper seems to be telling us that extremism of beliefs is the true cause of evil. She also presents us with a paradox. In the end, “The Lady” tells Will that the signs will help them defeat the Dark again. Yet Merriman has said that everyone— even the Walker—has free will. So which is it? Do we decide what happens in our lives, or does Fate rules the universe after all? Will is able to choose what to do with his newfound powers, and decides to actively seek out the signs, because he genuinely cares about helping to save the world. These are very sophisticated concepts to find in a children’s—nay in any—book. Susan Cooper’s enthralling prose combines fantasy elements with folklore and mythology. She explores depths of subtlety few other writers do, through a gripping adventure story. It is flawlessly structured over the twelve days of Christmas. The Dark is Rising is a snapshot in time, full of wonder, terror, and delight. It is time this author was better known. “The Dark is vanquished, at last, in this encounter. Nothing may outface the Wild Hunt. And Herne and his hounds hunt their quarry as far as they may, to the very ends of the earth. So at the ends of the earth the Lords of the Dark must skulk now, awaiting their next time of chance.”
