Tragic and hilarious; Jong goes between pontificating on literature, expressing disgust at psychiatry and discussing sex in terms that are poetic, brutal, mechanical and everything inbetween. Whilst I think the sex scenes are what got a lot of attention from the book when it was published, it's the description of her apatheic marriage and approach to others that really stands out "I had wanted to leave my marriage for years, had saved it up like a sweet before bedtime, like a piece of bubble gum put on the childhood bedpost, like the evening out you promise yourself after day of writing." the elements discussing her writing and the nature of writing itself also stand out as whilst not universally true but absolutely honest "Even autobiography is not interesting if it is only about its subject. Unless that subject becomes everywoman, unless that story becomes myth, it is of no interest to anyone but the subject-and perhaps her mother. And once it becomes myth-it is no longer merely autobiography. Or merely fiction" The blurb promises one of the funniest lesbian sex scenes in writing which I think might be a method of titalation and sales but absolutely delivers "I tried. I put my best tongue forward and took the plunge. You'll get used to the smell, told myself. said to myself, Self, you smell the same; but it was not much use. Rosanna took forever to come, and my nose felt like it had spent its entire life in there. I was nibbling her clit as she had done for me, sliding two fingers in and out, trying not to think of the smell, the hairs getting stuck between my teeth, and the fact that my wrist was getting tired from moving back and forth, forth and back. How long had it been? An hour? Two? I began to sympathize with Bennett's not wanting to go down on me; I began to understand what it meant to be a man, fumbling around - is this the right place or is that? -getting no guidance from one's subject (who is too polite and ladylike to tell) and won- dering, wondering if she is going to come now, or now, or now-or has she already, or will she next summer, or what? Help! I need some guidance This is uncharted territory If I keep sliding these two fingers in and out and revolving my tongue on her clit and nibbling with my teeth, will she eventually come?Will she come by 1984? Will she tell me when she does? Do WASPS moan?" Choice Notes Why is it harder to leave a loveless marriage than a loving one? Because a loveless marriage is born of desperation, while a loving one is born of choice.... While the whole world is fucking away behind closed doors, all I do is write, write, write!" "`Why a condom? Don't you have a diaphragm?" "I do but how can I use the same one with my husband and with a lover?" "You use the same cunt, don't you?" 'Everybody knew.' This reopens my wounds. They bleed invisibly. 'Everybody?" "Yeah. It used to kill me when I saw you and Bennett and Penny jogging around the track in your sweatshirts. Everybody knew about it but you. And Robby, I think. But then, he was having an affair with his secretary... Frankly, I thought Bennett was immensely cruel to you.' "Why didn't you say?" " Nobody in their right mind messes with anyone else's marriage. You know that.' I hung my head. "I thought DeeDee treated you cruelly too.' "'And you didn't tell me either. In fact, you drove her into town to meet her lover on one occasion.' "I had to, she...' "Don't explain I'm not blaming you "You were always getting into accidents to deprive me ..." he said, as if he hadn't the slightest idea what he was implying psychologically. "To deprive you! Youl We were skiing on ice, if you remember. And it was your ideal" "So I had an affair--big deal. Doctor Steingesser doesn't think that's any reason to break up our marriage. "What marriage?" I shrieked. "What marriage are you talking about? Your marriage to Doctor Steingesser or my purgatory with you?" Old pals in the literary world accusing you of having "sold out." Ah, the literary world. They hate failure and despise success. They have contempt for authors whose books go unread and sheer hatred for authors whose books are too much read. Try to please the literary world and you will spend your life in a state of rage and bitterness. But Hollywood is simple, almost pure-if total venality is a form of purity. There, nothing at all matters but making money. And the more you make the better you are. And the end justifies any means at all. If I do it once, I'm a philosopher If I do it twice, I'm a pervert (WITH APOLOGIES TO VOLTAIRE) I came- thinking of Josh (with whom it was so hard to come). Oh Doris Lessing, my dear-your Anna is wrong about orgasms. They are no proof of love-any more than that other Anna's fall under the wheels of that Russian train was a proof of love. It's all female shenanigans, cultural mishegoss, conditioning, brainwashing, male mythologizing. What does a woman want? She wants what she has been told she ought to want. Anna Wulf wants orgasm, Anna Karenina, death. Orgasm is no proof of anything. Orgasm is proof of orgasm. Someday every woman will have orgasms- like every family has color TV - and we can all get on with the real business of life
