When I reviewed 'The Wizard of Earthsea' I gave it four out out of five:- https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... Having read 'Tombs of Atuan' I feel like I was overgenerous. Maybe WoE was a 3.5 rounded up? The bottom line is, I REALLY enjoyed 'Tombs of Atuan'. When I got to the point where Ged entered the story, I could hardly put it down. It's a gripping book, set in a grim and fascinating setting. It reeks of the mystery of ancient places. The whole book takes place in the sort of setting most books brush past, hinting that the ruins are ancient and of another time and telling you nothing more. Surprisingly, Ged was NOT the protagonist here. It never really switched to Ged's point of view either. This tale is told from the perspective of a young girl called Tenar, who becomes 'Arha' (The Swallowed One) when the old Priestess dies, because she's born on the night the old one died, she is assumed to be the reincarnation. This situation puts Arha into a unique dichotomy. She essentially grows up in a world where she has enviable privilege, but no freedom. She's well looked after, she's important, but she can never leave the Tombs or forego the rituals demanded of her by the ancient dark that dwells there. She is essentially a well cared for slave. For the most part Arha seems to accept her fate. I can understand why too. I think it's realistic. She leads such a sheltered existence that considering what the world beyond the Tombs may be like never really occurs to her until she meets Ged. In some respects her moral anguish over the fate of the men she left in the chained room reminds a little of my own character Vexis Zaelwarsh, Low Priestess of Avanti who features in Rise of the Archmage . I actually think this book has a very similar theme to Vexis's story in Deathsworn Arc. The exploration of faith and fear... It almost reads like a strange version of Stockholm syndrome. When offered freedom, I don't feel Arha grabs it without fear. This is probably realistic. Most of us DO have a fear of the unknown. A new job, relationship or moving to a new town always brings anxiety, even if it's something we're really excited about. Arha ends up in a position where she's forced to choose between a new life, unknown - or the existence she's lived for her whole life. The way Le Guin portrays it, Ged's kindness and compassion, always offering her the choice of sacrificing him or enslaving him to return to her life as Low Priestess - that seals the deal. The villain in this number, Kossil seems to envy Arha, but I got the impression Kossil had chosen a life serving the Tombs, whereas the life was chosen FOR Arha / Tenar without her having a say in it. This is a crucial difference and though subtle, it gives the whole book context. This book is about the importance of freedom, over privilege. I particularly liked the rich and emotional exploration of Arha's early life in the Temple. It seemed realistic and intimate. I liked the claustrophobia and darkness of the tombs where no light is ever permitted and explorers have to feel their way in the darkness. I DO think Kossil's decision to light up the Tombs later in the book in order validate Arha's claims really pushed Arha's loyalty towards Ged. For me, it showed a lack of respect for the gods Arha served and a prioritization of control or dominion over Arha, over revering the forces the Tombs belong to. A truly gratifying part of the book was the ending. It would have been VERY easy to simply set the characters outside the Tomb and waffle off a little 'happily ever after' bit. Le Guin doesn't allow herself the easy way out though. She continues to explore Tenar's feelings as they make their way away and it was good. The portrayal of her emotional turmoil and sense of loss and lostness was excellent. Another thing I found particularly satisfying was the explanation of the strangers Ged met on the reef in book 1. I hope their story isn't complete. It was great to learn more about them, but the more you learn about them - the harder hitting and sadder their tale becomes. When you dwell on their fate and the lives they must have led up until Ged met them... Their story is truly gut-wrenching. Of all the people Ged meets on his travels and all those who inhabit the Tombs, I feel the most sympathy for the castaways on the reef. I REALLY hope Le Guin has some kind of redemption in mind for them, but I can't see how she can. Their tragic, sad lives seem to be another reminder of the realness and gritty undertone of Le Guin's story. It isn't in your face grittiness like Game of Thrones, there aren't beheadings, disembowellings, impalings and people being eaten alive and stuff... Le Guin is subtler and applies the grit brush on a more deeply emotional level. All in all I loved this book and enjoyed it far more than the first one. My only criticism was it could have been longer. I can't mark it down on that because as much as anything it's a testament to how much I was enjoying reading this! Paperback:- http://amzn.to/2fPKqJ9 Kindle:- http://amzn.to/2wwtP0l Martyn Stanley Author of:- The Last Dragon Slayer (Free to download)
