Charlie the Caterpillar is an interesting take on the traditional Ugly Duckling tale. Charlie is a caterpillar who is born in the beginning of the book. We see him in his innocence as he grows, eats, and sets off with a desire to "see the world". In this moment he is "glad to be alive", but his spirits are quickly crushed as his repeated attempts to make friends with other animals are foiled on the grounds that he is an "ugly caterpillar". Thus, Charlie retreats into his coccoon and, after a winter, emerges a beautiful butterfly. However, Charlie's story is not over, though we do have the same scene as in the Ugly Duckling where all the animals fawn over his beauty. Charlie goes on, leaving the animals who base friendship on appearances, and finds a sad little caterpillar who has been rejected as he was. Charlie wipes her tears, and becomes her best friend. This heartwarming tale conveys a clear message without being overly didactic, and, overall, creates for a rather enjoyable experience. It is interesting to study the intertextuality that this book has with the tale of the Ugly Duckling. Whereas both texts focus on the rejection of one being for being ugly and that being's gradual transformation into a thing of beauty, they convey rather different messages. The Ugly Duckling encourages us to believe that inside of us all, there is a beautiful swan that just needs time to get out. It is a story of hope and survival. Now, while "Charlie the Caterpillar" does carry those elements, we are brought to focus more on the theme of friendship. We see clearly that friendship should not be based on looks. Where the Ugly Duckling left it at accepting the praise offered him, Charlie decides to take a stand and not hang out with those who would judge from appearances. We see that in order to have a friend, we must be a friend, as illustrated through Charlie's actions towards the girl caterpilllar. To be honest, I was worried when Charlie started to reject the other animals' pleas for friendship. Perhaps it was because I thought that he was being mean in his rejection or because I felt unnerved by the deviation of the story from that of "The Ugly Duckling". However, I was set at ease when the author explained Charlies' purpose of not wanting superficial friends. If you want to teach your child about good friendships, this may be the book you are looking for.. And if teaching your child is your game, you may want to look into reading the book outloud with him or her. There are many elements which make this book a fun read-aloud. One is symmetry. The same basic scene is repeated six times throughout the book, with two subcategories. Charlie meets with monkies, hares, and mice in the book both before and after his transformation in to a butterfly, and each conversation follows the same format with Charlie encountering the animals and inquiring as to their activities followed by the subsequent rebuttal and Charlie's slow slinking to the other page. Repeated exact words such as the phrases "looked to the left...looked to the right" and "giddadda here" help with memorization. This format will allow for a reader to have fun with voices as well, focusing on the distinctions between each sitiuation and on Charlie's progression from being rather glad to being rather glum from the beginning of the book to the middle. Also, Dom Deluise repeatedly uses the onomatopoeia word "giddada" in the phrase "giddadda here!" which concludes each encounter. This is a signal that we should read the "get out of here" in an emphasized, characteristic way. It also provides a way for listening children to join in the fun. Given a few cues, the listeners should be able to tell when and how to shout out "giddadda here" during the reading. Whatever your style for reading out loud may be you will assuredly find it enjoyable applying it to this book.
