The best biography of Blake and it's not even close. It is also likely, barring a profound discovery, to remain the definitive biography. By merely placing my opinion into words, I am already defeating Blake's vision for his own poetry: a transcendent fusion of art and poetry to see beyond the physical world into the spiritual. While Blake may often be lumped into the list of "great English Romantics", he himself would resist this constraining label, and in fact transcends them as well. He did intersect with them personally or professionally other than a late life visit by Coleridge. His major works, barring his late master epics which were composed and inspired over decades, were published before Lyrical Ballads in 1798, meaning Blake had much more impact on the Romantic movement before Wordsworth and Coleridge. He was born before them all and lived beyond the years when W+C were still producing impactful poetry. Byron, Shelley, Keats far predeceased him. And yet, because his work appears so opaque and difficult and - well, to use his contemporaries' words which chime throughout the sources cited by Ackroyd here - "insane" and "mad", he lived in poverty and obscurity. When his works were displayed, critics were unimpressed or even scornful. Even the brilliant Coleridge, when he met the man, didn't misunderstood what he was trying to achieve. William Blake scorned chains and restriction. He believed that reason and material forms were artificial constraints on our truly spiritual forms, driven by our imagination. He claimed that the physical nature of the world darkened and dampened our inner light. He claimed to see visions and hallucinations all his life that revealed our interior world. Ackroyd doesn't attempt to explain or criticize Blake's visions; all that matters is that Blake himself believed in them and they impact his work. His opinions and claims were sometimes blasphemous or seditious. Indeed, I wonder what he would have truly though of Percy Shelley but they never met and Blake never mentioned him. Ackroyd understands Blake like few biographers understand their subject, and nowhere is this better exemplified than by his discussion of the evolution of Blake's visual artistry and media, firmly delineating his technique and touring us through the changes in technique. Blake actually began to eschew hard lines and forms (as to be expected by him) near the end of this life. Be sure to have a good copy of color editions of the plates nearby when you read this book. The only criticism I would have is that an even greater examination of his poetry probably exists (though understandable as his mythology is complicated and could probably hijack a biography). Be sure to supplement this book with Damrosch or Frye and their explanation of the poetical world of Blake. But this book is required reading for those wanting to learn about Blake. Post script: an old prof of mine had a great explanation for the visions. He had a theory that Blake and his wife (who also claimed to see visions) were actually inadvertently dosing themselves with LSD (which explains why so much of his writing completely sounds like an acid trip). I'll not explain the theory since it is his intellectual property and I haven't seen him publish an account. I'll leave clues though: a basic staple of everybody's diet which the Blakes made themselves and where LSD actually comes from and the English weather that might have inadvertently produced it in their food. Fascinating whether true or not (we'll probably never know).
