I picked up this biography after reading Aldous Huxley’s Doors of Perception , wherein he equates his experiences on the hallucinogenic drug mescaline (much like LSD) with the experiences that some have under hypnosis, meditation, schizophrenia, or extreme asceticism. However, Huxley informs that some people can experience these states naturally and his prime example is William Blake (1757-1827), a mysterious English poet, painter, and engraver. Blake was largely ostracized for the visions he experienced and, in fact, his mother actually beat him for declaring that he had seen visions. It will help somewhat to understand Blake by remembering the historical context of his place among precursors & contemporaries, which follows: Dante (1265-1321) The Divine Comedy Michelangelo (1475-1564) John Milton (1608-1674) - Paradise Lost John Bunyan (1628-1688) The Pilgrims Progress Isaac Newton (1642-1726) Louis XVI (1754-1793) Marie Antoinette (1755-1793) William Blake (1757-1827) Napoleon (1769-1821) Hegel (1770-1831) Victor Hugo (1802-1885) But First, my Soapbox Should Blake be listed among such an illustrious grouping of persons? Certainly, Blake did not hail from the elite class, but he nevertheless belongs in their midst. In fact, there has been a great amount of wasted power in humanity which has been restrained by social standards, the circumstances of one’s birth, the legitimization of only those certified by certain educational institutions, and ethnic prejudices. This untapped power is nascent because heretofore the majority of the human population has been relegated into economic servitude. Blake was no exception. Blake was obliged to labor incessantly as an engraver to earn his way and this left only a minority of his time available for creating the great works that we find so remarkable today. The tragic fact is that inequality and religious oppression cause the majority of people to be denied education, sufficient leisure, necessary supplies, and other necessities for the effective implementation of their God-given gifts. Certainly, Blake is an example of one relegated to lesser importance by his contemporaries because of his lack of certain educational standards. One can only wonder how many amazing poets, artists, scientists, singers, writers, inventors, etc. have lived their entire lives in servitude to lesser beings, and never furnished an opportunity to manifest their talents. The extent to which this has restrained the progress of humanity is a horror to think about. Eliminating this tragedy involves developing a social system that does not elevate people on the sole basis of monetary riches and instead exerts value unto people based upon their ability to contribute to the state of humanity. Blake’s Philosophy Blake clearly believed in an afterlife. In fact, Blake believed that we are all on a perpetual pilgrimage within time; and that we all move through different existences via the processes of birth and death. Appropriately, images of compasses may be found in many of his works. Blake said that “ every death is an improvement in the state of the departed ” and that “ death is but a removing from one room to another .” Blake insisted that he wrote from his dead brothers dictate and that he had angels for companions. Blake saw education as “ eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil ”; as something that misled people away from their intended world. This does not mean that Blake was against self-directed study, for he involved himself in incessant reading, but he was largely autodidactica. His position was that study should be self-directed into the realms of one’s callings and interests, not imposed upon one in the form of an indoctrinating curriculum. One of Blake’s graphics shows an old man with shears, cutting the wings from an angel child, as indicative of how adults sever the imagination of childhood with heavy doctrines, many of which are presented as fact but can’t be proved, i.e., Santa Claus, religious fundamentalism, etc. Blake’s closest and most significant attachments were to the Bible and the great majority of his art is associated with Biblical images, but of a radical and mystical nature. This author suggests that Blake is among those first initiating radically dissenting religious convictions in the 16th and 17th centuries. Blake felt that the spiritual realm longed to see itself in material form and that was a strong motivating factor for his art. Blake envisioned that people move through various states of existence, such as desire, rage, longing, etc. as a process for externalizing sin and error, such that it may eventually be cast off like a garment. This view is a way of contemplating the passage of a soul through the world by dwelling more upon forgiveness and redemption than judgment and punishment. Blake’s view was that a Divine Humanity exists within each created being and endeavors to form itself within an idealized society, i.e. a pure Jerusalem. Blake felt that our understanding of human history is yet to be properly understood. Similarities Between Myself and Blake I’m not really sure why I feel impelled to compare myself to such a pugnacious little weirdo, but nevertheless, the following list just kept growing, as I read through this biography. · Even though I hold a master’s degree, I consider myself largely autodidactic and certainly I agree with Blake that self-directed study is paramount to personal growth. · Like Blake, I’m a student of world religions and in particular the mystical components. · Blake would have been flabbergasted to know that the world’s greatest rock band (and my favorite of all time), U2, would issue albums named after his works: Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience , more than 200 years later. Like Blake, U2’s lyrics on these albums are developed from the perspective of a child. Blake’s legacy is that he was able to maintain the imaginative capacity of childhood throughout his life, to see what others cannot see. In the song: You’re the Best Thing About Me , on U2’s Songs of Experience album, Bono wails: “ I can see it all so clearly. I can see what you can’t see .” Truly, some can see what others can’t. Some may see the beauty of a mere tree to the extent that it moves them to tears, while others see only a green thing standing in the way. In childhood, we notice the intricacies within the veins in leaves, the varied hues of blue lurking behind the clouds, and the magnificent engineering within a caterpillar’s motion. It is a perspective we should all seek to retain. · Blake expressed his great love for the writings of St. Teresa of Avila (1515-1582) who’s work The Interior Castle is one of my favorites of all time. In this work St. Teresa expresses some of the best explanations and analogies for the spiritual life I’ve ever encountered; and yet, as a result, she was investigated as a heretic by the Spanish Inquisition. This author proclaims that “ to read St. Teresa is to understand something of the mystery of William Blake .” · Blake’s writing was received by his current society as somewhat strange because he understood, as I do, that writing is all about casting away the masks of the self. Writing in compliance with social dictates lacks passion and, to become truly effective, a writer can harbor no embarrassment or reluctance to disclose what he’s thinking. · Someone reading this might remark with exasperation that I would dare compare myself to William Blake, just as those in Blake’s world were flabbergasted that he would compare himself with Michelangelo (1475-1564) or declare Milton (1608-1674) to be his forerunner. · This author describes Blake repetitively as “pugnacious” and Blake, like me, obviously exerted this characteristic to promote in people an examination of polarized world views, something that is necessary for productive dialectical intercourse and for synthesizing new ideals. Blake’s Art For Blake, art was a process for transcribing that which is near impossible to verbalize. Blake sought to materialize or replicate the images that appeared to him. Blake disliked landscapes and art renderings derived from nature because he preferred to render forth the internal visions he experienced. His ideas seemed to come to him in the shape of images or scenes; and after depicting them he would supplement them with poetry or narrative. This brings to mind the modern proliferation of Twitter participants who use web photos to aid in conveying their meaning in cyber land. However, Blake downloaded images from his mind, not the web, and he worked the images into reality with watercolors and etchings upon copper plate. Can you imagine how much insight this biographer could have gained if Blake had been a regular contributor to something like Facebook or Twitter? Those who post repetitively in social media are in fact creating cultural artifacts that posterity may indeed use to examine who they were and the nature of their life. Blake disliked oil painting. He liked Gothic art. Blake’s art reminds me of something from the Book of Kells or Jung’s Red Book ; and yet, it is distinctively different, more detailed, much more refined, and still it preserves that rare ability to promote meditative states in the viewer. Several selections of Blake’s art seem most appropriate to include in this review. Perhaps the most stunning is the comparisons and contrasts one can make between his depictions of Newton and Nebuchadnezzar; both are huddled over like animals and the viewer senses the seemingly palatable desire to escape animality that emanates from them both. Newton & Nebuchadnezzar Blake’s Vision of the Last Judgement, is a haunting graphic of interwoven detail, from which an outer layer can be discerned. This outer layer seems to emerge into the foreground as a horned beast when one studies the painting at length. Then there is this other animal-like figure at the top, seemingly rising from behind the throned figure, largely above it, as an open armed being, arms outstretched, and head upward, as if in worship or exultation. Vision of Last Judgement Blake’s Visions The phrase commonly used by psychologists for Blake’s condition is “eidetic imagery”, which is a condition where a person sees objects that are not present but which they still describe as though they were present. Such persons have enormous difficulty distinguishing between a subjective and objective world. Some of the things Blake saw as reality include: -a tree filled with angels -the prophet Ezekiel in the fields -a city filled with angels and prophets -In Westminster Abbey, he suddenly saw the old cathedral filled with a great procession of monks, priests, choristers, and censer-bearers, complete with the audio of song, chorale and organ music. -his brother’s spirit leaping from his dead body -in his own words, “lands of abstraction where spirits of the dead wander” -the ghost of Michelangelo -the Angel Gabriel -a horrible firm figure, scaly, speckled, very awful, stalking down stairs toward him and that revisited him from time to time - he called this thing ‘The Ghost of a Flea’ and completed art to illustrate it. -He contended that he saw and/or conversed with Socrates, Herod, King Saul, Joseph & Mary, and Voltaire Conclusion William Blake is certainly a unique historical figure and one worthy of knowing. Learning more about him will change how one thinks about art in general. For there is the sort of art produced commercially, such as Blake’s engravings and the computer-generated images we have today. But beyond that is the art that is an attempt to portray things we experience inside ourselves. It is this latter art that moves and mystifies us because it reminds us of the vast inner spectrum within ourselves that we so rarely access. -End-
