The Little Drummer Girl is a page-turning story set in the Middle East in 1979. Published in 1983 this novel is still relevant today. It is beautifully written literary fiction which takes on the Israeli/Palestinian conflict and portrays the complexity, brutality, and hypocrisy in both camps without taking sides. John Le Carre tells a sympathetic, exciting, at times heart-wrenching and completely absorbing story. The narrative is as complicated as the situation in the Middle East. Le Carre’s mastery of dialogue, plotting and characterization puts the reader into the story and the minds of the characters. He portrays realistic emotional conflicts experienced by many of the characters in extremely difficult situations. The main conceit of the novel is that Charlie, working as an actress in a second rate theater, is hired by an Israeli counterterrorism team to take part in the “theater of the real,” in which spies are actors and actors are spies, both trained to deceive. Kurtz, the head of the Israeli team, has chosen Charlie because of her past attendance at talks supporting the Palestinians and other semi-radical causes and because she is an actress in a less than satisfying career. He wants to lure her with the offer of ‘the performance of her life” in the theater of the real and he wants someone who feels for the Palestinians whom he can send in to infiltrate one of their networks and whose empathy for their cause will be real. Is he worried that she may switch sides? Yes, but it is a risk he is willing to take. Kurtz: “We want to offer you a job, Charlie, the biggest part you ever had in your life, the most demanding, the most difficult, surely the most dangerous, surely the most important and I don’t mean money. You can have money galore, it’s not a problem. Name your figure.“ Joseph, her handler and so much more warns her: “There is no fear like it. Your courage will be like money. You will spend and spend, and one night you will look in your pockets and you'll be bankrupt and that is when the real courage begins.” Charlie is not disuaded by the talk of fear and danger. She wants to do something exciting and important with her life. She takes the job, becomes the titular “little drummer girl,” and Kurtz and Joseph set her in motion in a brilliant and elaborate plan to catch the kingpin of recent Palestinian bombings. One of the most powerful aspects of this novel is Le Carre’s treatment of both sides with sympathy, so that we are, like Charlie herself, by no means convinced that the Palestinians are completely wrong, or that Kurtz’s team is entirely justified in their actions. Who are the good guys or the bad guys is a complex matter of perception, morals and politics.
