A murky exercise in the absurd, a soup without flavor but nutritious to the consumer if they can digest it, a labyrinth into a maze with a molasses plot you may scream at yet continue into the fog helpless, however this is Kafka what did the reader expect? Not a clear view certainly, nevertheless The Castle one of only three novels he tried to produce all incomplete though, the unusual, uniquely talented writer but unsure of his own worth never could believe in himself. As his multiple nervous breakdowns and broken engagements that history records. The book meanders like the main character "K"( why are authors lacking the energy to give a protagonist a credible name?) I digress . The narrative set in a little nameless village probably in Bohemia, Czech Republic dominated by the enigmatic Castle and surrounding territories during the 1920s as electric lights are rare here. Officials from the citadel rule still... for good or bad this is the unanswered question. They don't mingle much with villagers when living in the hamlet, hidden in inns writing reports of who knowns for what purpose the Count never seen, few invited to the castle . K a surveyor he says hired by them, though nobody says for what job. Meets and fall immediately in love, Frieda a barmaid, not pretty or intelligent, all the same sly and former mistress of Klamm the apparent power behind the throne, to be sure nothing is understood in the village, all are illusions the more K wanders lifting the veil the more the mystery thickens and frustrations increase, but bureaucracy governs . K can't leave or stay no money still women Amelia and sister Olga both poor are attracted to the impoverished man. He becomes a janitor, Frieda tries assisting but can she be trusted with Arthur and Jeremiah, K's helpers given to him to spy on him? The novel will frustrate, puzzle and never be solved since the author passed away unable to complete it for better or worse. Those people with stamina might like this, others the grind can not be forgotten and have an opposite reaction. I'm in the former side.
