when mallory brings a tuna casserole over to stacey & mrs. mcgill's house, stacey, claudia, & mallory unearth an old leather trunk in stacey's attic. it's taking up a lot of space & mrs. mcgill wants to throw it out, but mallory convinces the mcgills to let her have it. the only problem: it's locked & there's no key. after sitting with the trunk a few days, mallory finally lets the triplets break the lock after vanessa threatens to start speaking in rhyme. the trunk is full of old clothes from the turn of the twentieth century, which just fir vanessa. & in the bottom of the trunk, mallory discovers an old diary. the diary is written by 12-year-old sophie in the year 1894. she lived in stacey's house with her parents. mostly she writes about school & crushes, but in the spring, she announces that her mother is going to have another baby. but there are complications, & she'll have to be on bed rest throughout the pregnancy. the baby, a boy named edgar, is born in october, & sophie's mother dies two days later. sophie's maternal grandfather, mr. hickman, is furious with sophie's father, jared, for allowing sophie's mother to have another baby when she was too frail to survive giving birth again. he vengefully writes jared, sophie, & edgar out of his will--which is a big deal, because he's the richest man in town. the splot thickens when jared is convinced of stealing a portrait of sophie out of mr. hickman's house. sophie knows her father is innocent, but the townspeople side with mr. hickman & jared has trouble finding work & supporting the family. in the last entry, sophie vows to clear her father's name or her spirit will never rest. which leads to the obvious question: are the mcgills sharing their house with a restive adolescent ghost? mallory shares the story in the diary with the other sitters & they want to solve the mystery. kristy suggests that mr. hickman may be old man hickory, last seen in book #17 when cokie mason lured mary anne to his grave to try to scare her & make logan dump her. the babysitters all agree to do some investigating & see what they can learn. when stacey sits for charlotte, charlotte points out that it can be helpful to try to look beyond the obvious. mallory has a steady tutoring gig helping buddy barrett with his reading problems. she's gotten him excited about reading by letting him read & make comic books, & when he shows an interest in mysteries, she shows him sophie's diary. he investigates the contents of the trunk & gets his hand stuck in a hidden compartment containing mr. hickman's confession: after sophie died, he felt too sad looking at her portrait, so he hired someone to paint over it. when his friends noticed sophie's portrait was gone, he allowed them to believe jared had stolen it. buddy suggests that the portrait may still be in stacey's attic. they run over to look around, & find a painting of boats where some of the paint is chipped & an image of a bejeweled finger is peeking through. mrs. mcgill agrees to take it to an art restorer & see if it's the painting of sophie. conclusion: it's sophie's portrait. the babysitters & buddy have cleared jared's name & sophie's ghost can rest easy. mrs. mcgill hangs the portrait over the hearth. mallory's inventive tutoring techniques have inspired a love of reading in buddy. he is moved into a higher reading skills group & no longer dreads school. everyone lives happily ever after. i still have a soft spot for mallory books, & this one has the added bonus of a mystery diary, a secret trunk full of historical artifacts, & a dude named jared (my boyfriend's name). what's not to love?
