this probably isn't really a two-star book, but i am marking it down due to the conceit of the premise: stacey is living on the upper west side of new york city with her parents. they live in a fancy apartment building with a doorman. a homeless woman lives on the street outside their building. her name is judy. sometimes she's friendly & nice & calls stacey "missy" (stacey says this like it's a nice thing, but it makes my skin scrawl that this 40-something homeless woman would use a term of respect like that to refer to a spoiled 13-year-old). other times, she doesn't seem to recognize anyone & screams & insults people. i think the implication is that maybe she is schizophrenic. the adults in stacey's building decide to have a meeting to discuss the "homeless situation" & figure out "how to help". WTF? classic ann m. martin: acknowledge a social issue like homelessness & then give it the most worthless possible band-aid treatment. anyway, the adults all ask stacey to babysit their kids while they're at this very important meeting. she can't possibly watch all the kids on her own...so she gets permission from her parents to invite the BSC to visit & help take care of the kids. & all of their parents okay it (except for the pikes & the ramseys, because mal & jessi are only eleven...which doesn't explain new york, new york! , super special #8, but...sure). stacey's mistake was that she did not foresee that maybe having all of her friends visit new york wasn't a great idea. mary anne is obsessed with new york & embarrasses stacey by constantly spouting off guide book factoids like how many acres are in central park & shit. kristy is kind of a dumbass tourist who does things like whip her wallet out on the street with no thought of being mugged, & mispronouncing "filet mignon" in a restaurant (not a fancy restaurant though--it's just the hard rock cafe, what's the problem?). claudia brought too many suitcases, as usual, & doesn't get along with laine. apparently both laine & claudia are jealous of the other's friendship with stacey & all they do is snipe at each other. & dawn is terrified of the big, bad city & seems to be convinced that she's about the be besieged by murderers, muggers, cockroaches, & CHUDs every time she turns around. first, the babysitters get kind of lost in grand central station & are late meeting stacey. then they have to take a cab back to stacey's apartment to drop off claudia's nine million bags. then kristy has her "filet mignon" incident, & the wallet thing, & mary anne starts embarrassing stacey. dawn acts scared of everything. then they go to bloomingdale's (which stacey actually refers to as "bloomie's"--how undignified) & mary anne is collared by security for stealing an eye shadow sample. which is really weird because i don't think richard really lets mary anne wear make-up yet. but anyway. they go back to stacey's house to get ready for the party that mr. & mrs. mcgill charitably allowed stacey to throw. laine comes over to help & this is when she & claudia start getting into it. when the party starts, kristy meets a boy she likes & then claudia cuts in & hurts kristy's feelings (as if kristy thomas wouldn't cut right back in if she was that invested in the dude). mary anne bores stacey's sophisticated new york friends by spouting trivia at them, but wins them over by making fun of dawn & her phobias. stacey hulks out on everyone & it's a big mess. the next day, they start their babysitting job. they are watching ten kids, & the parents have provided money for entertainment & food. the girls take the kids to the museum of natural history, which is walking distance from stacey's building. they lose one of the littlest kids when he goes back to see the brontosaurus (not a real dinosaur--if i recall, the "bronto" skeleton was renamed a brachiosaurus by the time i was at the museum in 2004). mary anne finds him again & all is well. they have lunch at the museum cafeteria, which always makes me think of that episode of "friends" where ross gets joey a job as a tour guide at the museum, but won't eat lunch with him until joey leads everyone in a confessional trust exercise. sadly, nothing like that happens in this book. next they hit central park, which is right across the street. they ride the carousel & see the alice in wonderland statue & no one gets mugged, murdered, lost, or eaten by wolverines. they have snacks & buy balloons & the baysitters start having a really nice time together. they decide to stay together for the kids. or...they make up. they take the kids home, & laine calls to invite the babysitters to a broadway play. her dad is a big-time broadway producer who gets comped free tickets all the time & can have a limo pick them up. the babysitters are all over it, claudia agrees to give laine a chance, & they all have a great time. the play involves actors on roller skates. what? stacey invites laine to spend the night again, but laine says stacey should enjoy her quality time with the BSC. so stacey does, everyone is happy, the end. oh, & the grown-ups get a church to help them start a soup kitchen to help out the homeless. fab.u.lous. a CHUD really would have spiced this book up a little.
