4.5 stars rounded up to 5.00 - this is my 4th Iris Murdoch and my favorite so far. I also gave "The Sea, the Sea" 4.5 stars so "The Good Apprentice" deserves to be up a little higher on the scale. This book has left me emotionally drained. I found myself reading it compulsively and when I wasn't reading, I was thinking about it all the time! As expected in an Iris Murdoch novel, we find the usual large cast of mad hatters, but whereas we would normally find them ALL to be self-serving, egotistical, shameless, or just demented, in "The Good Apprentice" we not only find a fair share of those, but also a few others who are remorseful (Edward), unselfish and moral (Stuart), forgiving (Brownie). There are as many good and empathetic people here as there are destructive, selfish and awful people. There were some truly startling scenes here that made me sit up straight in my easy chair. Both scenes with Mrs Quaid were stupendous; the seance and later the dream in front of the TV. The entire middle section at Seegard was amazing, mysterious, and unlike any scenes in Murdoch's other books I have read. I sped through that section, enthralled. All the scenes with Brownie were heavily charged with strong emotion. One can't summarize an Iris Murdoch novel. It's not possible. The plots are too convoluted, the characters too many. What is incredible is how intricately connected they all are, but not confusing! How did she manage it?! At the end of the book, Edward himself summarizes the whole thing up pretty well: "In a way it's all a muddle starting off with an accident: my breakdown, drugs, telepathy, my father's illness, cloistered neurotic women, people arriving unexpectedly, all sorts of things which happened by pure chance. At so many points anything being otherwise could have made everything be otherwise. In another way it's a whole complex thing, internally connected, like a dark globe, a dark world, as if we were all parts of a single drama, living inside a work of art. Perhaps important things in life are always like that, so that you can think of them both ways."
