Even though I have already read and reviewed The Surgeon and The Apprentice, Tess' previous books in the series, I still feel that it's such a perkiness of mine to review any book written by this genious (I emphasize: genious!). Gerritsen, one more time, now through The Sinner, made me hook into her writing until the end, NOT letting me to put it down, despite a few flaws I found that I dare myself to point again. A crime envolving two nuns, in the circuntances presented by Jane and Maura therewith the investigation of the case, conduces us to initially match the name of the book to the probable "nickname" that could characterize one of the victims. However, two more crimes — a woman that can't be identified plus a massacre in a village in India years before — come to the surface and probably discard any previously settled teory by the readers about the ending of the story. Also, it's disclosed that the three crimes are, at last, all connected. During several pages of the book, we're shown Maure Isles' life in and out of the morgue more throughly. It's soon noticed that the focus is aimed at introducing the patologist as a protagonist of the series — just like the policialwoman-detective Jane Rizzoli is in the previous book, The Apprentice. This point of introducing one more protagonist into the series can turn it into a tiring reading at certain moments. Besides, can shadow the awesomeness the ending could have had — knowing the talent of Tess Gerritsen as a writer — and conduce the readers not to enjoy the book, but to even let them a little disappointed. Nothing of this, though, mean that being acquainted more deeply with the character has turned The Sinner into a wearisome book. On the contrary: I've met a less cold and "self-loved" Jane Rizzoli, intimately braver to relieve everything, accepting her mistakes and wills, and to push off all the fear and weakness she denied to have. I've also met a new friend, Maura, who shows to be a better positive person, with a big heart, but not allowed to feel completely happy, considering her familiar, relationships problems. We get to, soon, relate ourselves to Maura and Jane, two protagonists that we, certainly, will miss once we have to say goodbye.
