Initial Thoughts It's been a while since I've read a Koontz book. To be honest, I've got a very up and down relationship with the guy. When he's good, he's very good. But he's the kind of author who goes for quantity over quality and for every banger (Intensity, Phantoms, Twilight Eyes, Night Chills, Odd Thomas) there's usually a stinker to go with it (Face of Fear, Shattered, Tick Tock). Ok, maybe "stinker" is going too far. But let's just say the type of books that just don't really add anything to your life. Formulaic and pedestrian. You get the picture. But based on just how good those top titles are, I keep coming back to the well. And let's just hope this time it's not cometely dry with the supernatural horror, Dragon Tears. This one has appeared in a few Dean Koontz top tens on YouTube. So I'm expecting it to be good. It's from the time in his career when he didn't have hair. So that usually guarantees it's going to be fairly decent. The less hair, the better the book or so the saying goes. The Story Dragon Tears revolves around two cops, Harry Lyons and Connie Gulliver , and kicks off like most Koontz books do. With some intense action as they chase down an active shooter. This is an author who firmly believes in hooking the reader from the start and it's a great opening. They then encounter a homeless man, who isn't your standard hobo. This guy is huge, ominous and strangely terrifying. Something far more menacing than the boring old gunman. And thats before he tells Harry "ticktock ticktock...you'll be dead in sixteen hours. " After that when the supernatural shit completely hits the fan for our two heroes. A huge, metaphorical hole is about to open up in front of them and it's looking like its going to swallow them up. Time is ticking for the pair and the race is on to survive. Let's go! The Writing This is Koontz writing super natural horror, which was more his flavour in the 90s. Normally I'd be all over this. But it's far from his best writing. Certainly nowhere near the likes of Intensity, Phantoms or Twilight Eyes. There's a hell of a lot of explanation and Koontz defining stuff that I didn't think was really necessary and sometimes in descends into repetition. Not good! The premise was certainly intriguing. But for me the story seemed to get bogged down in the middle and lost its pace. Strange for a Koontz book as they're usually rapid. Don't get me wrong, there were some intense scenes of blood thirsty horror. But what came between them is nowhere near the best from this author. So slightly disappointing. The Characters Koontz is not an author that's known for his characters. The only time he's really succeeded, in my opinion (although I haven't read anywhere near all his work), is Odd Thomas . Dragon Tears is unfortunately no exception. All of the characters felt a touch one dimensional to me. Harry isn't really the most likeable protagonist and neither is Connie, although she did have potential. Harry is very orderly and believes in following the law, while Connie Gulliver is much more laid back and chaotic in nature. They're two cops working together who are pretty much complete opposites. Speaking from experience this doesn't really work and the chemistry between them is a bit forced. Then there's Janet and her son who are homeless and living in their car. There was a number of chapters that focused on them but I honestly can't remember any of them. They just didn't add anything to the story. To say I didn't really connect with any of the characters is putting it mildly. A lot of the dialogue felt a bit odd and clunky and the banter between the two main characters got a bit boring if I'm being honest. Nothing like the stuff that used to go on while I was at work until the powers that be put a stop to it all. I've got to say the villain, Brian (what a name by the way), is definitely sinister and has a certain amount of intrigue. He's a guy with a full on God complex, only with the powers to back it up. But he just wasn't explored to the fullest. I'm not going to lie though, all the best parts featured him. And I am still not sure how I feel about a dog as a partial narrator. Wait a second, that's a lie. They really annoyed me. Did it add anything to the book other than satisfying Koontz's obsession with dogs? Absolutely not. His presence was necessary, but his point of view certainly wasn't. Just quit it with the dogs Deano. Final Thoughts Let's start with the ending. Rushed and anticlimactic is what I would say. The authors attempt to build suspense fell completely flat for me. An average end to an average book. And that's me being generous. So Dragon Tears is another one that joins the pile of Koontz books that really did not do it for me. It had a lot of potential but in the end was barely OK. There were parts I really enjoyed though. But certainly not not enough. Definitely not Koontz at his finest. Bizarre that it featured in all those top tens on YouTube . It's certainly not getting into mine. Although I might have only read ten of his books. In which case it's in last place at number ten. On the plus side it did not require a great deal of brain power and was a pretty quick read. But it has nothing to do with dragons, so if that's the reason you were wanting to pick this up then better think again. Has this put me off reading more by this author. Potentially yeah. But I'll probably end up going back to him when I forget about this one and remember those good ones. You've got to look at the positives. Sorry there's just not many in this review! Thanks for reading and...cheers!
