AWARDS: Winner of the National Book Award, 1979. "To call Going After Cacciato a novel about war is like calling Moby-Dick a novel about whales," - New York Times. I have a hard time reading war stories or watching war movies and not feeling angry or upset afterward. There are a couple exceptions. Like Terrence Malick's, 'The Thin Red Line.' Or Tim O'Brien's stories. War stories that are about death and horrific violence, but also about life, about falling in love, and fucking, and relationships, and the people that came before you, and the people that will come after you, and things that we are ashamed of, and things that are vulgar, and things that you understand spiritually.... One monstrous, medly. Terrible and beautiful. An excerpt from, 'Going After Cacciato.' [CONTEXT: It's 1968, the thick of the U.S.-Vietnam Conflict. The protagonist, PFC Paul Berlin, and a group of new recruits have just arrived in Vietnam to begin their tour of duty.]: "In the morning the fifty new men were marched to a wooden set of bleachers facing the sea. A small, sad-faced corporal in a black cadre helmet waited until they settled down, looking at the recruits as if searching for a lost friend in a crowd. Then the corporal sat down in the sand. He turned away and gazed out to sea. He did not speak. Time passed slowly, ten minutes, twenty, but still the sad-faced corporal did not turn or nod or speak. He simply gazed out at the blue sea. Everything was clean. The sea was clean, and the sand and the wind. They sat in the bleachers for a full hour. Then at last the corporal sighed and stood up. He checked his wristwatch. And again he searched the rows of new faces. 'All right,' he said softly. 'That completes your first lecture on how to survive this shit. I hope you paid attention.' During the days they simulated search and destroy missions in a friendly little village just outside [Chu Lai].... PFC Paul Berlin, who wanted to live, took the exercises seriously. 'You VC?' he demanded of a little girl with braids. 'You dirty VC?' The girl smiled. 'Shit, man,' she said gently. 'You shittin me?'"
