I enjoyed this book and James Lee Burke 's writing style is superb. I have come across few authors who have the ability to describe New Orleans or Louisiana and leave you feeling like you are there. His characters are rich and colorful. To me though this story was not quite as good as earlier books. As usual there are several subplots but this time they did not seem to get tied up and the ending left things unexplained and unanswered. The story opens when Dave bumps into Sonny Boy Marsallus in New Orleans. Sonny was a gambler. He would also lend money to prostitutes who wanted to leave the life. This did not sit well with the Giacano family and Sonny fled to El Salvador and Guatemala where he became a mercenary and also worked for the DEA. Now he is back. Sonny gives Dave a notebook and asks him to hold it. If nothing happens to him Dave can mail it to him. He tells Dave he gave a Xerox copy to a lady friend. Dave agrees to hold it for one week. When Dave returns to New Iberia, Bertha Fontenot asks Dave for help. The Fontenot's, descendants of sharecroppers, have lived on Bertrand property for as long as anyone can remember. She claims the property they live on was given to them 95 years ago. Now Moleen Bertrand, heir of the plantation where that property lies, wants to evict them. There are rumors that Jean Lafitte buried gold. At the same time Dave and another New Iberia police detective, Helen Soileau, are investigating the murder of Della Landry. She was the girlfriend of Sonny Boy Marsallus. Is her murder related to the notebook Sonny gave Dave to hold? It is sometimes difficult to keep track of all the characters. Who is good? Who is bad? Of course there are the usual organized crime figures. But otherwise it seems to be a story about race and class. And about mercenaries and their sins in Vietnam and Central America. About the role of the government and the DEA. There seemed to be too many things going on and the ending left some things unexplained and unanswered but maybe sometimes that is how it is in reality. Sometimes maybe there isn't always an answer or explanation. Burke is still a master storyteller and I look forward to reading more of his work.
