I'll start by saying this is a pretty good story. As with most of this series, it's a bit light on the history, which i missed. Feather has a real talent for weaving historical fact in with a subtle hand, so that you gain knowledge of the period even while you're reading a fun story, but again, this was more of a straightforward Georgian romance. Sylvester Gilbraith has inherited an earldom from a distant relative, a member of a branch of the family that has been at odds with his (bit fuzzy here; if the reasons for the feud are ever explained, I sped-read right past it. The feud is important to the story in that it's one of the obstacles to the romance, but it seemed pretty silly to me). The terms of the previous earl's will give Sylvester the title and entailed estates, but the wealth, which is not entailed, is to go to the earl's granddaughters unless, within a month of the reading of the will, Sylvester can persuade one of the girls to marry him. One of the girls is betrothed, and the other is a child, leaving two, the shy and very sensitive Clarissa and the hoyden Theodora (Theo). You can guess who he picks. And how does he go about wooing the young, defiant, determined not to marry Theo? Well, start with the fact that before he knows who she is, thinking she's a gypsy, he pretty much tries to force his attentions on her. I won't call it seduction; he grabs her and mauls her while she's saying no. She does respond to his kiss, but that doesn't make it better. Somehow, though, Theo never thinks about the implications of that once she realizes who he is and what he wants. I'd have expected her to take exception to a man coming to woo a bride stopping along the way to ravish a local gypsy. Doesn't say a lot for what she might expect in terms of fidelity. Anyway, once he does figure out who she is, and even after he understands that some of her intransigence is out of grief for the loss of her father and grandfather and resentment of him as a usurper, he basically runs roughshod over her and continues to force his affections on her until he wears her down. It's one of those icky romance novel things where she says no, he holds her down and has his way until her body responds, and then it's all good. I always end up at the end of these scenes really disgusted with him and not too impressed with her. Just once I'd like to see the heroine resist until he has to respect her. Instead, of course, he learns that anytime he does her wrong all he has to do is ravish her and she'll turn up sweet. Geck. I'm not holding this against Feather, though. It's such a standard part of the genre that it's almost required. I am just disappointed that a writer as gifted as she is couldn't find a better way to play out the battle of the sexes. So just about the time the relationship begins to head in a better direction (though he is one of those dictatorial men who is now going to start telling her how to dress and what she can and cannot do--and again Theo doesn't put up the kind of fight I thought she should), there are more complications. Seems Sylvester has an enemy from his service days and the man is quietly trying to kill him. So we have a pretty good thriller woven into the relationship story. I get bored with romances that are just about the romance, so this is another reason I like Feather. A good addition to the series, for all the peeves it trod upon.
