This was exactly my kind of book; the history of something I knew a little bit about where you end up finding it is even more interesting than you thought. I saw the film Mutiny on the Bounty in my early teens and it must have had an effect on me – whether it was the notion of rebellion, of living a simple life on an idyllic island or just the sight of a windswept young Mel Gibson I can’t say, but I have vivid memories of scenes from the film. Anthony Hopkins as Captain Bligh washing up on English shores in a little row boat and the Tahitian women cutting their heads with shells as they grieve the Bounty’s departure taking their lovers away from them being just two. Although these events did indeed happen, the film glosses over the mundanity that underpins the whole series of extraordinary events. Firstly that the Bounty, far from being some magnificent ship was in fact a small, sparsely crewed boat that the admiralty had little time for being as it was something of a vanity mission for the wealthy botanist Joseph Banks, creator of London’s Kew Gardens. The handsome, swashbuckling mutineers were actually on a voyage to Tahiti to collect 500 cuttings of the breadfruit plant to bring back and cultivate in the colonies as a cheaper alternative to plantain. The slightly ridiculous purpose of the voyage meant that Bligh was set to captain a voyage without the usual security and, as the 500 cuttings would take up most of his sleeping quarters, he slept with his door open to avoid claustrophobia. Both factors that made an fleeting thought of mutiny seem easily achievable. The true reason for Christian’s actions are never fully known (he died before he was discovered on Pitcairn) there are many insinuations that he was suffering some form of depression. There are numerous reports of him claiming to be in hell and that he had been in hell for some weeks prior to the mutiny, but as with the voyage itself the catalyst was laughably mundane. Men died, were hung, set adrift in the expectation of their perishing all over a stolen coconut. When Alexander states it baldly towards the end of the book , having read all the dramatic repercussions I had to laugh out loud, “Remarkably, for all the energy invested in these proceedings, nothing emerged to suggest that the direct cause of Christian’s breakdown was anything more than the famous theft of coconuts. ‘Damn your blood, you have stolen my cocoa nuts,’ Bligh had said, accosting Christian when the theft was perceived’. There are many unintentionally funny moments, including the ship that was sent to bring back the Bounty shipwrecking, and the description of all these European ships chasing each other and stopping off at various South Sea islands to the amusement of the islanders has echoes of the silent era’s Keystone Cops chases. In fact much of it sounds jolly japes, there is a description of an event that is worthy of a 1970s sit com episode where the recovery crew are harassed by the locals to the extent that the captain’s servant was stripped naked by an acquisitive crowd and forced to cover himself with his one remaining shoe. Of course the humorous moments offset the descriptions of how brutally tough both physically and mentally long voyages were, lashes doled out for minor infractions, living away from home in cramped conditions for up to two years. Through the subsequent trial, Alexander lays bare the universally known truth that the rich can get away with anything and prosper (one of Christian’s keenest allies got off by knowing the right people and being able to afford the right advocate and went on to be a successful naval captain himself) and that today’s news is tomorrow’s chip paper (Bligh returned a hero but faded into obscurity a couple of years later. Alexander has written an engaging, entertaining and enlightening account of an event we have all heard of in a lively intelligent way. I have no knowledge of sailing or ships and very little interest (I’m not overly keen on seascapes in art) but she is light on jargon and explains clearly any technical descriptions she uses. A brilliant book. So good in fact, my sister bought a copy the same day I told her about it!
