Learning how to small talk is probably one of the most important skills that everyone overlooks. This is something that should be taught in schools but won't because their too worried about standardized testing all the time. If you were to recount the number of times you've been to a social event and found the other person to be quite rude in their social and conversation skills then you are not alone. Debra Fine explains in this little book of hers that learning how to small talk with others can open doors into other worlds that might never have been possible before because you took the time to listen and relate to what the other person was saying. These are not simple or easy skills to learn because if they were, everyone would be jumping at attending social functions every night. But how often do you find your nights filled with nothing to do at home? People who learn the skills in this book and take it to the next level realize the world of opportunities that are out there every night. Their nights become filled with event functions and networking groups that expand their inner social circle. There is something else that changes when you learn the fine art of small talk and that is, you bring in more job prospects into your life. If you look at the number of people who have mastered the skills taught in this book, they are the ones you meet at these social functions who show a genuine interest in what you have to say but not only that they make your stories and experiences something they can relate to that makes you want to talk with that person more. There is no secret in what they are doing to you, they have simply learned the art of active listening and relating. Small talk starts off with all the things your parents taught you as a kid that has done damage to your understanding of what it means to become a social person. Parents need to stop telling their kids to not talk to strangers because that is the first bad habit that kids pick up and take with them into adulthood. If you have been told not to talk to strangers and then one day you graduate from high school and then told to go talk to strangers, what happens? Confusion happens. You were never taught the skills of how to do that and now you are told you have to be amazing in interviews and social events? Kids naturally want to talk with anyone who will listen to them and if you learn to cultivate those skills instead of killing them, then your kid will grow up to be quite the people person that everyone wants to be connected to. The remaining part of the book goes into different ways of starting a simple conversation with various questions and comments you can memorize to help you get started. The book also covers different situations you will be required to talk in, weddings, company events, parties, singles events, and so on. Learning to speak with others shouldn't be hard, especially if you just take the time to listen to what other people have to say instead of worrying about what you plan to say next. If you want to get better at talking with people, you have to get over your fear of talking to strangers, so the next time you are on the bus, in an elevator, or at a public event, smile and say hi to anyone that looks at you. You will be surprised at how just acknowledging another person can transform that individual into someone that is just looking to be validated and wanting someone else to talk with. But always keep in mind that you want to meet new people as well and not take up others time, so mingle, talk, mingle and talk some more. You might be surprised at the new opportunities that open up in your life from just that simple act of acknowledging someone else's existence.
