This is an intergenerational family saga, which reminded me that I ought to find and read other similar books because it's a concept that I seem to enjoy. Unfortunately, I've also been burned by concepts I enjoy many times as well. Although this is a fix-up novel, which means much of the content of the book is from previously published short fiction, in this case I didn't hold that against it at all. I usually do. I've previously read of one the stories before, The Pardoner's Tale, and it was interesting to see how it differed. Sometimes it's helpful to have proper expectations before engaging with a work. I believe this is one of those times. A person can start something and expect to know where the story is heading based on what they've previously experienced and stake their projected enjoyment on that only to be disappointed when the work takes a different path. There's an alien invasion, which is the plot for the entire book, but first and foremost this is a family saga. This isn't a story about joy, victory, or heroism. That by itself may be too off-putting for many. If you require the "why" of anything to be answered, then you'll be severely frustrated. The considerable amount of sex, the long and frequent descriptions of the bodies of various women, and the utter contempt that several of the men hold for women, will be deal breakers for others. There are many viewpoints and no single character is the protagonist. This was a nice change of pace and I really should read more books that don't have any characters in a dominant narrative role. There are a lot of characters presented, but most of them only have minor roles, so it isn't that important to keep track of them. The beginning was slow going, the entire first part really, but eventually I couldn't put it down and was completely engrossed. If you don't find yourself interested in the family and others, then it'll probably be a slow read from beginning to end for you. This book was an unusual case in that most of the time I was reading I was considering how I ought to rate it and what sort of statement that would make. I remain conflicted, but I've rated this in terms of personal enjoyment. Take from that what you will as I'm uninterested in defending the aforementioned potential concerns about the content. Many readers seem to have strongly disliked the ending for various reasons, which is understandable. The ending is entirely thematically appropriate for the book, but that's the problem in of itself. What the ending says about the book will be abhorrent and/or confusing to many readers. I've rated this 5/5, but when considering what seems to be its reception, that may be mostly because of my personal biases and interests. This is not intended to be an endorsement for others to read this. As noted above, I've included the preceding disclaimer I believe it can be important to have realistic expectations.
