Here's the thing about Cereus Blooms at Night : it is almost achingly transparently a first novel. Metaphors of all kinds announce themselves again and again and again. The social points are stated kind of obviously (though they are themselves sensitive and perceptive points). The plot, although amorphous, is firmly rooted in one event - but that event is not firmly rooted in anything; rather it happens because it needs to happen in order to allow the rest of the book to happen. (Which, by the way, is fine: but if you're going to use that, you need to leave more mystery behind it, instead of explaining everything, but that one thing on which the entire novel hinges. We only care about parts of a book if a writer directs our attention to them. Don't sabotage willing suspension of disbelief!) I've no idea if Shani Mootoo's writing has improved: this is the only novel of hers I've read, and it's also the most buzzed (my copy has a complimentary blurb from the NYT Book Review), and the only one with a Wikipedia page. But! But! There's a lot to love about Cereus Blooms at Night , starting with the title. Which is amazing. A++ title there. Almost worth reading this book for the title alone, right? It's weirdly dense, too, although it's less than 300 pages long and the writing doesn't have a lot of frills; Mootoo's style is lush, but not baroque or self-referential - it's not particularly difficult to read, and actually is written in a fairly straightforward way. (And I'm as desensitized to sex and violence as you can get, basically, so it wasn't that either.) I don't know how the book can be written in a way both lush and streamlined, but the result is that it doesn't push you forward as you read. It was a little disorienting. What wasn't disorienting was the setup. You know as soon as Tyler tells you "this isn't my story, I'm hardly in it, actually" that Tyler's story is going to squirm to the front every chance it gets. That's totally fine with me, I liked the humanity and humor of that touch, and I liked Tyler's love story a lot. In addition, the basic facts are set out almost as soon as the novel starts. This isn't a mystery, even in a Dickensian way. I like what the novel says, but I wish it were better at saying it. There are a lot of first novel problems (in this instance, I don't mean the framing device, although normally I hate the back and forth in time organization), but there's also a . . . lightness, a sense of vigor probably unique to a first novel that I admire. Cereus Blooms at Night is good, but it could have been so much better.
