Time to get stoned! This novel can put you in a catatonic torpor, a drug-induced haze near the point where you are about to overdose and die. First person narrative, here is someone named Ryu, not yet twenty, with his equally-young male and female buddies. Ryu is telling a story. You hear him, but do not really understand the story being told. The images will distract you and catch your full attention. First there's this cockroach on some unwashed dishes. Then it is squashed. See the jelly-like substance that spurts from its violated body. And then the old, cut pineapple, its rancid odor; the blood on needles, heroin, hashish, mescaline, Nibrole pills dissolved in gin, Philopon, shooting up, vomit, spittle, saliva, unwashed smelly bodies, rock music, The Doors, Rolling Stones, Mal Waldron, James Brown, Billy Holiday, mouldy soup, rotten bean curd, dirty rooms, leftover roast chicken gone completely bad, old radio, black American studs with huge dicks, Japanese girls with small pussies, sex orgies-- "Pressing her chin on the table, breathin hard, Moko attacked a crab like a starving child. Then one of the blacks stuck his shaft in front of her, and she took that in her mouth too. Stroking it with her tongue, she pushed it aside and turned again to the crab. The red shell crunched between her teeth, she pulled out the white meat with her hands. Piling it with pink mayonnaise from a plate, she put it on her tongue, the mayonnaise dribbling onto her chest. The odor of crab flowed through the room. On the bed, Reiko was still howling. Durham pushed up into Moko from behind. Her butt jiggled, she held onto the crab, her face twisted, she tried to drink some wine but with the rocking of her body it went into her nose and she choked, tears in her eyes. Seeing that, Kei laughed loudly. James Brown began to sing...." On to the glorious ending, a dead moth, a crazed Ryu ingesting insects, contemplates on a dead moth, sees a huge black bird, hallucinates, stabs his arm with a broken glass, bleeds and bleeds until he becomes "a boundless blue, almost transparent." He survives, but only to write this novel.
