I "inter-library loaned" this to read "God" by Zamyatin and knock it off my list. As it turned out, a few more things here were on my list, I'd read and reviewed - on Goodreads - a few things already, and there were a few authors I wouldn't miss a chance at reading, so I ended up reading about half the book, but my review only covers those stories. Most of these are pretty short, so reading this was much like my experience reading Short Shorts (there were even a few stories shared between the two). As always, since I read a lot of genre short fiction, it's always bracing to read a bunch of mostly non-genre, "Lit" short fiction (although there were a few genre pieces here). As usual, weakest to strongest. "A Psychological Shipwreck" by Ambrose Bierce - a man takes a sea voyage and meets a young woman he becomes interested in, only for their ship to sink - at which point he awakens to find the whole thing merely a psychic projection or something. Not great. "Germans At Meat" by Katherine Mansfield - over a meal, a visiting Englishwoman is interrogated by Germans about English eating habits, while some of the questions seem to veil far larger topics of politics and potential war. Hmmm - not sure I totally grasped this, although it was well written. "A Wicked Boy" by Anton Chekhov - a boy blackmails his older sister and her suitor over their romantic dalliances, until the boy proposes to the girl, upon which they can take a little revenge on their tormentor. A cute trifle. "Moonlight Sonata" by Alexander Woollcott - droll little macabre piece in which a man, visiting a friend's estate and finding him absent, spends the night only to spy a ghost near his door, quietly embroidering. But as it turns out, it isn't a ghost and that isn't what it is doing. I upgraded this a bit on the reread but not by much - I appreciated its drollness a bit more now, and its attempt to sell the story as true, but still it seems a bit of macabre slumming. Better stories: "The Hollow of Three Hills" by Nathaniel Hawthorne - is a classic, briefly sketching a scene in which a troubled young woman asks a powerful old lady to conjure some sounds for her. The ending is amazingly dark and mean-spirited, and a specific detail could be read a few ways. "The Boy Who Drew Cats" by Lafcadio Hearn - is one of Hearn's Japanese folk sketches, here involving an artistic boy who is thrown out as a priest's acolyte because he has a compulsion to sketch cats, and what happens when he shelters in an abandoned temple inhabited by a goblin. A light and easy sketch, like much Hearn. "The Shepherd's Daughter" by William Saroyan - the author hears from his grandmother that he should know a craft, and have the ability to make something physical and not just be a writer. To illustrate her point, she tells a fable about the King Of Persia's son who is forced by his bride-to-be to learn a craft, which later saves his life. Nice. "An Attempt At Reform" by August Strindberg - has a modern married couple, unhappy with cultural roles of husband and wife, live in a thoroughly modern and equal way - until pregnancy threatens their perfect system, but then doesn't. Interesting. "God" by Yevgeny Zamyatin - A poor postman is seen as like unto God by a little cockroach that lives behind his stove - but even God has problems. A little bit of absurd satire. Solidly good stories: "I See You Never" by Ray Bradbury - a woman who runs a boarding house loses her best tenant, Mr. Ramirez, who has been there for years, because he is going to be deported back to Mexico. A touching, human story - sadly prescient. "The Upturned Face" by Stephen Crane - soldiers, under fire, hurry at digging a grave and burying a fallen comrade. A fine piece of "slice of time" writing. "The Riddle" by Walter de la Mare - in which seven children come to visit their Grandma in the countryside and are given free reign of the house except from being warned away from the oak chest in the upstairs guest room. But kids being kids... this is a good, spooky little fable - sure to set young minds working and pleasantly enigmatic for us oldsters. "The Ghosts" by Lord Dunsany - a man stays in a haunted room to disprove the existence of ghosts, and has a revelation about sin, rationality and spirit's exact nature. Nicely done - excellent scene setting up front, compact language, and some powerful dread. "The Exact Science Of Matrimony" by O. Henry - two con-men work up a valid "marriage by mail" scam, but require a real woman to fulfill a role so as to make the whole thing seem legitimate, despite one's trepidation about involving women in the scheme. But it all works out, thanks to some thinking ahead. "Charles" by Shirley Jackson - a young boy dutifully reports about the disruptive actions of another boy at school. Cute. "The Beggarwoman Of Locarno" by Heinrich von Kleist - a good old, Gothic style story of a haunting. Short and sweet. Still on the good tip: "Born Of Man And Woman" by Richard Matheson - Quite a calling card from a new writer, as it takes a classic genre scenario (scientist creates life) and upends it, telling the story from the POV of the monstrous *thing* in the basement and reveals what it thinks and feels about its parents. A horror/sci-fi gem. "The Ant And The Grasshopper" by W. Somerset Maugham - our narrator tells of his redoubtable, steadfast friend George Ramsey, who suffers with a dissolute black-sheep brother Tom who has led an irresponsible life and is constantly borrowing money. George looks forward to his retirement, and seeing old age undo Tom, but fate has one last twist to play in its hand of cards. Funny, a trifle but entertaining. "The Fiddler" by Herman Melville - a poet seethes about his bad reviews before being invited along on a night on the town by his friend, accompanied by another man who seems to take pure and simple delight in everything. Our poet has a rather cynical reading of how mundane the man must be, to maintain such a breezy and admirable attitude toward life, before the friend informs him of the individual's background. Nice. "The Standard Of Living" by Dorothy Parker - two secretaries, best friends, spend their work breaks playing a game based on the idea of inheriting a million dollars. But upon admiring a string of pearls in a window, and being driven to discover its actual price, they find they need to modify their game slightly. A cute little trifle. And even more solid stories: "Three Letters...and a Footnote" by Horacio Quiroga - A female correspondent outlines the repeated (and mechanically precise) attempts by many men to get her attention (and by extension, any attractive woman's) on the streetcar, and how she repulses these same advances. The story even leaves a little space at the end for a trace of coquetry. "Reginald's Choir Treat" by Saki - young Reginald, a sardonic youth, takes advantage of an attempt to advance his spiritual growth (by leading a choir practice) to instead play a rather ribald and bachnallian joke on the town. Droll and enjoyable work from Saki. "Luck" by Mark Twain - a priest, whose word can be trusted, relates how an amiable and much lauded war hero is actually an ignorant fool. Cute in that it's an early example of the concept of "failing upward." Meanwhile, "The Doctor's Heroism" by Villiers de L'Isle-Adam - is a blackly comic piece in which a doctor dismissively suggests a unlikely treatment to a dying rich man, only to have the man turn up hale and healthy 6 months later and then, only for the doctor to kill him himself, to discover how such a ridiculous cure could possible have worked - as the health of potential clients is more important than the life of a current one . Black humor from the man who invented the conté cruel. There were a few truly outstanding stories as well: "The Jewels Of M. Lantin" by Guy de Maupassant - a middle class man makes a wise marriage to a woman who fulfills his every desire. She has only two vices - a taste for audacious costume jewelry and a thirst for seeing plays. But upon her untimely death, the husband uncovers a surprise. Quite good - but then it's Maupassant so how could it be otherwise? - engagingly told, more like a fable whose lesson we must puzzle out. "The Lost Soul" by Ben Hecht - an amnesiac awakens in prison, convinced a mistake has been made and that efforts should be undertaken to prove his identity - but there is no mistake. A grim and well-written little conté cruel. "The Oval Portrait" by Edgar Allan Poe - a man and his valet shelter in an abandoned chateau in the Apennines, a bedchamber of which divulges a portrait of a rare beauty, whose fate a small book explains the artist worked obsessively at capturing the image of the girl, while the model herself declined in health, with her death culminating with the final stroke of the work . This short piece is an example of why Poe was taken up as a hero by the Decadent movement - the linking of art and death, image and reality, and morbidity. It's a nice little cameo (barely even a story). I also found the textual shift - from visually observing the painting to reading the explanation of its origins - to be oddly modern. Also excellent: "The Chaser" by John Collier - a man wants to buy a foolproof love potion, whose purchase almost certainly assures another, more dire, acquisition in the future. A Collier classic, this was expanded into a memorable TWILIGHT ZONE episode, but is notable here for being told (other than some initial scene setting) entirely in dialogue (and also in that the implied ending is slightly more ambiguous - not in the specific purchase, but in their target of intent). Just great and a model for short story writers. Finally, in "The Phoenix" by Sylvia Townsend Warner - an extremely rare phoenix is acquired by a sideshow but isn't bringing in the money to justify its keep, and so the owner uses cruel means to hasten the bird's death, selling the rights and charging top dollar for the expected spectacle of its self-immolation and rebirth. I laughed out loud at the punchline! All in all, a nice little reader.
