I liked this book a lot, though it had numerous flaws that frustrated me. I'll start with the good. I loved the cast of main characters, all strong and vivid in their own way. It just always makes me feel good to see queer characters in a Caribbean setting. (And fictional island or no, this is a very Caribbean novel; Lantanacamara is clearly based on Trinidad.) I really loved Tyler, I think he was the perfect character to tell Ms. Ramchandin's story. I loved his gentleness, his caring nature, his sweetness. He and Ms. Ramchandin opening up to each other was just lovely. One of my major complaints is actually that there wasn't enough of him. I'm just not sure the structure of this book was the best way to tell the story. I don't mind non-linear structures, I don't mind different POVs, I'll even tolerate POV switching within scenes once it doesn't get too erratic... I just feel like Tyler's thoughts and POVs should have been interwoven more thoroughly when the past was being narrated. Or the novel should have taken a different form. If that makes sense. I like Mootoo's writing a lot; very vivid and evocative. The dialogue was great too, very true to life... mostly. Sometimes, when the highly educated characters were speaking, I kinda reeled backwards. No one talks like that. Not even Yankees talk like that. Not even fresh water Yankees talk like that. Ambrose was the worst offender; I mean I GET that you're trying to show that he went abroad and got an education and like so many Caribbean ex-pats absorbed a large chunk of the foreign country as a defence mechanism/source of pride/whatever but... nooooooooo one talks like that. I liked the plot, made me sad and angry in all the right places, though at times I find it was a bit heavy handed? (Major warning for rape and abuse.) And I wanted more of Tyler and Otoh, more of Sarah and Lavinia, more of a resolution for Asha. IDK. All in all, a good book that I enjoyed and am glad I read, I just wish it had been written differently, I guess? 3.5 stars. P.S. Elsie was a relatively minor character but shout out to her for delivering my favourite line of the book and the best way of saying 'I'm leaving you' that I've ever heard: "You was simpler when you was sleeping." Lmao.
