John le Carrè’s The Little Drummer Girl is much more than a spy novel. At its heart is a compelling relationship – which just happens to be between an agent and her agent runner (or case officer) amid a fascinating plot to stop a terrorist bomber. But it’s the genius and complexity of the relationship that raises The Little Drummer Girl to heights far above the limits of the spy genre. An intricate fiction is planned in order to infiltrate the bomber’s network and bring him down. Michel, the bomber’s deceased brother, will be used as the access point. Charlie, struggling English actress and ideological seeker, is recruited somewhat against her will to play the part of Michel’s grieving lover. But fabricating a history between the two won’t be easy. Not only must the bomber be convinced of the fictitious love affair, but also Charlie needs to be able to draw upon her memories of Michel and her feelings for him as if they are real. Words have power, and in this tale we see the power of the spoken word, sound and breath, to summon, to establish memory where there is none. Meet Joseph: battle-scarred Israeli hero and “all that a girl adrift could wish for in her savior.” He’s an enigma, a conjuror, both warrior and poet. Standing in for Michel, he manipulates Charlie, even as he’s drawn to her. He walks her through scripted scenes of her imaginary life with Michel, making her go through the motions and say the lines he’s written for her. At first Michel appears only as a cutout, a hallucination. But through the power of words, fiction becomes truth. And Charlie’s lover becomes a chimera: Joseph and Michel superimposed one over the other, shifting in and out of sync, their outlines indistinct. At the conclusion of the novel we’re so invested in this relationship that we want more. We want to continue beyond the final page, to see Charlie and Joseph heal and come into focus. The Little Drummer Girl deserves a wider audience. I think many readers who don’t enjoy the spy genre probably just overlook it. And a note: don’t expect it to be about politics. le Carrè deftly avoids politics and manages beautifully to embrace characters on both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
