In the West we like to think that we are somewhat better than the other peoples of the world. At least one of the reasons we give for this, to us at least, self-evident superiority is our Judeo-Christian heritage. This heritage is what we refer to when we need to explain our sense of justice (and it is also often quoted as the actual source of our legal system as well as our systems of government – despite how diverse these are) while also being seen as the sole (soul?) source of our morality. I’ve always found this to be a very strange thing – not least because it is so evidently not the case. One might just as well say that Socrates is father of modern Biology because in one of the dialogues Plato mentions birds. When it comes to religion we are much more interested in seeds than we are in other endeavours, even when those ‘seeds’ weren’t actually the seeds that grew into the plants proliferating around us. But then, why let details get in the way of what has proven a remarkably reassuring story? The questionable glories of the Judeo-Christian contribution to morality are, ironically enough, no where more disturbingly contradictory than in the behaviour of both Jews and Christians in what some like to refer to as the ‘holy land’. Think I’ve gone too far? Well, you really do need to look up how the Jews treated the locals when they first turned up in the holy land. That Moses guy even complained when his brethren only killed all the males and all the females that were not virgins; when clearly the ‘moral’ thing to do was to kill everything: male, female, child, adult and even their animals and then to also burn their homes. Unfortunately, this has been a bit of a repeated theme in the holy land – right down to the present – by both Jews and Christians. The tragedy that is Gaza today would not be possible without the massive US aid Israel receives - more than any other. Morality is a difficult concept in such circumstances and is probably better spoken about in very general terms, rather than dwelling in specifics. This book is much more partisan than I have found other of Tuchman’s books. We are told at least three times from various sources during this book that the local Arabs had turned the garden that was Israel into the wasteland that was Palestine before the Jews returned. This is repeatedly presented as fact and never explained. The motivations of those stating such are never explored – the lives of the local Arabs are passed over as being temporary squatters on someone else’s land. No one is expected to pay any attention to their claims nor their lives. In fact, that is the thing that is so surprising about this book – it glories in the return of the wandering Jew, finally able to complete the prayer, ‘Next year in Jerusalem’ – while completely ignoring any claim hundreds of generations of Palestinian Arabs may have to the same stretch of land. This is a terribly strange book. It presents itself as a history of the holy land between the Bronze Age and the Treaty of Balfour – but actually, it is a history with an exclusively Western focus. Don’t expect to learn anything from this book about the Arabs who lived on this land during the 1900 odd years while the Jews were absent. I’m really not the right person to review this book. As someone born in Ireland and now living in Australia – I find the whole question of Nationality and Patriotism deeply troubling and (beware of understatement) quite problematic. In fact, whenever YOU use the P word I can only hear the N word. Patriotism, Nationalism – they are all much of a muchness to me while also being among the most frightening of human emotions. Now, that being said, there is little question that the Jews have been treated unspeakably badly by Christians for a very, very long time. I’ve never quite understood why Christians have chosen to get quite so upset with Jews. This book reminds us that Jesus was a Jew, as were all of his original followers. In fact, it wasn’t really until Paul converted to the Cult of Christ (bringing with him all the passion of an ex-smoker) that the Jews started getting into trouble with the Christians. Again, I’ve never totally understood this, as even if the Jews were responsible for the death of Jesus (although, I had always thought crucifixions a Roman, rather than Jewish death), given Jesus had to die to become Christ and thus redeem us of our sins, Jews would seem to have had more to be thanked for than punished over. But then again, such are the contortions of religion which I shall never understand. One thing this book does make clear is how endlessly ‘pragmatic’ (that is, brutally amoral) people have been over the years in promising the Jews their ancient homeland. Neapolitan had no problem promising Palestine to the Jews, as did numerous British Prime Ministers, but not so much because they felt the Jews had been treated badly, as because they felt the Jews would act in ways favourable to their ambitions in empire building. I’ve never really liked the idea that because we have been bad to the Jews for a very long time that should mean we should ship them off somewhere a long, long way out of our reach – as if Jews are a bit like chocolate to someone on a diet, you can’t really expect us to not mistreat them if they are right here among us, so the best solution all round is to hide them out of sight from temptation. As an Irishman I also struggle with the idea that centuries of mistreatment of my people by the English automatically entitles me to special treatment. I’m not very keen on the idea of blood rights – as those who claim them tend to need to enforce them over the blood of others. As I’ve said, this book is a very partisan one and it has elicited a partisan response from me. My dream, and like all dreams it is based on impossibilities, is that one day there will be no nationalities and consequently no need for racism – if I thought there was anything I could bring that day closer, I would do it with pride. But people so love to be part of groups, people so desire to belong (particularly if those groups can be at the expense of other groups), I have little faith in my dream.
