Reading Tuchman’s highly regarded later works, namely The Guns of August and A Distant Mirror, piqued my interest in exploring her earlier catalogue. Published in 1956 at the dawn of Tuchman’s prolific writing career, Bible and Sword attempts nothing less than to outline the entirety of England’s relationship with the Holy Land from the dawn of recorded history up to and including World War 1 and the Balfour Declaration. While a noble effort, I found Bible and Sword to be middling and not nearly as engaging as her subsequent books for several reasons. As many other reviews have pointed out, the subtitle “England and Palestine from the Bronze Age to Balfour” can be misleading. Based on this subtitle, I was expecting the book to focus on narratives from both England and Palestine and then to focus on the confluence of those narratives. Instead, most of the book seemed to take an Anglocentric view of events and focused on storylines only insofar as they concerned the English. I felt a rich Palestinian side of events was left out in many cases. I found particularly concerning the book’s view of British policy towards Arabs during World War 1 and immediately thereafter. To my limited understanding, Skyes-Picot, among other British maneuvers and machinations, were at best negligent and at worse treacherous, yet the book seemed to excuse British foreign policy of most wrongdoing. Imperial schemes are still reverberating in a negative sense throughout the region today and to write them off as well-intentioned efforts or mere mistakes is to absolve the policymakers of potential myopic and maligned motives which have led to more than a century of bloodshed in the region. Finally, the narrative style of this book was, for whatever reason, not compelling to me. Covering such a large topic and large timeframe made focus on any time period or person for long an impossibility, and details that were added seemed at times pedantic. Despite all of this, the book gives an interesting insight into the life of English and continental Jews in the common era. I especially enjoyed Tuchman’s treatment of the opinions of international Jewry regarding a potential Jewish state leading up to and including the world war. Also of interest was the discussion of Britain’s offer to establish a Jewish state in East Africa. All in all, Bible and Sword is a readable, if not particularly remarkable, work of non-fiction.
