4.5 stars! Also, this is currently on a $1.99 Kindle sale , as of April 12, 2021. Georgette Heyer books very rarely go on a sale, and this is one of her Regency comedy gems, so grab it if you’re interested! My third read of this one, and it keeps moving up on my list of favorite Heyer novels. Kitty Charing is the orphaned ward of the miserly and eccentric Mr. Matthew Penicuik. "Uncle Matthew" has no children of his own, but has five grand-nephews, including his favorite, the suave and handsome Jack. Kitty has a crush on Jack, and Matthew hopes he’ll marry Kitty, but he decides, in fairness, to throw the field wide open: he'll leave Kitty his fortune, contingent on her marrying any of his grand-nephews. So Matthew calls a meeting of all of his single grand-nephews, two of whom promptly propose to Kitty. But Jack, reluctant to be ordered about and to lose his freedom too quickly, doesn't show up at the meeting, thus offending both Kitty and Matthew. Kitty impulsively asks Freddy, another of the great-nephews, to enter into a pretend engagement with her for a month. With a fair amount of difficulty and tears, she convinces Freddy to go along with her plan, partly so she can enjoy life in the big city for a few weeks, out from under Uncle Matthew’s thumb and miserly ways, and partly to try to make Jack jealous. Freddy patiently squires Kitty around London (his reactions at being forced to tour the sights of London with her are one of the highlights of the story). Jack is a little taken aback by the news of the engagement, but thinks (rightly) that Kitty is just playing hard to get and (maybe rightly) that he can win her back any time he wants. Meanwhile, he's busy trying to make the lovely and innocent Olivia his latest mistress; since she has a not-so-innocent Mamma, Jack figures his chances of success are good. To complicate matters, Kitty’s generous heart is moved try to help everyone else in her vicinity with their romantic troubles. She's very much like Arabella , actually. And Olivia, of course, just happens to be one of those people Kitty meets and tries to help. When I first read Cotillion , ten or so years ago, I thought it was pleasant but forgettable. I think I was expecting more of a focus on the romance. I was new to Georgette Heyer at the time, and also my expectations had been set by Devil's Cub , probably one of Heyer's more romantic books, what with the hot (and hot-tempered) hero chasing the reluctant heroine all over creation (be still, my heart). *Note: Some spoilers follow, although I've tagged most of them* In Cotillion the romance is definitely more low-key, the handsome rake that the heroine has been angling for turns out to be pretty much just a cad and a jerk and a cheater besides , and the hero is a beta character of middling good looks and average intelligence, excessively fond of appearing in the pink of fashion, who turns out to have unforeseen depths of character. It's definitely gratifying in its own way, but it wasn't what I was looking for at the time. Looking back on it now, I think I had my expectations set wrong: I was expecting a reformed rake trope plot and instead I got a "beta hero stepping up to the plate" type of plot. Which is really a far better plot, when you think about it! Rereading it a second time, it struck me that this really is much more a comedy than a romance, even though the plot centers around several romantic entanglements. Once I stopped expecting it to give me deep romantic feelz and just settled down to enjoy the wit and the absurdities, it became immensely enjoyable. One of my favorite things was how this book thumbs its nose at the standard romantic tropes: “I do think,” said Kitty fervently, “that Freddy is the most truly chivalrous person imaginable!” Freddy’s sister, regarding her with awe, opened her mouth, shut it again, swallowed, and managed to say, though in a faint voice: “Do you, indeed?” “Yes, and a great deal more to the purpose than all the people one was taught to revere, like Sir Lancelot, and Sir Galahad, and Young Lochinvar, and—and that kind of man! I daresay Freddy might not be a great hand at slaying dragons, but you may depend upon it none of those knight-errants would be able to rescue one from a social fix, and you must own, Meg, that one has not the smallest need of a man who can kill dragons! And as for riding off with one in the middle of a party, which I have always thought must have been extremely uncomfortable, and not at all the sort of thing one would wish to happen to one—” Freddy is about the farthest thing from a dragon-killer or a feet-sweeper-offer: he's a clothes hound who loves high fashion, and he has an interesting habit of dropping his pronouns that makes him appear more dim-witted than he really is. But he's also a totally goodhearted, stand-up guy, and Kitty's tendency to get into fixes that require some nice guy to rescue her motivates Freddy to step up to the plate and develop new depths. A cotillion is a genteel version of an English square dance, popular two or three hundred years ago in Europe and America, and was - mark this - originally danced by four couples. In this book there actually are four romantic (well, more or less romantic) couples: 1. Kitty and Freddy 2. Dolph and Hannah 3. Olivia and Camille 4. Mr Penicuik and Fish And suddenly it struck me how brilliant Heyer was with the plot of this book, with these four couples engaging in a social dance with each other and in their relationships with the people around them, and with all of the crazy entanglements among them. 4.5 stars, up from an initial 3 star rating. :) Prior review : This has been one of the Georgette Heyer books on my TBR list for a while, but I paged through it at the library the other day and realized that I actually had read it (maybe 10 years ago) and pretty much forgotten it, except for the ending. Even at the time I read it, it struck me as pleasant but forgettable. A lot of my fellow Heyer fans love this one so I might give it another try sometime, when my TBR pile gets a little less daunting or I'm really in the mood for an old-fashioned Regency read.
