My name is Connor To, and I have the privilege to interview the best basketball player ever, Michael Jordan. A biography about his life, called The Jordan Rules, by Sam Smith, breaks down his whole basketball career. A humble legend, born in Brooklyn, New York. He is one of the hardest workers ever to play the sport, always motivated and determined to be the best, and hated to lose, most of all. His legacy changed basketball forever, and will be known as one of the greatest basketball players and athletes of all time. Here are some of the questions I asked him. Q1: What were some of the main factors that lead to your great success? Answer 1: Certainly my coaches, Doug Collins, and the best coach ever in basketball, Phil Jackson, had systems that I fell in love with and worked well in. My teammates too, John Paxson and Horace Grant early in my career, and Scottie Pippen, Dennis Rodman, Toni Kukoc, were some of my best. Without them, I would’ve never had the success I experienced. Chicago was such a welcoming city, and the fans are some of the greatest fans in all of sports. My parents also taught me how to be a man. I learned my work ethic from my dad, and he was a main factor in my life. Q2: Throughout your career, what was one of the most memorable moments, or your greatest accomplishment? Answer 2: One of my favorite memories was my first NBA championship. We had lost a tough 7 game eastern conference finals series against the Pistons in 1990, and I was not physically or mentally prepared to play that Pistons team. They were my toughest competition early in my career, and in 90’, they beat me up. Finally beating them in 1991, sweeping them, in fact, was a great feeling. I had trained so hard all summer, pushing my body to the limits. I had become bigger, stronger, and was ready to play that team again. We went on to play the Lakers in the finals, I had come too far to lose to a washed up team full of veterans. I played some of my best basketball that year, and that championship gave me the motivation to go after more and more. Q3: What was the biggest setback during your career? Answer 3: My second season in the league, I broke my foot in the third game of the season. I begged my coaches and trainers to let me play, but they insisted I let it properly heal, which looking at it now, was a great decision. I sat out for 64 games that year. I was truly devastated. I thought “Why me?” My career had just begun, I was so eager to win, and this injury put me in a place that was concerned about the future. I had no idea how this would affect me playing, or even for the rest of my life. My shoe sales went down, and I had to sit at home watching my team struggle. We were able to sneak into the playoffs, and I tried to play back at my true potential, but that year we didn’t make the finals. Luckily, my foot was back to 100% by the start of next season. Q4: What do you regret about your playing career? Answer 4: You probably already know the answer. After the 1992-1993 season, I retired from basketball. I thought it was the end, I didn’t have a motivation to play anymore. This decision was mainly fueled from my father’s death, as it controlled my emotions and actions. I took on baseball, and thought it would be a fun sport to pursuit. Now that I realize, I missed 3 years of my prime. No team would’ve stopped us, I could’ve won at least another ring, maybe more. Instead, I couldn’t control my emotions, and made the worst decision of my life. If I could go back, I would never make that choice again, and used my father as motivation to win for him. Q5: Even when you were by far the best player in the league, why did you still work so hard? What was your motivation? Answer 5: My parents taught me the work ethic that I have. Whenever they did anything, they never half-a##ed it. I wanted to be like my dad, and how he worked. So I always practiced like I played. I was addicted to winning, and being the best. I couldn’t stand losing, and practice was the only way I could get better. I worked till I couldn’t walk, and never stopped even when I was on top. I never saw practice as a time to rest, I saw it as a time to work and become an even better player. I liked to work. While others were sleeping, I was in the gym. I knew that I was working harder than everyone, and the results payed off. My parents would’ve never let me half-a## anything in life, and I would never have my work ethic without them. Q6: What is your life like after basketball? Answer 6: When I came into the league, I knew absolutely nothing about business, it was not an interest of mine. I had only focused on basketball. I came into the NBA with no intentions of attaching a marketing value to my basketball career. My agents pushed me into all types of brand deals, with Gatorade, Coca Cola, Hanes, and of course, Nike and Jordan Brand. I never would’ve seen myself where I am now at the start of my career. I also got interested in acting, in either movies or commercials, and now chairman of the Charlotte Hornets. They reached out to me after I began a coaching campaign, and I am excited and grateful to be apart of the Hornets. Because of my playing ability, it opened the windows to millions of possible brand deals, and lead me to become a billionaire. Q7: Who were your greatest rivals? Answer 7: Early on, it was Milwaukee. They were a divisional team, and one of the teams we played the most. We could never beat them. Even through the playoffs, they would still beat us. Eventually, we reached a level where we were a better team. And of course, the Pistons with Isaiah Thomas. They were a great physical team who beat me up early in my career. Isaiah was such a great player in his prime, and guys like Bill Laimbeer would kill me in the paint. That was the biggest step. It took us many years to overcome them, as we lost two years in a row in the playoffs to them. I pushed myself harder than I ever have, and was in the best shape of my life. Once we overcame them, there was no one who even matched to us, or would have that type of rivalry with. Q8: How would you describe yourself as a basketball player on and off the court? Answer 8: I always try to stay modest, because of who my parents taught me to be. I never held myself above anyone off the court. However, on the court, I do feel like I am the best to ever play the game. From the time I won my first championship until the last, I felt that no team could stand a chance to me. I dominated everyone that stood in my way, and after many missed playoff opportunities early on, I worked to the point where I felt like I was the best to ever play. The championships are merely reflections of my career. I know that people think of me as the best ever, and a hard worker. I hate to lose, and would train to the point where I couldn’t lose. People also off the court view me as a competitor in everything I do, whether from golfing to business. I always strive to succeed in everything. Some people view this trait as good or bad, but I am a very real person who doesn’t hold myself above anyone. Q9: How did the death of your father affect you as a person? Answer 9: I had been in pure bliss as the prime of my career was ensuing. We had just won three championships in a row, and were looking for more. After my father was kidnapped and killed, it broke me. I did have a gambling problem, which was especially evident in golf. I was confident that I was a good golfer, but ended up losing hundreds of thousands of dollars golfing. No connections were ever made between the people that killed my father and any mob, but I had been in some bad places with very bad people. That was why my initial reaction was that it was my fault. I was completely broken, my father meant everything to me. He was my role model, and who I looked up to and learned everything I know from. I did not want to play basketball anymore, I didn’t want to do anything anymore. I retired in the middle of my prime. I wasted the best years of my life playing baseball. It was the biggest regret of my life. Instead of playing for him, I quit the game. I eventually returned to basketball, but his murder left me heartbroken. Q10: You have been the model of one of the most popular shoe and clothing brands across the world. How did the relationship with nike begin, and what is your role in Jordan today? Answer 10: I never wore nike shoes, whether it be for basketball or lifestyle. I had offers from Adidas, Converse, and some others that all sounded the same. When Nike came to me, they were unique, as they offered me a signature shoe, and let me have an input in the shoe. I have never heard of a signature shoe, and gave me a new insight on the sneaker world. I told the designers about my personality and things that I like and things I feel people may like. We put all those thoughts into a brand, into the Jordan brand and into the shoe. As the company became more and more popular, I wanted to have Jordan as a separate brand from Nike. We began to have jordan expand from just the world of basketball, into other sports and lifetime shoes as well. Today, I am an independent endorser of Jordan brand. I approve all of the decisions for Jordan brand, and Jordan has grown to a company worth over a billion dollars. I am very proud of how far jordan has come, and can’t wait to see where jordan evolves to in the future.
