I have loved this superb novel for a very, very long time. Perhaps you, too, have shrouded yourself in the endless folds of its inner mystery and adventure - and lost yourself within it! But WHY does it always seem to us so frustrating? So unsatisfying in the end? Is it because the Land Surveyor never gets to his Castle? Well - maybe there’s a DEEPER reason why he never arrives... something endemic to the functioning - or malfunctioning, of our ordinary minds. Let’s try to FIND OUT what it is. Now, some writers - and Kafka is one of them - seem to catch us unawares... as if they’re calling out to us from a higher plane of existence. Edwin Muir, the Scottish expatriate poet who first ´discovered’ Kafka for us anglophones in the 1930’s, was sure that the dear, misunderstood Franzel had an armlock on some Hidden Truth. But what if this key to Kafka is that he was caught in the complex to-and-fro-ing of Hegel’s Contrite Consciousness - the tempestuous Ethical Plane of existence, according to Kierkegaard? And what happens when the human mind morphs from the everyday sphere of living for the day... to a scary Moral Sphere? It can be like Freud’s The Schreber Case. After all, there’s no justification for moral judgements in an amoral world, is there? So we’re automatically viewed as a stranger. Once you take sides, Sonny, you’re on your own! The mind tends to play tricks on us at that point... And, once challenged and stopped dead in its tracks, the mind starts to replay its key judgements and obsessions ad infinitum, as Kafka does here - almost in anticipation of Freud’s example, Schreber - but only neurotically, and not psychotically. But, hey - you rise above the herd, and it ain’t gonna be easy! Let me put it from another angle: did Frodo chicken out from his Quest? Not on your life! Though, like us, he retreated to the false comfort of his Ring now and then - and paid for it heavily. Just as Kafka and Schreber take comfort in their obsessive disorders... Though Frodo’s fix is a VERY dangerous narcissism - Power. But Kafka IS calling us from a higher plane, because the Castle itself is theologically symbolic of a Higher Reality. Just as Mordor is the hobbits’ Armageddon and Gandalf is their Guardian Angel, along with the elfin-folk. Even though that wonderful symbolic reality has now become shadowy and ungrounded in the crass garish light of the daily news, and though heads of state now seem utterly self-seeking - making our Land Surveyor’s reasoning utterly nonsensical to them, we now all have to live in an Upside-Down Kingdom, the postmodern mindset. That’s a fact of our lives for us modern ethically-minded seekers - for we Quixotes are now hopelessly pitted against powerful electronic windmills! *** Okay, then. Had Kafka lived longer, would he have written in a HAPPY ENDING for the poor Land Surveyor? Would he have entered the Castle, finally? I think so. Because all it takes is that one unforgettable moment when, at the end of all our wanderings, we hear the magical voice of the “Woodthrush calling through the Fog.” That moment when it finally dawns on us that there’s a much BIGGER story going on here than our own tiny story of dazed frustration as we trudge endlessly with the Land Surveyor through the snowdrifts of an Eastern European village... Like in Kafka’s Amerika. The bigger story of Redemption. For it’s not about us... It’s about something Bigger. Kafka made this clear in a short story called Before the Law - only once (surreptitiously) published in his lifetime. In Before the Law, a man ceases to believe, because he can’t even believe in the Law. So if he can’t believe in the Gospel, he loses the right to enter through the Gate of Heaven. So the man always starts again. And TRIES again. And continually starts again at the beginning, simply because he now no longer believes. When it’s time for him to die, the Gate is Closed. Why? Because he has given up trying, believing AND BEGINNING AGAIN! And accepting the Law as - absurdly - God’s will. In Amerika, though, Kafka comes to see that. Salvation is a Free Gift. And it’s only because he has given up hope completely, that the Gate (the Castle - or the Gift of Grace) of the Law is Now closed to him. Until he starts over, but NOW it’s too late. Or WOULD be too late - WITHOUT GRACE? Or, without... the LAW! For, to Kafka himself, at the end, Grace now ABOUNDED... He now had kept his part of the bargain, always trying, unlike the Land Surveyor, no matter how hard it became, to believe and BITE THE BULLET... OF THE HARD AND FAST TRUTH... of the LAW. AND SO THE CASTLE GATES SWUNG OPEN.
