I HATE MY COMPUTER. I had written a beautiful review for the whole sweep series and then my computer decided to delete it all and do some crazy thing where it all disappeared and wasn't saved. THANKS COMPUTER! Maybe I'll try again later. EDIT: trying again now. Well, SWEEP was a magical(pun intended) series that swept(another pun intended) me off my feet. It revolves around 16-year-old Morgan Rowlands, who learns about the beauty and the darkness involved in Wiccan Magick. I immediately liked Morgan after only the first book, with her strong will and independence. She was a great older sister and a great friend. She was confident and okay with the fact her younger sister was prettier and curvier. And she was vulnerable to love and life woes. Over the fifteen books that make up SWEEP, Morgan became more than a character to me. It might sound silly but I quickly grew to care about her and her well-being. She became like a friend to me. I felt like I stood next to her when she found out devastating news about her heritage. I felt my heart ache when she found out she had been betrayed. I wanted to cry with her when her heart was broken and tell her she could lean on my shoulder if she needed it. I feel like Morgan is the character every author wishes to dream up, in the sense that she's real in every normal teenager way and yet, unreal all at the same time. Morgan also deals with some subjects that a lot of young people, or maybe just people in general, deal with on a daily basis. Her parents and sister are not accepting of Wicca at all. They are Catholics and believe that is the only way. But Morgan tells them over and over that it was not something she has chosen. Wicca is just who she is. For anyone who has ever felt unaccepted(which might just be all of us at one time or another) will feel connected to Morgan in this way. She also fights a battle, almost daily, of choosing between light and dark. And though I think its safe to say we don't all practice a form of Magick where the dark side is constantly begging us to join it, we all have a good side and a not-so-good-side. And we all have to decide if we are going to do the right thing, or the not-right-thing. It may be some small instance like deciding whether or not to fib to your best friend that you indeed like her new hairstyle. But we all make these choices at some point in time and I really felt for Morgan in her decision making. She had to constantly remind herself that she chose good. That the alluring dark side had no pull, no reward for her. She had to remain confident and strong no matter how many times she was knocked down (and it was A LOT), and continue the fight. None of our lives might be that dramatic but isn't it great to see someone, and a young, teenage girl no less, never give up? Doesn't that give you some hope for your life where you have no dark witches, or backstabbing best friends, or even an evil dark force called a dark wave after you? Doesn't it make your life seem a little brighter? Maybe that's why I read. Maybe that's why I loved this series so much. Certain books always seem to come into my life to teach me something or make me see something that I didn't before, always at the certain time I need them to. Cate Tiernan's writing was another reason I loved this series so much. It was straightforward and concise, but also beautiful in her descriptions. I've never read someone describe Magick the way she does. Whenever Morgan was getting wrapped up in a Circle, I felt like I was there. That I was spinning with them and could feel the air around me moving. I could see the light and the energy that Morgan saw and felt. It was all so precise that I felt like I must have pictured EXACTLY what Cate Tiernan pictured when she wrote it. Her writing also had a wonderful flow to it that made the reading go by quickly. I keep wanting to say that it was simple, but simple is not the right word for it at all. So all in all, I guess you can see that I loved this series very much. It will always have a place in my heart and I look forward to the day when I will start again from the beginning, moving all the way through to the end, dredging up all my fond and familiar feelings, just like catching up with an old friend.
