I am informed that this is "travel writing" and in his preface Colin Thubron tells me that this an innovative piece of travel literature breaking new ground by being a blend of fiction and fact.... Excuse me.... am I missing something here? This is a work of fiction in which the hero, his aunt and her pig travel through Eastern Europe at the time of the great changes that took place when the Berlin Wall came down. So it's fiction set in a real time and real places... Doesn't a lot of literature fall into this category? So it's a story and once you realise that this isn't really a piece of travel writing, since there are very few bits where we get a description of the place, then what you find you have is a very amusing story with a fascinating cast of dysfunctional and woe-begotten characters. Our hero (we never learn his name but it sure as hell ISN'T Rory) gets a call from his rather domineering Aunt Zita to inform him that his Uncle Peter (a former key player in the Soviet takeover of the Eastern Block) has been killed by his pet pig, Winston, who fell on him. Apparently this wouldn't have happened if they hadn't taken the wall down in the first place. Winston has run off with Zita's dentures and mislaid them but you can, apparently get good replacements in Budapest! Zita then railroads her nephew into a road trip visiting friends and relatives on the way. Many of these friends and relatives turn out to be former Communists or collaborators - or just plain dysfunctional individuals, beginning to adjust to a post-Communist world itself adjusting to new, as yet undetermined, circumstances. The whole is a genuinely amusing but also thought-provoking story. Whist MacLean doesn't spend a great deal of time describing places he does give us a sort of superficial snapshot of the great changes taking place by concentrating on his characters. In Czechoslovakia the remains of dead heroes, secretly buried, are being disinterred, as is the real history of the Communist era. In Hungary adjustments are also taking place in an atmosphere of revelation. Poland is seen as heavy with history and the spirit of resistance, whilst Romania is just the same old story but with different labels. Russia is entering the era of the great disillusion. Poverty abounds, alcohol flows. Somewhere in there one can hear the greasing of palms. MacLean does a super job of helping us see that process of change, coming to terms with the truth, expressing resentment or relief and, of course, survival. Reading this is like entering the dark ages of Modern History and there are very few books that I know of that bring this brief period to life (I'm thinking here of that other great bit of writing, Anne Applebaum's "Between East and West: Across the Borderlands of Europe"). ...And it's amusing as well as serious. My hero is Winston, the pig. He sleeps his way across this era of change sleeping in the back of the Trabant, drinking beer and occasionally causing mayhem - I bet he's a Polish pig! Good old Winston.
