Pearl Buck brought English readers to China to experience the culture of her early life in her parents’ mission. Her Good Earth trilogy is a masterpiece that won a Pulitzer prize for Literature. I have thoroughly enjoyed everything I’ve read of Buck’s work. And yet, I longed for an inside perspective, something like what Alan Paton’s Cry the Beloved Country or Andre Brink’s A Dry White Season do for South Africa. While Buck represents the Western family discovering China, Bette Bao Lord embodies a Chinese family discovering America and translating China through her adopted English. Betty Bao Lord was born and raised in Shanghai. Fleeing the Chinese Civil War, her family found refuge in America where they enjoyed a settled life in New York City with all the challenges of immigration from a far culture. I love Lord’s book for children, In the Year of the Boar and Jackie Robinson, about a Chinese family finding new life rhythms after immigrating to New York City. I was eager to read some of her other work. Lord writes of her Chinese home for her English audience as a Mandarin insider steeped in classical Chinese culture and tradition, taking us one step closer the source than Buck. The Middle Heart follows three young people who take the legendary oath from Romance of the Three Kingdoms as their own… “We three, through of different clans, bind ourselves to one end. We swear to defend our country and save our people. We cannot undo our separate births, but on the same day we mean to die. May Heaven, all-ruling, and Earth, all-producing, read our hearts! And should we turn aside loyalty and forsake duty, may the gods and man smite us.” Steel Hope, aristocrat’s son, his bookmate Mountain Pine, and Firecrackers, the peasant boy that turned out to be a girl, are united from the Japanese occupation in 1919 through the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989. Lord explores their paths together and apart through revolution, love, politics, triumphs, marriage, children, devastation, faithful acts and painful betrayals. Lord’s characters are made indelible by the Chinese pragmatism expressed in their development and the survival necessary for it to take place. The scope of The Middle Heart is amazing. By location, Lord takes us to Wen Shui, ChongQing, Shanghai, the hinterlands of northeast China, and Beijing. In Chinese history, her characters live through Japanese occupation, the war to evict the Japanese, the corruption of the Nationalists, Civil War (Nationalists v. Communists), the Communist triumph/ take-over, Mao’s Great Leap Forward, Mao’s Cultural Revolution, Deng XiaoPing’s liberalization and Tiananmen Square suppression. These events are not mere staging for these wonderfully vivid characters, they are shaping the characters and their storyline throughout the plot. Fiction though it is, Bette Bao Lord’s The Middle Heart rings true. This book has become an all time favorite and I give it my highest recommendation. For Pearl Buck's work, see The Good Earth, Buck, 1931 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... For books about South Africa by native sons, see Cry, the Beloved Country, Paton, 1948 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... A Dry White Season, Brink, 1979 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... In the Year of the Boar and Jackie Robinson, Lord, 1984 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... For a non-fiction presentation of this timeline from a Chinese family partially transplanted to the United States, see Shanghai Faithful, Lin, 2017 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...
