I have complicated feelings about this book. The first two and last three pages of the book I found to be incredibly clumsily written. The rest of the book was an absolutely joy to read. Eliza Minot's similes are a dream; I was reading this simultaneously with The Marriage Plot , which has some of the worst similes I've ever encountered, and the contrast was kind of delightfully shocking. The book itself is a little, I don't know, fluffy. A young girl whose mother has just died is recalling the day she learned of her death in a novel-length stream of memories that spark other memories, a kind of nested sequence of recollections that present what seems to me to be a pretty accurate portrait of a fairly privileged eight-year-old's life experience and way of seeing. What made the book extraordinary for me was the perfection of the author's imagery; at times it read like a linked series of prose poems. I kept finding myself thinking yes, that's exactly what it's like -- with more and more surprise, because she just kept doing it , page after page, these jewel-like images conveyed with the precision of poetry. They worked, I think, because her narrator is a child with a believable child's voice, and what makes the images glow is their simplicity: things are perceived and described vividly and plainly, in language that would never work from an adult narrator. I love that she manages to evoke the feeling of wonder that we feel as kids (or, at least, *I* felt) and then lose, somehow, when we reach adulthood; it seems to me that our ability to perceive the world as magical fades as we grow more self-aware, and Minot's narrator Via is perched just on the cusp of awareness, old enough to be articulate and young enough to still see things fresh and unmuddied. The book is flawed in a few ways, one of which, for me, is the fact that it's supposedly about her mother's death but nowhere, at no point, did I feel any actual sense of loss. The place where Minot's descriptive abilities fell flat for me was right in those moments where Via is dealing with death, and the book as a whole does not read to me as the believable paean to loss and remembrance that I think it's supposed to be. What works is simply the transcendence, the evanescent feelings Minot manages to capture that have to do, instead, with joy and pleasure and comfort and wonder, the fragments of Via's experience that rang absolutely and startlingly true with my own memories of childhood feelings about sunsets on boats, or rain, or paint on the side of buildings -- the sensory world and its satisfactions. Read the book for the touching story of a girl dealing with death and you may be disappointed; read it for an intense evocation of the sensuous moments that make up a childhood and you'll be richly rewarded.
