First things first. If you want to read a book about the war in Viet Nam, only one, make it this one. It's 1969, and Cacciato, a soldier in the US Army, has had enough. He deserts, leaving clues for the other men in his unit indicating that he's decided to walk to Paris. Now they're obligated to go after him, to follow him until he's captured. And if that happens to take them to Paris, that's fine with them. It's 1969, and Paul Berlin is a Private First Class in the Viet Nam War. On guard duty at the top of a tower, he watches the sea, reviews his experiences so far, and tries to run away inside his head, far far away, from all the terrible things he's seen and done. To find the good mixed in with all the bad, as his father suggested. I read about World War II all the time. There were two sides. One was good and one was evil. The good guys knew what they were fighting for. The bad guys…well, the very best one can say about them is that they were led by bad men. It is a war that is easy to understand, to appreciate. And when soldiers died, they died in the service of something greater than themselves, a mission to save humanity from unspeakable madness. But the Viet Nam War was something else. Going After Cacciato is an anti-war novel in the pattern of All Quiet On the Western Front. By the time you come to the end of this hauntingly beautiful, evocative novel, Tim O’Brien will illuminate for you exactly what was wrong with this war, and how different it was from the ones we had fought before. I am left with a kaleidoscope of sensory overload. The feel of high, unmoving green grass brushing against my legs, the fetid smell of the rice paddies. The fatigue from the endless march, the red dust of the dirt path on my boots, the mercury color of the sky and sea, the awful knowledge of the terrible ways a man can die. The unreadable expressions on the faces of the people we are there to help. The alien landscape, littered with enemy corpses, pitted and charred after the US Army firebombs it. The sound a personnel mine makes when a man walks over it. The pervasive gnawing of fear.
