Had to laugh at the beginning of this one when Mallory writes in her journal that she feels like she'll be 11 years old forever. Who wants to tell her??? LOL sorry kid, but you're like an insect frozen in amber. An insect who will permanently be on the edge of puberty. HAVE A NICE DAY. Mallory is typically one of my favorite babysitters to read from, but this one was a real miss. Just like in The Ghost at Dawn's House (the worst one of the series IMO, at least thus far in my reread), I found myself rolling my eyes so hard at these girls easily and totally believing that a ghost might be haunting Stacey's house. I feel like by middle school, you should be past believing in that kind of thing. I mean, I know there are adults out there who believe in ghosts, but still. (Which is so absurd and stupid I can't even, especially when their "reasons" are equally stupid. Why do you think a ghost has nothing better to do then hang around your apartment, unlocking doors and messing with your twinkle lights? How narcissistic do you have to be to think your life is so interesting that a ghost, who could conceivably go anywhere and do anything would choose to spend all of its days watching you make tofu scrambles and collages? Yes, I might be talking about a specific person.) Anyway, while I could totally understand Mallory being fascinated by finding a diary from a girl her age from a century earlier, and I would absolutely have loved to find such a thing myself, when we get to this mystery of the stolen painting and potential haunting, it just got dull. Nothing spooky actually happens, and the answer to the mystery was so obvious, the girls ought to have been embarrassed for not only not thinking of it right away, but for being so mind-blown when little kids gave them the idea. I kind of wish the main focus had been on Mallory helping Buddy learn to read and maybe having some kind of connection between that and the diary instead. So yeah, swing and a miss on this one. And I really hope there aren't any more ghost books coming up. (Oh, and I should add: there is a scene in here that at the time most people probably would not have realized was offensive, but it definitely is. Kristy shows up at the "séance" the girls plan to hold to contact the girl in the diary (for fuck's sake), and she's dressed as "a gypsy" according to Mallory and calling herself Madame Kristin. Ugh.)
