I was compelled to read Worlds in Collision as it is the single piece of work that has inspired the work of the electric universe group, something that I follow with much interest. While the members of this group don't completely agree with all of Velikovsky's ideas the premise served as a springboard to launch new investigations into the electric model of the universe and new interpretations of mythology and its roots in catastrophe. As I write this review, I must also add that I read Earth in Upheaval as soon as I finished Worlds in Collision. WIC was so controversial when it was published back in 1950 that Velikovsky wrote Earth in Upheaval to document an entire volume of what he researched to be the physical proofs of his theory in response to the backlash from the scientific community that attempted to have the publication of Worlds in Collision thwarted. Velikovsky broke out onto the scene with his book backed by his own impressive credentials. He was a MD who practiced medicine, psychiatry, and psychoanalysis. He studied psychology under one of Freud's students. He was one of the founders of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He was colleagues with Einstein who was also involved with the university. His researches into ancient texts left him with an understanding that many of these writings were not symbolic accounts, but records of people who had witnessed terrible devastation. I will admit that it is a lot of information to absorb. It affects you intellectually and emotionally. The concept of Venus as a comet seems so preposterous until it is put into the context of the ancient writings and then further into Earth in Upheaval with the tremendous amount of geologic anomalies. It has also come to pass that in the many years that have passed since this book was published there have been findings that support at least part of Velikovsky's theory. Recently is was discovered that Venus appears to have a tail, and its rate of rotation is slowing down. Tantalizing clues to be sure. I would recommend this book highly to anyone who is curious about the possibility that our ancestors survived global catastrophe after catastrophe. Anyone following the progress of the electric universe theory would likely find some benefit as well.
