This is the second book in the Dark Is Rising series. Unlike Over Sea, Under Stone, this book is much more supernatural/magical. In fact, the jump from the first book to the second almost feels like a jump to a different series, except for the continuity of themes and some characters. Like the first book, this one is very well-written and passes the audiobook test, which in my experience tends to expose sloppy writing. This book, like the first, was brilliantly read by Alex Jennings. As for the story itself, Cooper fills her 20th century world with British legend, mythology, and magic. Many of the images and scenes were easy to imagine, and filled me with appropriate foreboding and wonder. It's an immersive and very interesting world. The big failing is the plot, which feels increasingly uninteresting as the book goes on. It's not that interesting things don't happen--it's just that the main character, Will, around whom this titanic clash between light and dark is occurring, seems to do almost nothing himself. At every stage things just happen to him. He's called the (SPOILER ALERT!) "Seeker", but mostly he's just taken to places by other people and handed the things he's supposed to be seeking (or told exactly where to pick them up). The closest he comes to hunting one down (as I remember it) is when he happens to be somewhere and then notices it. There's little sense of really needing to solve a problem or escape a situation. This is a huge departure from the exciting first book, in which it felt like the main characters had to figure out everything, and with the imminent threat that time would run out. Additionally, while there seem to be a lot of rules to the magic and the characters which govern the story, these rules are only given to the reader as events happen. So at any given point, you, the reader, have no idea what resources the characters have at their disposal, or what they lack. Can they get out of this situation? What would they have to do? Are they in any real danger or not?. Will supposedly has all kinds of powers, but he rarely seems to be able to use them, and we don't know much about what they can do. By the end of the book I found myself just assuming that there would be some kind of surprise solution to each problem, probably coming from someone else besides Will, and I stopped caring. I remember The Grey King (book 4) being a cool story when I was a kid. Maybe the series gets better as it goes on? I might give the next book a try just to see if there's any improvement. A hybrid between the styles of books 1 and 2 would certainly have potential. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
