Stacey's Mistake PLOT: Stacey invites her friends out to NY for a weekend when the adults in her building decide to get together for a day to work on a solution that will help the homeless. That leaves 5 families with no one to watch their kids. Only Stacey can't watch all those kid's alone. When the BSC arrives they act like they've never been outside of Connecticut. Maryanne has turned into a walking guide book. Dawn is freaked out by the city's bad rep. Kristy is just her typical loud self and Claudia well Claudia is someone else completely. She turns jealous and bitchy. The BSC manages to come to a truce after things get tense after a party doesn't go so well as she planned to introduce her old crew to her NY friends and they take the kid's out for an enjoyable afternoon. The weekend ends on a high note involving a limo and a Broadway play curtesy of Laine (Stacey's NY best friend). MY THOUGHTS: *I think Stacey gets embarrassed to easily. She does and does not seem to forget off and on that her friend's aren't from New York. For example they get lost in Grant Central Station. Just out of curiosity I did a search on Grand Central Station. It's got 68 freaking shops and 35 dining places. Stacey says they'd better not have stopped to go shopping. Ok even if they hadn't, did she seriously think Mary Anne wouldn't have probably stopped and taken like a trizzilion pictures between where they got off and the information desk? Even if they hadn't gotten lost (which was probably also easy to do.) just because Stacey was used to the place's layout doesn't mean her friends were. Thus she should have been a little more understanding. Unless the main room and the information desk was right there when they stepped off the train with a big sign in front of them. Somehow I don't think this was the case (without having been myself) *She gets pissed because Claudia brings a big suitcase with wheels, which is ridiculous because if you went to a airport now a days that's half the suitcases probably and I bet you someone else in that station that wasn't an old lady had one. And like she said it's CLAUDIA. I'm surprised the others were able to fit three days' worth of clothes in back packs and just a carry on. She should have automatically assumed she'd have to make another stop to drop off their things. *She gets embarrassed because Kristy mispronounces fillet mignon. I'm sure the waitress has heard mispronunciations of things on the menu before and its not her first time. She wasn't bothered by it why was Stacey. *She gets "huffy" when Maryanne asks if there are any other celebrities in her building, which to me seems like maybe a far fetched question but one that seems pretty understandable. But then having studied the guide book word for word wouldn't Maryanne already know? *They're away for a WEEKEND and their writing their families and other members of the club stuff they can just tell them when they get back. It's not that serious. *This book is consistent with Welcome Back stuff with Henry liking Bronto's. * Ok I've heard of Stuart Little but I never read the books or watched the movies. A MOUSE is born to human parents? Did I read that correctly? How is that even remotely possible? *If each kid had a partner maybe they should have kept that system while they were in the Museum then maybe Henry wouldn't have gotten left or either they should have checked that all the kids were with them after they came out of the Dinosaur room. Careless on the BSC's part. *What's up with Claudia in this book? She seems VERY out of character. She calls out Laine (despite how I feel that Laine needed to be called out for treating Stacey like a leaper over having diabetes) and she c-blocks Kristy because Coby "was the only guy she felt comfortable talking to". No time before this in the story did it say she'd been talking to Coby. He'd been talking to Kristy most of the night up until after they were introduced until she cuts in on their dance. *If this party wasn't about "dressing up" then why did Laine have on a short, black, dress, STOCKINGS, and flats. Which kind of puts me in the mind of a video vixen in the early 90s more than of sophistication. RATING: 7 The descriptions of the places in this were so inspired it made me go to each one's official page (Central Park, Grand Central Station, and the American Museum of Natural History and the Hard Rock Cafe). I've never been to New York (even though I have a cousin who lives there) and reading this definitely made me want to go and see each one in person. Minus the doing them with 10 kids. That part I could skip. Even though Henry and Grace were my favorites. They kind of remind me of my two little cousins. Stacey in this is just a little irritating. Yeah I know Maryanne was like a tour guide on speed, Dawn was a little nervous about the city (which well NY isn't always painted in the best light), and Claudia was insecure but their your friends and its there first time in a new place. If I took my friends to let's say Orlando (which is my favorite place) even though I've been several times if they'd never been I'd be so excited to show them all the things I love about it. It would be just like my first time all over again, and I can't wait until we take the newest member of our family. So it's not always true that things you love and have seen a lot can get familiar and not impressive to you anymore. Put yourself in their shoes. If the situation was reversed would they see it as a mistake inviting you if say it was Cali (Dawn's home town) or does Stacey think she's so sophisticated that she'd never lose her cool like that being from the city and all? Sometimes I think Stacey does have just a tad bit of snob in her
