Devoted Ladies are people I wouldn't want to be friends with. My god, this is so close to the truth it's a crazy mix of clever black comedy and horror. Because people do behave like this, and Keane has dissected these personality attributes so well, with her dry wit, that you find yourself stuck in the head of these women and their motivations. Just vile. Not woman's greatest moment. There really isn't a massive plot to this book, other than some people who know each other in London all end up in Ireland and one of them fancies this Irish guy and they might get married. Looking at it like that, it sounds rather thin, and perhaps fitting of one of the Irish-set books George gives Jane to read whilst she's on her sick bed - classically soppy books mixing hunting and romance, with marvelous titles such as "The Girl Who Gave". Because, I should add, this is focusing on the country upper classes who enjoy nothing more than a good hunt, and sadly the only time you can see them calming down and approaching something human like is when they're tracking their hounds across fields and watching foxes being torn to shreds. It may not be a massively complex plot, but what this is, is a character driven book, with some brilliantly portrayed characters. And their interactions with each other. It feels as though Keane is describing the whole of womankind that she may have come into contact with. The ladies in this book are all devoted to their individual arts and generally making one another's lives a misery. We have flatmates Jane and Jessica, living in London. Jane is an airhead alcoholic party girl who doesn't have an opinion about anything and lets herself be bullied into doing anything she doesn't, whilst on the inside cowering and whimpering that she wished she could do what she wants. Ruses even have to be concocted between her, her ladies maid the butler Albert (another wonderful character) and her nurse, so that she may read her books, such as "The Girl Who Gave". Jessica is an intellectual snob and a vicious bully, who will go to the lengths of random physical violence. At a party at the start, she throws a glass at Jane's head because... couldn't really tell you. She loves the fact that she bullies and controls Jane, whilst at the same time looking down her nose at her. I suppose this all feeds some insecurity she has deep down. In London they are friends with playwright/author Sylvester, who puts himself out for no one, and George Playfair, awfully nice Irish rich guy who is a little bit besotted with Jane. The action then goes to Ireland where for various reasons they find themselves living with Hester and Viola - constantly referred to, even by herself, as 'Piggy'. Hester is of the rich aristocracy who has lost her fortune and is forced to have Piggy, who does have some money and can help keep the household afloat. Hester therefore is a bit of a martyr to Piggy's whims and will often do without or cancel her plans because Piggy might want something different. But we see a bit of a blossoming of Hester, even though she's more of a side character, and of all the women she's the most likable. Piggy is completely in awe/dominated/utterly and consciously taken advantage of by her 'friend' Joan. She is constantly called fat Piggy and made fun of by this family, but she's like a loyal dumb dog and laps it up and keeps running around asking for more. In turn she vents on Hester, and then Jane who is immediately seen as competition for Joan and George's love - and so starts the female bitching. Look at the colour of her nails, what is she wearing!!! etc etc. Joan is a self absorbed narcisst girl-woman who unashamedly uses people and although beautiful on the surface, is pretty nasty underneath. What a vile bunch of characters they are! And yet it's interesting to read and see the mind games and tactics they play against each other, whilst all the time trying to convince everyone how utterly devoted they are to one another. Fascinating and mildly depressing for how close to real life it is. I should add this is my second Keane book. Although this is worth a read, I didn't like it as much as Time After Time. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
