Personal Reaction:I thought this was an excellent book, and I could immediately tell it was a transitional book. The story has plenty of sentences, but they are relatively short with small amounts of dialogue. I also really liked the illustrations, as they were very vivid and definitely helped to tell the story. I definitely enjoyed this book, so I think this is one that a first, second, or third grader would love, so I would keep this book on my classroom shelf. Use in the Classroom: Curricular Connection: I would use this book to teach my students the idea of tone in a story. First, I would read this book aloud, then ask my students what they think the tone of the story is. The overall tone of this book is excitement and anticipation, and I would point this out to my students. Tone is incredibly important to the emotions the reader feels while reading this story, and I would be sure to point out the importance of recognizing tone when reading a book. Independent Reading: This book has relatively short sentences, and it also introduces basic dialogue to the reader. It also has three chapters in it, so it introduces the concept of different chapter to transitional readers. The illustrations also take up about half of each page, and they help to clarifying the meaning of some of the sentences, which would make reading this book independently much easier. I think this would be a great book for a first or second grader who are advancing in reading as they should be, and it would also be good for a third grader who is struggling with reading. Since it is an easy chapter book, I think it would be a great book for an older student that is struggling with reading, as they might not feel as behind while they are reading it. Narrative: As I said before, I would definitely use this book to teach tone, but I think I could also use it to teach setting. I could as the students how the story would be different if the theme was different. I could also use it to teach theme, as the theme of this particular story is relatively easy to understand. This would also be an excellent book for introducing the idea of dialogue to the students.
