3.5 stars, rounded up to 4. This was an enjoyable read, nothing outstanding or groundbreaking in my opinion, but I liked it all the same. The sorcerer Anskiere, master of wind and water bound the Mharg-Demons with the help of his fellow sorcerer, Ivain, master of fire and earth. Unfortunately, during the binding, Ivain, who had gone insane in from trying to master the Cycle of Fire, betrayed Anskiere during the binding. Anskiere was able to accomplish the binding anyway, and he laid a geas on Ivain and Ivain's descendants that if he should ever summon them they were bound to fulfill a task of his choosing. Fast forward some years later, and some humans are trying to release the demons and Anskiere makes good on his summons. The physically frail apprentice scribe Jaric, unbeknownst to himself and to those around him, is actually the son and heir of Ivain, so it falls to his slight shoulders to answer Anskiere's summonses. In many ways this is a bog-standand fantasy novel, with many of the tropes (I hate the word "tropes" and TV tropes but I can't think of what other word to use instead) we have come to know and somewhat tolerate in the genre: the Unsuspecting Chosen One, the Mysterious Yet Benevolent Wizard, the Gentle Empath, the Badass Pirate King, the Beautiful Scheming Sorceress, the Angry Young Man Who Vows Vengaence and Is Pulled Over to the Dark Side, etc. I found the prose to be well done in the main, in a dense, descriptive way, though at times the author became a little too fond of stacking together adjectives. Ms. Wurts must be a fan of high-seas adventure; come prepared to read extensively about nautical pursuits. (Me, I can't really tell the aft from the stern or what a halyard is; I have pretty much given up on trying to understand the layout of a ship, so I just went with it). Also there is a lot of magical pyrotechnics, which were pretty fun to read, I must admit. Though in some ways Stormwarden treads a well-worn path, there were certain things I found unique and intriguing about it. the Vaere, the Sathid, and the blending of sci-fi and fantasy elements, the Lhondel. I hope all of these aspects are explored in more detail in the next two installments of the trilogy. The prose, as I mentioned, is dense and descriptive, and on occasion a bit repetitive. I mean, I don't need to be reminded a dozen times about Jaric being insecure about his physical frailties. I get it, he's got an inferiority complex. Let's move on, shall we? But overall, I enjoyed the book, and look forward to reading the next two installments of it (one of the advantages to buying an omnibus edition is that you have the whole trilogy lined up in a single volume).
