Staggerford, Minn., senior citizen Agatha McGee takes the stage again (third time) in Jon Hassler's "Dear James," and this time the sometimes set-in-her-ways spinster's life has taken a tumultuous turn, and she's not sure what to do with herself. She's a teacher no more, feeling useless and down in the dumps since her school was closed. She's still writing to her Irish priest-friend Father James O'Hannon; she's just not mailing them. Agatha still is stinging after finding out, in Hassler's earlier "A Green Journey," while visiting James for the first time in Ireland, that her beloved penpal is a man of the cloth. While James suffers ill health in Ireland, Agatha decides to join a group of college kids, her Staggerford priest and her friend Lillian on a trip to Italy. Back at home, a shiftless man who watches over Agatha's house while she's away has a relationship with Lillian's daughter, who turns out to have it in for Agatha and discovers the old woman's letters from James, which reveal some snarky words Agatha has had for Staggerford residents. This woman decides to do what she can to knock Agatha down a peg or two. To Agatha's surprise, James finds her in Italy, and they resume a complicated relationship. The book drags a little before James joins up; this time abroad worried me, as I found "A Green Journey," set primarily abroad, the weakest of the previous six Hassler books. But the resumption of Agatha and James' friendship, coupled with James' decision to jump hip-deep into seeing what he can do to soften the violent situation in Ireland/Northern Ireland and the Troubles, perks things up. This unexpected political slant, coupled with Agatha's own troubles, on her return to Minnesota, coping with the cold shoulders turned her way by friends and townspeople affronted by her words, through James, about them, lift the novel considerably. Determined to keep their friendship going, Agatha and James visit each other in their home countries, and when Agatha decides to help with a troubled Irish boy, their lives entwine further. Hassler breaks through the temporary dullness of the early part of the Italy journey and turns in another perceptive, moving, amusing tale of small-town Minnesota.
