i burned through 5 dennis coopers in as many days and i'm in no proper state to comment. so, lemme bring to your attention two exemplary goodreaders i came across as i checked out how y'all responded to cooper's extreme punchfucking asseating & ballsniffing. 1. eddie watkins nails what's best about these books. y'see, i'd be content with some obvious booshit like calling out cooper as a postmodern genet but watkins writes this: "The particular obsession in Frisk does originate in a mere image (a snuff still), but Cooper does a fantastic job of portraying how deeply an image seen in one’s youth can so deeply inhabit one’s psyche that for decades to come one’s larger actions are determined by it. But for Cooper it doesn’t end here, because the obsesser finds out years later that the haunting image was actually a fake, which sets up some interesting metafictional pyrotechnics and much narrative ambiguity." it kinda irks me that he used 'deeply' twice in one sentence, but this is disposable internet bookreport bullshit so fuck it. here's some more: "Gay Fetish Lit. Did I ever think I would read such a thing? Never. Did I even know it existed? Sure, but only vaguely. Did I enjoy it? Definitely. Does this mean that my straight married life is going crooked? Only in the imagination (a far more capacious world than we are generally allowed in workaday life), and as a straight man (with an inner asexual gay man) I'm probably more interested in reading about gay sex anyway." 2. imogen binnie. ok, this girl is not on my friends list and i'm not gonna friend request her because i hope that one day she's skimming cooper reviews and comes across this and it totally freaks her out. after reading some of her reviews (cooper and non-cooper) and seeing her picture she seems the type that i would've met in a too-crowded & low-ceilinged nyc dance cavern and feeling all sad and wonderful during a new order or morrissey song i would've acted inappropriately and she would've punched me in the face and then i would've cried to her for a while and drunkenly pathetically repeated "i'm sorry, i'm so sorry" and she would've had to tell me "it's ok. forget it." over and over and then i would've walked home alone and felt all depressed and gropey but also kind've enjoyed the general chaos of the night. but yes. she's a really good reviewer and her cooper stuff goes something like this: "Dennis Cooper is my boyfriend so bad. It's hard to describe why teen angst, gay u/dystopias, and shit obsession are SO APPEALING when he writes about 'em. But they are." the first sentence makes absolutely no sense. awesome. "I can never remember any of the specifics of his books a week after finishing them. I love him." and "Pssh, like I was not gonna give this five stars: my life is basically an attempt to answer the question, "What if I had been the gay boy I should have been in 1995, and also what if 1995 had never ended?" This book is full of: Dennis Cooper being a homo interviewing Keanu Reeves, Dennis Cooper being a homo interviewing Leonardo DiCaprio just before Titanic came out, Dennis Cooper writing a 20-page biography of Nan Goldin (I got so sucked into this that I missed my bus stop), Dennis Cooper writing about heroin and Kurt Cobain and raves and, y'know, it's basically him taking all the things I like (including jaded old punk bullshit, self-conscious self-obsession, and pretending not to smirk) that i've mixed up and made my blood out of, and de-alchemizing them into their individual ingredients. Pretentious! All I'm saying is, I wish that Dennis Cooper was my dad... Man, I don't even care that it gets more and more lazily copyedited toward the end, dropping punctuation and even letters. Who cares! It is punk rock apathy, which was HOT in 1995."
