i'm pretty sure there aren’t many books that focus on teenage girls, not in some special light and under particular (and doubtlessly most worthy) agendas, but as vibrant, strong people with a rich private and communal life that encompasses all sorts of realities. i can think of books that do this with boys, and from the point of view of boys, but girls, girls are mostly relegated to literature that exposes abuse (i’ll be delighted to be proven wrong). nancy takahiro is a japanese-american high-school senior and star basketball player who lives in inglewood, an entirely african-american neighborhood of los angeles, with her divorced father. mom left, married a white guy, and pretty much forgot all about nancy, maybe an unpleasant reminder of her racialized past. nancy's dad, wendell, is loving, attentive, and solid, and, while not in a we-tell-each-other-everything way, nancy and he get along great. nancy's rapport with her dad is one of the bearing walls of this novel, and i think it's portrayed beautifully. nancy feels towards him the way a seventeen year old should: she takes for granted his support and protection, looks up to him in a way that has yet to reckon with the fallibility of parents, and pretty much ignores him in order to do her own stuff. the trajectory of their relationship, which is traced throughout the year that constitutes the temporal span of the novel, is a lovely tribute to the way parents and children's love can grow instead of ebb over time. soon after the beginning of the novel dad falls in love with the mother of another gay high school basketball star he meets at a game, and mother and daughter soon move in. raina, nancy's newly acquired step-sister of sorts, happens to be the girl nancy has long admired and desired. remarkably, at seventeen, nancy knows that she is, and feels fully comfortable being, gay, and is in close touch with the girls in the high school basketball circuit who are also gay. they consider themselves a "family," and draw a tremendous amount of strength from this statewide community of theirs. the novel tells us just about all we ever wanted to know about high school basketball in the 80s (i doubt it's much changed), which is a great thing if you like sports. it tells you about tournaments, leagues, camps, training session, seasons, and play-offs; uniforms, shoes, diet, and lifestyle; how kid athletes are seen, the way they negotiate their lives as athletes and their lives as children, students, friends, and the tremendous confidence they derive from being something that is recognized and admired instead of just regular teens trying to find their place in the world. it tells you all about games: moves, tactics, team psychology, coaching, leadership, the advantages of height and weight, and what makes a kid a star and another an ordinary player. and it tells you all about recruitment. recruitment is another of the bearing wall of the novel; it constitutes a nice focal point for the moment in which nancy and raina will leave home and become (a bit more) adult. both girls, now housemates, have a lot of suitors and they deal with the pressures of recruiting with a mixture of pride, pleasure, and anxiety. now that raina lives with her, nancy has a whole new problem vis a vis her feelings for her, which grow and grow with each passing day (because of raina, nancy’s been single for two years). through nancy's eyes, raina is the most charismatic kid ever. she's beautiful, a brilliant athlete, strong, focused, and vulnerable in the right amount and fashion for maximum seductiveness. nancy's love for her is boundless. since it is a known fact in the lesbian circle in which raina and nancy navigate that nancy is infatuated with raina, things are complicated between them from the start. nancy makes a high wire act of loving raina without losing her dignity or risking rejection, and raina, for her part, goes out of her way to be kind and friendly toward nancy without giving her the wrong idea. the novel is so drenched in longing, you could wring a bucket out of it. but it's longing mixed with the pure pleasures of childhood – watching tv together, playing one on one or pickup games every afternoon in the park, studying in the same room. nancy lives of the fumes of raina's life – raina has a girlfriend she very much loves and who constantly breaks her heart with her cheating and callousness – but they are rich fumes and keep nancy exhilarated. The Necessary Hunger does a fabulous job of portraying the miseries and delights of adolescence in the context of ordinary life. revoyr takes her time building the novel, and she gives us nancy's life with a calm, steady pace that takes full pleasure in repeated description of routines and apparently insignificant acts. i found this deliberately slowness intensely mesmerizing. you find yourselves living with these people and finding peace whenever they do. this tempers what could have been an intensely emotional novel and gives a sense of the normality of life, in which deep and rich moments are drowned out, quantitatively, by the simple acts that constitute our getting from morning to night and vice versa. it is astonishing to see how many profound themes revoyr manages to get deeply into while seeming to spend time on walks in the neighborhood and pancake breakfasts. one of these themes, of course, is the huge complexity of race in a big city like L.A., which is most glaring in the moments in which teams from different part of towns meet (nancy takes awesome pleasure of making mince-meat of the all-white teams from wealthy neighborhoods) and in the fact that nancy and her dad are the only non-black characters of the book, so that every relationship they get into is ipso facto a mixed one. revoyr describes lovingly the dangers and allures of the run-down neighborhoods that sit on the other side of the tracks. many reviewers have seen this book as a love song to L.A. and revoyr herself describes it as such . the charm of urban america, especially of cities like L.A. that are designed for cars instead of fragile machines of flesh and calcium, is somehow lost on me, but, having lived and sweated in L.A. for a chunk of years, i still see what revoyr and the reviewers mean. the most striking element of this striking novel is the level of assurance and confidence of girl athletes. these black girls own the town. they have no problem roaming all of its neighborhoods, wealthy or poor, because they have played there and probably beaten their high school teams. their being brown-skinned, gay, poor, and female means nothing to them. they inhabit their bodies and their identity with ease and feel pretty much invincible. in her rough neighborhood, nancy, courted by the best colleges in the country, is a hero, and this makes her feel safe and strong. at the same time, the novel breaks your heart with the stories of high school athletes who are courted by no one, and whose strength and safety are doomed the day high school is over. nancy knows that most of her teammates and friends from the basketball circuit are headed for dead-end jobs, early pregnancies, crime, and jail, and it hurts her tremendously. i have delighted in reading so many novels, recently, that deal with what it feels like to be on the cusp of adulthood. the overwhelming sense i have derived from them is that we never get there, that adulthood and childhood are inextricably linked and that pure, unfettered maturity is a fictional construct designed to give us a sense of where we should be more than of where we will ever be.
