I learned about Mumford's work by reading Against the Machine by Paul Kingsnorth. If memory serves, Kingsnorth adopted Mumford's "machine" terminology for his own work. I refrained from reviewing Volume 1 until having read Volume 2, so what I say here applies to both. Mumford's work in Myth of the Machine is a part of several larger threads of literature that I would classify as social criticism and social philosophy. The clearest thread in which he should be included is that which was founded, in part, by Henry David Thoreau. At several points throughout the two books, Mumford elevates Thoreau above other writers who advocate a more primitive approach to culture, both in terms of quality and substance. Another writer in whose thread I think Mumford is a strand is C.S. Lewis. This may not appear as obviously as Thoreau, although Lewis is mentioned several times. In particular, I find that Myth of the Machine resonates with Lewis' argument in Abolition of Man . This is particularly the case in Mumford's discussion of "axial religions" (Volume 1, pages 258-262), as in axiology , the philosophical consideration of value. Both make the argument that to be human is to pursue questions of value and, more often than not, the things most humanely valuable transcend (in the truest sense) cultural, religious, and theological differences. Overall, I find the central thesis of these two volumes together to be that humanity must be on its guard to put its tools and technology at the service of values rather than shifting values to serve its tools and technology. Mumford is cautioning modern Western civilization against what he sees (and we are currently proving) to be the case: that we sacrifice value and meaning to pursuit of mere "progress" in technical terms. In this sense, Myth of the Machine proves to be as prophetic as Huxley's Brave New World (also cited) and serves as a valuable nonfiction companion to any study of dystopian fiction and other sources of social critique.
