I became an active eBay.com user in mid-1998, about three years after Pierre Omidyar launched it. This book was certainly interesting to me in filling in what I missed and also jogging my memory on quite a few incidents I witnessed as a user. This biography of a business attempts to tell the history of the first seven years of eBay.com. Of course tracking a business that grows from seven to over 15,000 employees in a few short years is a massive undertaking. Author Adam Cohen does a fairly good job of breaking it all down. He focuses on key personal and major events of the company and tries his best to lay it out chronologically. The twelve chapters all contain a number of articles pertaining to that time period, with certain important company characters we return to more than others. Cohen deals not only with the employees but also with the eBay community. One of the more shocking revelations concerned an active forum member with the account name "Pongo." I remember Pongo but never in my wildest dreams would have guessed what was going on with her in her personal life. He also interviews the first seller to reach 10,000 feedback as well as a few anonymous users who have their own opinions of eBay's worth (or worthlessness). It is also interesting to read this 2002 book in 2009 for the promises broken. The author states that Half.com was shut down by eBay. After the book was published eBay found that the Half.com community would not let it go and it still exists as a separate site today. He also talks about how the community disapproved of eBay selling advertising and also giving special preference to large corporate sellers, and how eBay decided to back off those ventures. Here in 2009 eBay is full of advertising and Buy.com and other corporate sellers are indeed being pushed in front of regular sellers. I was expecting to read about the first eBay Live! convention but I guess that was in 2002, after the book was finished. I recommend this book to fans or users of eBay.com. This book is a great refresher course of past history and an insight to where many of its traditions began.
