It was too cheesy for me. Much of the dialogue was corny. Adrian's affectionate names for Vickie was repetitive and sounded too historical for the time. Some of the dialogue was lengthy and drawn out. The ending, I didn't like it. I get what the author intended but it just didn't make sense for me. I had theorized that the twist was they'd end up in the future present day (at the time of the book release that is) as the right time for them. I just don't see how they could be happy in a time completely foreign from what they're used to and why they couldn't go back to their own time in the first place since Keegan was gone. I don't see why they would have all died if they tried to get back to 1945 in the first place considering they still had a confrontation with Keegan regardless of what they chose. I liked the idea of the story but the way it panned out, not so much. It felt very...fairytale storybookish where the characters are cardboard cutout and don't change at all. There was no growth, no realism to them, very formulaic and boring. It wasn't a bad story, I know a lot of effort went into this. But it was just not very interesting seeing them running around asking questions every chapter and making no progress in a real relationship. It felt like we were told that they were falling for each other but I didn't actually see it. Adrian and Vickie were just two people thrown together by circumstance otherwise they never would have gotten together. There wasn't any chemistry between them. I was more interested in the cute romance between Nate and Cathy as kids than I did for the adults because they at least were shown they weren't perfect and showed some sort of personality to them. I don't know if I explained myself right but to put it in simple terms, this is one of those overly cheesy romances with no big drama. If you need something that's disgustingly lovey dovey with no heavy conflict for the characters, this is it. I thought this might be written by the author much earlier in her career but if the book page on Amazon is correct, this was published in the same month and year as "Waltz In Time" which was by far superior to this book and much, much, better overall in characters, storyline, quality...I love that book and recommend it highly. Which is why I was confused with how much I hated "Rogue's Mistress" and the indifference I felt reading this book with how amateur this book felt compared to "Waltz In Time." They're all written by the same author and left me with completely different impressions of each one. Sad to say, I'll pass on reading this again, it wasn't for me.
