"London: The Biography" by Peter Ackroyd is an exploration of the city that delves deep into the lives and experiences of its people throughout history. Despite the book’s considerable size, this is not the grand and epic history one might expect. Instead, Ackroyd often focuses on the intimate details of Londoners’ existence and their daily lives through time. This approach appears charming at first. The reader feels like instead of a sky high view of things, they are gently placed upon the ground and time is slowed down as if they are viewing London as a common person who grew up there. But soon, this approach also makes the book quite dense and hard to read as the author hyper focuses on one subject for a long period of time. For example, there is a lengthy chapter on what London “sounds” like and others that go deeply into its smells, or the graffiti you can find in its toilet stalls, or the history of maps made of London, the history of its accents, etc. The reader can be disoriented from the chapter titles, (which are often quotes and tell you nothing about what’s to come in the succeeding chapter), and also that the book is organized thematically rather than chronologically. You are thrown around vast quantities of time so frequently, it feels a bit chaotic at times and can be hard to follow. The segue ways from one topic to the next are not always the best. And again, the topics that one would think a lot of time would be spent on (the plague, the great fire, etc.) barely get mentioned compared to the far less interesting (and sometimes outright mundane) aforementioned topics above. It is obvious that the author put a lot of effort and research into this book. But it comes across as more little bits of culture that they personally found interesting all cobbled together, and not the scholarly historical analysis one might expect from such a comprehensive work. One other thing that can be hard for readers, at least it was for me, is the habit of using grand metaphors to describe London. The author views London as a living organism and constantly uses sweeping metaphors that can come across as excessive. For those interested in the common people and character of London, "London: The Biography" can, at times, offer interesting anecdotes and unique parts of history that you don’t normally hear about. However, readers seeking a more scholarly examination of the city's history may find themselves skipping to the parts that captivate their interest the most or putting down the book for good altogether.
