First of all.... BAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA Let me warn you upfront... If you are the overly sensitive, blushing, color within the lines, you know - that very special type of delicate flower, then by all means move the fuck away and make sure to take your smelling salts with you. This book is definitely not for you. I volunteer a day a week in a charity oriented used book store. The place is massive, the place is brilliant and most of all it has a lush, constant circulation of novels that come from people's loved sometimes even life long collections. You get to find those nuggets, long forgotten. The difference between the used book stores and the polished – brand spanking new – ones is simple. The books in the used book store are affordable, were talking .99 here. They are pre-loved and it shows, and they usually come with an honest recommendation, not the stupid marketing ploy bullshit. So needless to say, for one day a week, I am in heaven. When I stumbled on the Berrybender Narratives, they came from a guy with a sharp mind and a wicked sense of humour. He said → “The series is inappropriate in the true sense of the word, being laden with innuendos, gender stereotypes and surprising amount of gore.... and it was funny as hell.” No way I was going to pass on that. So, naturally I got it. He was absolutely right. The narrative presents us with a rich snob of an English Lord, his daughters that have characters worthy of their fathers upbringing all stranded in the New Country with their aristocratic mentality in a very raw and unforgiving land. The clash of cultures is astounding as well as sometimes incredibly shocking, but what takes the cake here was the fact that Larry made you try and think, try and envision the actual turn of events back in the day. The book is brutal, written in an unflinchingly bold way that would undoubtedly make many squeamish. That's why I have enjoyed it so much. Civilization as we know it is in fact very young, and we as a people still rush to forget the brutal ways we used to deal with each other throughout history. It shakes us to the core, the real fact that we used to be cruel and cutthroat and we tend to dismiss anything or anyone that dares to remind us of that. So I say, good on you Larry! I say good on you, because when I have checked and seen that this book was published only ten years ago, I was amazed by the guy's cajones. This takes guts to be open about the past in unforgiving times such as this. Needles to say it reflects in the ratings. The book is patronizing, brutal, sexist and insulting at times, everything that we as a society openly were until just a few decades ago- and still I've managed to bust a gut while reading it. And no, my sensitive ones, this doesn't mean that I condone these types of behavior in my everyday existence.
