A Dense, Quirky Telling of 2,000 Years of London's Story This is quite an unusual and quirky and unforgettable book. It’s a long-form love poem to the city over the past two millennia of its incredibly eventful and storied history. It does a great job of covering the city not chronologically like a bog-standard history book. Instead, it takes a loosely thematic approach, covering it from dozens of angles - the early native Britons era, then the Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Vikings, Normans, Middle Ages, Plantagenets/Tudors/Stuarts, then the Victorian and Imperial Age, Industrial Revolution, WWI, WWII Blitz, and then the Post-War years and Thatcher and up to around the turn of the century. The book is far from even-handed and unbiased - Peter Ackroyd believes the city has a personality and spirit of its own, embedded in the millennia of history in the very mud, stones, brick, human detritus, and later concrete, steel, and glass. And each neighborhood of London has its own distinct identity, which reverberates and remains throughout different ages. It’s quite a fanciful concept, and while I wouldn’t deny it in a more conceptual sense, he actually seems to believe it in very literally. Apparently this theme runs through much of his other fiction and non-fiction works. What I found most interesting was reading the polarized reviews of this book by other GR readers. They fall mainly into two camps, which fall broadly into these polar opposite views: 1) Ackroyd’s London is a brilliant and erudite book, brimming with amazing scholarship and chockablock with anecdotes, both entertaining and edifying. He is a genius and a national treasure. 2) Ackroyd’s London in its later stages is clearly a middle-class English book promoting a xenophobic, Eurocentric view of Englands Imperial and Colonial legacy, glibly glossing over the exploitive nature of that time, and instead taking a cosy nostalgic view of England at its zenith of political and economic and cultural status, and offensive and insensitive as such. Well, like all things, I imagine the truth lies in-between, and moreover it depends on the perspective and views of the reader. The book is both really, so you will react to it accordingly, most likely. As an American expat who spent half his life in Japan, and only recently moved to the British Isles, I’ve been voraciously learning as much as I can about this complex and contentious legacy, trying to see the good and the bad, and putting things in their historical context but also understanding how the bad aspects of Imperial/Colonial rule most certainly are deserving of harsh criticism in this multicultural and multi-polar global era. I think I can see both sides. I can say with certainty that I found the book very interesting to listen to, especially with its thematic, easily digested chapters that broke up a very long book. It never bored me, even though some of the florid writing did elicit some eye-rolling. It told me a lot about London I didn’t know, piqued my interest in the city even more, and provided much food for thought. In that sense, it was well worth the time I invested.
