I approached "With the Lightnings" as a contemporary of David Weber's Honor Harrington books, expecting something in the same vein: a Napoleonic space warfare adventure. Given the premise, focused on a young space navy officer without political connections cast into a complicated political and military situation, this confusion on my part is understandable, but I'm afraid that confusion marred my enjoyment of the book. In fact, the book takes place almost entirely on the surface of a planet and rarely involves anything more futuristic than what amounts to an iPhone and a solar-powered hydrofoil. The weaponry has fancy names (and implied high-tech elements) but functionally, the author might've been describing modern firearms. Frankly, With the Lightnings only achieves science fiction status by implication, by its occasional descriptions of exotic animals and plants, and by the (extremely brief) space battle at the end. Ultimately, it wasn't what I was expecting, but worse than that, it also failed to be particularly good in its own right. The main two characters, Lt. Leary and Adele Mundy, are fairly interesting and the events that lead them to work together are evocative, but the story is told in such an erratic manner that it's often hard to tell which character we are following or from whose perspective the story is being told, arbitrarily switching locations and perspectives freely without chapter breaks to help the reader follow along. The book also fails to provide perspective to its events, dropping the reader into a complex political situation in the midst of an ongoing war and only barely covering who the two sides are or why they're fighting. This was my first exposure to David Drake's writing and frankly, I'm not impressed and I doubt that I'll give him another chance. Deep down, there's an interesting story in this book, and at times I was genuinely intrigued, but ultimately, it was told so incompetently that I was just happy to be done with it. If you're looking for a space adventure story, I'd recommend sticking with David Weber's Honor Harrington books instead, and if you're looking for something with a comparable futuristic political intrigue/thriller, I'd recommend Jody Lynn Nye's "The View From the Imperium" or Eric Flint's "Course of Empire/Crucible of Empire".
