There was so much to enjoy about this novel. Such as the first meeting between the hero (Captain Chase/Lord Winstoke) and heroine (Cristobel Swann), although I have to admit I didn't like have his rakish behavior thrown so hard in my face. The two got off on the wrong foot right away, but in such a funny way (including some literal tripping over Cristobel's harp)! But how could things not get off on the wrong foot, given he had "stolen" (won in a card game) her inheritance. I couldn't help but think how differently it would have gone if Chase could have seen her, but I'm glad he didn't. Anyway, despite the less than pleasant meeting, Chase is a good guy. He tries to help Cristobel. But of course, with Metzger, things don't get better before they get worse. The lodging house Chase gives her is actually a bordello, a fact which Chase didn't know and that the residents and current managers of do their best to hide from her. And then when Cristobel does find out, things get even worse for her--I won't say how, for it will spoil things. But suffice it to say, from beginning of her plight to this point and beyond, Cristobel handles it with strength, so while I sympathized with her, I knew she is a capable woman. And of course, there is also the romance, which starts off, once again, on the wrong foot--for the two do not recognize each other! Though this time, they have time to interact and to start falling in love. Overall, the whole novel was great. So great that I read it in two days, and I was left with few regrets. One regret was the aforementioned rakish incident I did not like all that much, but was so brief and minor it is scarcely worth mentioning. Another was Cristobel's former employer (a woman "with a heart so coal-black it could stoke the fires of hell a good long while"). Metzger wrote her so well, I expected and wanted to see more of her, but we never saw her again, except for a few mentions that tapered off throughout the novel. Finally, there was the resolution of a few plot-lines, one being the antagonist's and another being the discovery of who Chase is, that felt a little rushed. But even so, these fit with the overall light, funny tone of the novel, so they are not enough to deprive this work of its fifth star. Heat Level: mostly sweet. You will see a little heat in the situation (the bordello) but nothing explicit. Also the rakish incident, a few kisses, and pondering of non-marriage sexual relationships.
