In love, concussed, exhausted, and back tomorrow with a review :) The Review Phew! Okay: I’m going to focus only on the universality of Bob’s experience and not the time-and-place context of the thing. The Failure of Pessimism Isn’t that cool? I’m not sure I want to be taken seriously as a reviewer because I generally just reflect on whatever I gained from the book. What the hell is a book review? I don’t really know. Wait until you see how not-a-book-review this is, by the way. I’ve tangentially tangentialed so hard I’m not even sure this has anything to do with the book. Something must have happened to me sometime. I better make fun of a serious review’s conventions in an attempt to escape them. THE FAILURE OF PESSIMISM I think I just made it more serious. Anyway, that’s what this book’s message is to me. Heller tries his absolute best to squeeze every drop of hope out of Bob’s life. Or does he? I think there is an Achilles heel— one that Bob wouldn’t want to stamp on (and that’s saying something: the guy wants to stamp on just about everyone’s ankles. Ha, ha. I think he imagines they are going to float away from him otherwise. If he can’t be happy, if he can’t thrive or discover something to give him joy, nobody else should be able to either. But he doesn’t want to stamp on his son’s ankle— to whom he refers exclusively as “my boy.” He steps on it accidentally and falls into further anguish. To Bob, everything is about him, so his son, the ray of hope in his life [so you can figure out what happens to him— but you can’t say this book is about plot anyway; it’s about the experience of Bob’s head] must survive.) Heller is quite brilliant, because towards the end, I was thinking, ‘Well, if nothing else, at least he’s being honest about how he feels. It surely feels good to get off his chest?’ Then Bob says something like ‘I wish I could purge all these impulses by confessing them. But they come back again.’ Is there to be no relief? Mayyyyybe. But who is Bob confessing to? To us! But we’re the reader: we’re not there. None of this is coming out loud. No matter what is going on with someone, if they’re honest about it, they’ll find someone, sooner than they think, who agrees with them. Then you’re on the path to working out what to do about it. You think this is idealistic? Can’t say I give a shit. But hey: Vonnegut said of the novel’s message that ‘many lives, judged by the standards of the people who live them, are simply not worth living.’ By their own standards. But we’re never 100% isolated. It can be fun to test out what this would feel like, but it’s never a realilty. Everything in life has a counterpart. DIGRESSION Maybe we do all die barely scratching the surface of everything that happened around us, without understanding each other, without being honest, and with life feeling shorter than we imagined it would, and with so much of our lives feeling funereal in a way too. It sounds absolute: but it isn’t. A counterpart to this would be the tragedy of living too long, of entering a prolonged, painful existence that death can free us from. Is no death just as bad or worse than death? Is NO mystery— about life, about those around us, about ourselves, about how long we’re going to live— better than mystery? When it comes to the absolute rules of existence, if you test them, you’ll discover that everything is the way it has to be, and how you get to feel in response to them? Totally fucking arbitrary. In which case, to me, it makes no sense to be pessimistic. “Something Happened” is better than “Nothing Happened.” (Apart from in Bob’s case: something pretty shit happens.) I love stories about the pain of having no viable confidant (Lost in Translation, the others mentioned above, which I then took out of the first draft, so this parenthetical digression makes little sense)— but am I really to believe that a whole socioeconomic demographic of a whole country felt like this? There wasn’t one who didn’t, somewhere? Remember persuasive vs discursive? RECESSION Anyways, back to Heller’s absolute pessimism. If you do attempt to read every single word of every page in this book, it’s impossible to do so without getting bored, wanting out, or even laughing, especially towards the end when I started thinking ‘Now I know why this book took so long to write: Heller was determined to extract every negative thought Bob could have about everything in his life.’ At first, the book is seductive and promises humour. Then it becomes depressing. Then it becomes profoundly uncomfortable. Then it becomes laughable. I don’t know if this is the book’s point, but it induces a creeping cognitive dissonance in the reader that makes Bob’s outlook does-not-compute impossible. (A reminder: I am not disputing the book’s commentary on historical context; I’m talking about what happens if you read it now.) Vonnegut also says: “He began this book way back in 1962, and there have been countless gut-ripping news items and confrontations since then. But Heller's man Slocum is deaf and blind to them. He receives signals from only three sources: his office, his memory and home.” There you have it: the guy is trapped in his own head. We alone don’t need to know how to solve all our problems. I have no doubt we feel like this. I have no doubt that Bob feels like everything he’s saying is true. But we cannot trust our pure judgement on anything. This is an important lesson in today’s quite isolating age: remember to collect second opinions! (When it comes to an outlook on life? You’re receiving mine right now!) Bob does a lot of telling: ‘I don’t care,’ ‘I didn’t give a damn,’ ‘I felt sad.’ I don’t have to believe him. It’s like when white middle class writers call writing “hell”: do you have to take that at face value? “Hell” (and “Heller” if that makes sense or at least sounds clever) is clearly relative. The Title Something Happened. It’s brilliant. The expression arises several times in the narrative. Bob has no idea how he ended up feeling the way he does. I can’t imagine he wants to feel that way, but how to get out when he doesn’t know what the hell happened? Something did. He used to enjoy his daughter’s company. He might have been a man who, while valuing his son’s equal opportunity mindset, didn’t discourage it, for reasons unknown. Something must have happened to society that men like Bob Slocum came into existence. The Structure. I want to say that the chapters go in order of whom Bob chooses to describe, starting with himself, then his wife, his daughter, his son, then his mentally disabled son (whose chapter is titled, interestingly, “It is not true.”) But Heller has said he finds his way into the text with opening sentences, and after the opening sentence about each family member, the ramble begins and digresses all over the place. But these signposts are important: we all take aspects of ourselves from others and hope they find us equally useful in this regard; someone like Slocum sees everyone as a projection of himself or purely as a device to bring him something of value. In which case, in lieu of plot, we can see Bob’s apparently non-developing thoughts retrogressing through each family member. Grieving Grievances I think it’s healthy to grieve for people you never even knew: it’s part of feeling connected to humanity at large. It doesn’t always feel like Robbie Williams Nikon camera ‘Oh my god!’ AHhhhah ahah ahhahhhhhhh ahhh ahhhhhhhhhhh fuckin’ hipsters drinking Southern Comfort on a roof. (Does it ever feel like that when product selling isn’t involved anyway? Most times I hang out with people to remember how overrated it is so I can enjoy my solitude again! But only the right people will read that confession, because they’ve made it this far and I suspect share this opinion.) Any time I’ve ever meditated or done something similar (read a hypnotic book, stared at some interesting artwork), I’m always left with a brighter (like a light) but emotionally neutral feeling, for this very reason. When you marry someone, you marry their whole family. When you open your heart, not only do you HAVE to let everything in, but it’s the healthiest option. Heller taught me this: so did Inside Out. Life is sometimes sad. But ultimately worth it (I am TOTALLY making burritos tonight!) These books are a staple of our culture. Of course I would only know the American ones (American Psycho, What I Lived For- both inferior) but we as a people have decided that reflecting on attitudes like Bob’s is an act with artistic value. (And where there’s art, there’s hope- ha!) Anyway, always remember: even if there is no pleasure in your life, there exists some method of reintroducing joy that you have not yet tried. I don’t doubt it sometimes feels like there isn’t, but there is. This is not blind hope; this is FACT. Dostoyevsky said ‘Man is a creature that can get accustomed to anything, and I think that is the best definition of him.’ I said, ‘I don’t get Catch-22.’
