Imagine the most spoiled brat you possibly can. Now imagine that kid gets older, but remains the same spoiled brat. That obnoxous, self-absorbed jock from highschool that got his way cause he was just so hot, only a hundred times worse, because he's a prince and power magnifies corruption. Now imagine despite being perfectly aware of all his characters flaws, everyone around him is dumb enough to keep giving him everything he wants regardless of the danger or damage to themselves or others. Now put this spoiled jock-brat in a D&D game and let him bully the DM into giving him god mode powers, and you've just about summed up the plot to Well of Darkness. Oh also he falls in lust at first sight with an elf, who also falls in lust with him after he gives her a necklace...she's really hot..and um, that seems to be entirety of her substance. Also there are superheroes in armor, who never do anything interesting with their powers. And a whipping boy, who like his master never grows out of his childhood role. It's good that not every protagonist in every story is a true blue hero, but if you're going to tell a story from the villain's point of view, at the very least make it interesting. The problem with Loerem is that it's boring. The evil-protagonist Dagnarus is boring. Gareth his whipping boy has the potential to be interesting, but never rises to it. The plot is fairly predictable. We're tempted with a big map, and then spend half the story inside the same building. There's an ongoing metaphor with the playroom, and if I was feeling super generous, I could say there's some moral about how never disciplining your children turns them into horrible people. But this falls so far into the "well, duh" category it's hard to justify the 500+ pages demonstrating it. This all could be forgivable if the story was interesting or was told in an interesting way, but it seems like everything worth seeing happens offscreen. We're left with predictions of what will happen and speculation about the meaning of things that have happened. Too much detail on this, too little on that. Lots of redundant information, which if trimmed back could save 100 pages without losing any information. Names reserved on things that seem like they should be common knowledge. Oh and a dragon shows up at the end of the story, because... um, dragons are cool? The highlight of this book was the orken, who had a refreshing pragmatism about them. It was at least a somewhat different take on orks. The dwarves were nomadic and rode horses, which...just kind of made them a bland group of nomads, interchangable with other rough nomadic groups. The Elves were given a cut and paste Chinese culture (down to the slant eyes...which seem to be pale blue and dark on the same character...) that merged with cut and paste Tolkien-esque D&D elf stuff. The humans are a lot of flash and no substance. In the back of the book is an advertisement for a roleplaying game which explains all the out of place world building that got in the way of the story, but doesn't really have me eager to go seek out the game. Loerem just doesn't seem like a fun place to either live or visit. It gets 2-stars for staying coherent and offering up an odd giggle or two, but can't be given anymore due to the extreme blandness of the fantasy and characters.
