THE WAY UP IS THE WAY DOWN. Heraclitos I think perhaps this is, in enchanted retrospect, the one book by Hermann Hesse that I most loved. It is the only one of his books - or so it seems to me now - that feels LIVED. Johann and Adèle see in their son the apogée of true love they have shared but have now lost: but by refusing to live out the remainder of their years in that earlier intensity, they miss their magical Door on the Wall that might have released them from mediocrity. *** I was staying at my friend Larry’s family cottage for a week in the 1970’s along with my old buddy from way back in first grade, Doug. The black flies bit hard, but bringing this book onto his screened verandah was ideal for an enchanted read. Around that time, there was an upbeat rock ballad that included the words, “If you wanna get to Heaven, You gotta go through hell.” But here, Johann and Adèle refuse that gracious offer. For it IS gracious. It’s gracious, because like Virgil’s Aeneas, the couple is being offered a Golden Bough as their ticket to unlock the secret of their conflicted past - and the past that now separates them - the key to the their inner Underworld. Carl Jung reiterated that to know ourselves, we must descend into the depths of our Subconscious. Hesse, before the War, submitted to Jungian therapy. His own wife had succumbed to the demons of mental illness, and their marriage had been equally painful. But for the rest of us Hope is a beacon. Only by taking “the way down” can we hope to find “the way up.” Hesse learned in therapy to work with his demons but his wife couldn't. She was too far gone. What more could better explain Hesses's "Great Reversal" into his almost demonic series of fantasy novels - Demian and Steppenwolf and beyond? Similarly, if Johann and his wife had descended deep into the nitty-gritty subconscious origins of their tight marital knots - with the Golden Bough of Faith - and patiently worked out their differences in that place of fear and trembling, they might have had a second chance. They had the opportunity to resolve their aporias but took their deadlock as an excuse to escape. You see, Johann feels he’s never LIVED, so wants to escape to India. A cop-out. Hesse had done the same thing, after WWI. And so he beats a handy “exit - stage right” from the only intensity that could have REALLY saved him: the fire of Real Love. Hesse seems to have refused that too. (You know, I have a feeling that this is what Hesse himself continually evades in his later novels, for he has thrown out humble, ordinary wisdom in his search for the meretriciously arcane variety, born of therapy!) The old heavy metal standard sums it all up for Johann: Love bites Love bleeds It’s bringin’ me To my knees... Is that excerpt ironic? No. For if this bored couple had been led by the rekindling of their conflictive love to their knees, to ask forgiveness of each other - It might well have saved their marriage!
