i was really distracted when i started reading this because about three-quarters of the first chapter is written in present tense, & the rest is mostly in past tense (with occasional forays into present). what the eff, ann m. martin/scholastic editors? it's that kind of crap that gives kids such a tenuous grasp on the writerly craft. anyway...mallory has been invited to join the babysitters club, in order to replace stacey. she is psyched because all the babysitters are thirteen & in eighth grade, while mallory is just eleven & in sixth grade. she is really excited to hang out with older girls & be part of their older girl social circle--so much so that there's a whole passage where she goes wandering around the eighth grade wing of stoneybrook middle school before home room one day & is almost late to class. she thinks that if she sees any of the babysitters, she'll say hi & be all nonchalant & awesome. oh, mallory. i should mention that she is wearing a jumper with her name on it & heart-patterned tights while she is doing this. not cool. she is also hung up on the idea of having a best friend, & her prayers are answered when there is a new girl in her home room. mallory observes that the new girl is black, & that there are no other black kids in the entire sixth grade. at lunch, some of the kids that mallory is sitting with say some pretty racist shit about the new girl. mallory kind of speaks up, but i could have done with a little more indignation on mallory's part. mallory also observes other kids doing mean things like shooting rubber bands at the new girl. she rushes off to her first BSC meeting & is informed that she'll have to take a test & go on a supervised sitting job in order to join the club. she is non-plussed by this. the test they give her is ludicrous & mallory doesn't do well on it. she claims later that a "doctor couldn't have passed it," which always cracked me up. her supervised sitting job, for myriah & gabbie perkins, with claudia, is a disaster. mallory asks the girls what they want to snack on instead of just giving them a healthy snack, she drops a glass & breaks it, she spills milk everywhere, she lets the dog in when she wasn't supposed to, etc. claudia is not impressed, though i think the fact that she misspelled myriah's name in the notebook entry she wrote kind of undermines her credibility. the BSC tells mallory that she failed the test & sucked at the babysitting job & can't be in the club. mallory is all, "screw you, haters!" & runs away. while moping about it at recess (recess? in middle school? what?), she finds jessi, the new girl, moping about being the new girl & not fitting in with all the white junior klan members in stoneybrook. they start talking about horse stories & their families & become buddies. when mallory visits jessi at home, she sees first-hand that some of the neighbors are not psyched about having a black family in the neighborhood. mallory tells jessi about the babysitters club & they decide to start their own babysitting club. it's not the best but they get jobs with their own families. the actual babysitters club is PISSED. & too busy to handle all the jobs they are getting. they realize that the test they gave mallory wasn't really fair, & that mallory didn't make any mistakes on the sitting job claudia observed that really endangered the kids at all. they call & invite mallory to join after all. mallory stands strong & says that she won't join unless jessi can join as well. it's like they're wobblies or something. the BSC says okay. at their first meetings, jessi asks if her race will be an issue, & the babysitters are all dumbfounded because they've never heard of racism before, i guess. they declare that they won't sit for anyone who wouldn't let jessi sit. jessi & mallory join the club. this wasn't as awesome as i remembered, but i do enjoy the earlier books because they sometimes make the girls seem like actual middle school students who do really dumb things. no way would the babysitting test they gave mallory have played out the way it did in the hands of the ghostwriters.
