The subjective nature of life and reality has driven people to seek objective counsel in religion, astrology, spirituality, or any other source that claims some kind of sturdiness in a world of uncertainty. Theodor Adorno, a twentieth century philosopher, suggests that literature shouldn’t play to this weakness of the mind for “completeness and continuity” which follows an “epistemological impulse”. Getting at truth means exposing different angles, even if they contradict. “Reality is fragmentary”, to present one answer is a misrepresentation. Multiple perspectives are what fuel thought, so that ultimately the written word doesn’t act as though it’s figured itself out. Nothing can be truer of Tim O’Brien’s Going After Cacciato, in which the main character Paul Berlin finds himself on a constant quest for answers in a reality of contradictions and subjectivity. O’Brien brilliantly portrays Berlin’s story of Vietnam through fragments and an array of possibilities that cleverly leaves the reader’s mind open to many avenues of understanding and interpretation. The Book is divided into three prominent parallels. The present time, memories of the war, and the tale of chasing Cacciato, which takes place in Paul Berlin’s imagination. All of these are interspersed within the novel. While the present and his imaginary tale are recited chronologically, the actual war events get mangled out of a distinct timeline. O’Brien also poses an array of questions: can a soldier escape war through imagination? Does war have it’s own identity separate from individual war stories? Are we to be against this war? Is there a purpose? And so on. These questions are never directly answered. In fact, the novel is presented with dueling perspectives and contradictions, none of which seem to receive any precedence or emphasis. Perhaps O’Brien himself doesn’t claim to know, and perhaps he implicitly asks us to take on Adorno’s philosophy: to reflect on its complexity, and accept this very quality as a characteristic of war’s reality: That there’s a storm of questions, but no one right answer to shelter us. The truth is a synthesis of contradictions and perspectives. In many ways this portrayal of war offers a tension between Apollonian Tendencies (notions of identity and individuality) and Barbarian Dionysian (de-individuation and the complete loss of oneself) as displayed in classical Greek Tragedies. Though they are opposite tendencies, they can exist simultaneously, especially in war. There exist the individuals, who differ in perception and personality, but are thrown into a situation that causes de-individuation, anonymity, and often “mob brutality”. Paul Berlin relates how at times it was easier to use people’s symbolic names, or just remember them in songs, for de-individuating them mollifies the burden of their grotesque death. This is the reality of war to O’Brien, and reality as an object to Adorno. It has it’s own “inner coherence” and “harmony” that is only misconstrued by attempting to undermine it’s complex nature via “an overarching concept”. At the close of the novel the reader is not meant to have any presumptuous solutions, but rather bask in the limbo of its humility, so that through some miracle of fiction, the author manages to inject in the reader a vague dose of the haunting confusion, and psychological labyrinth that only a soldier knows.
