This was an interesting book that didn't start at all as I had been expecting. It has a decidedly different feel to The Moon by Night which I wasn't expecting and there was a slightly weird, "does this fit in the real world" sense to it that threw me off. However, the answer all that was to trust the author. She pulls it all together and makes it all fall together in a most satisfactory way. That slight weirdness doesn't totally disappear (but don't worry about it) and leaves me wondering if there was something in the zeitgeist of when it was written (it was first published in 1968) that I, born a year later on the other side of the world, I unable to pick up on. It's also aiming to be futuristic (there's an author's note in the beginning saying some things - I suspect mainly the subject of Dr Austin's research - are ahead of us) but written 50 years ago, which may be a contribution to that slightly surreal feeling. It doesn't matter. It works. I took a few notes along the way, the main one being in regards to the timeline compared to the Murray-O'Keefes, which I mentioned confused me in my review of the previous book. This book indicates that the Austins are supposed to be a generation after the Murrays (Dr and Mrs Austin would be contemporaries of Meg and Calvin). To me, both series read as contemporaneous to when they were written, which brings in the discrepancy. But this explains the Zach and Polly thing that was confusing me. I remain confused about the chronological order of both series of books, but I can live with that. I thought the idea of violence as a disease was an interesting one. I'm not exactly sure I agree with it. Maybe as a contagion, which is almost the same thing but not quite. Food for thought, anyway. I did make a note when I was reading this (at 65%) because I'd made a guess about one of the things that was going on and I wanted to record when I twigged if I turned out to be right. I was right and knowing that thing was what made the weirdness into not-weirdness. (Can I be more vague than that?) The horrible racism of one of the villains, once revealed, did seem a bit on the nose compared to the implicit diversity of the "good guys" but hey, at least the racist got his just desserts, which doesn't always seem to happen these days. It's a good book. Once my teetering pile of library books that have turned up eases a little, I suspect I'll go on to the next one.
