The first few chapters of this were a real chore. They were confusing and dull. However, out of the darkness of those chapters, and out of the depths of the labyrinth, came a story of redemption, human suffering and a will, a will to overcome great evil when succumbing to the darkness would have been a much easier path to walk. “You must make a choice. Either you must leave me, lock the door, go up to your alters and give me to your masters; then go to the Princess Kossil and make your peace with her-and that is the end of the story- or, you must unlock the door, and go out of it, with me. Leave the tombs, leave Atuan, and come with me oversea. And that is the beginning of the story. It was a shame about the beginning, but the rest of the novel more than made up for it. That quote gave me tingles when I read it. Artha is a young priestess of the undying power that is shadow. She reluctantly carries out her duties of ritualistic dance, prayer and the murder of anyone who enters the darkness of the Labyrinth. She doesn’t directly kill the unfortunate wonderers, but she leaves them die of exposure nonetheless when she could easily save them. There’s no life in the darkness and certainly nothing to sustain it. So you’re as good as dead if you enter, and even deader if a priestess imprisons you in a part of the catacombs. It’s all doom and gloom until a familiar face turns Artha’s life around. It’s odd to talk about such strong character development in a novel this short, but Artha completely changes. She gradually sees the evil of her situation, and that none of it is of her doing. She sees that she is as much a victim as any of the wonderers. The familiar face she encounters is a powerful namer, he is a wizard of both name and reputation, and he knows how to break the binding darkness; he knows how to save the young girl: he knows to remind her of her own name, her true name, and exactly who she is in the process. Fast and eloquent writing: “The Earth is beautiful, and bright, and kindly, but that is not all. The Earth is also terrible, and dark, and cruel. The rabbit shrieks dying in the green meadows. The mountains clench their great hands full of hidden fire. There are sharks in the sea, and there is cruelty in men’s eyes.” Le Guin doesn’t piss about. She has a story and she tells it. Her narration is minimalistic and basic, but it carries with it such depth and feeling. She can achieve a lot in just a few words; the whole mood of the story shifts in just a few chapters; yet, it’s appropriately done. I’m normally an advocate of drawn out plot and lengthy characterisation (points lovingly at my Robin Hobb bookshelf) but Le Guin does what she does just as well. It’s odd. Le Guin can do what other novelists do in six times the word count. Her writing is fast, engaging and excellent. This is the perfect series for those that want a fantasy hit, but don’t want to be dragged down with pages, and pages, of lengthy storytelling. I also liked the shift of narrators; it added a little more flavour the Earthsea world. I think it would have been predictable, and perhaps easy, had Ged been the narrator at the start. By shifting the story around I got to see the world from the perspective of a much darker character. I liked the way this was done even if it was a little bewildering at the start. Earthsea Cycle 1. A Wizard of Earthsea- Four worthy stars 2. The Tombs of Atuan- A redeeming four stars 3. The Farthest Shore- A strong four stars
