How many people in the U.S. have paid a visit to Talequah, Oklahoma, capital of the Cherokee Nation? I have been, and it was well worth the visit. Honestly I learned more there than I learned from this book, although I loved the book. So ... my dear fellow citizens of the United States ... before you book your trip to Paris or Sydney, why not think about visiting a treasure trove of history right here in our own country? I went to Talequah with my family several years ago; we visited the Cherokee Heritage Center, with its beautiful museum and recreated ancient village, complete with tour guides to show us the old Cherokee customs ... and I saw the "Trail of Tears" pageant at the Tsa-La-Gui outdoor theater. It was truly a moving experience, and the memories have stayed with me. Looking back ... that must have been my motivation for hunting down and reading this book. Truth be told ... at first this book was awful, but ... gradually it grew on me. At first I was taken aback by the jarring way in which we, the readers, were thrown into this ordeal. I felt like the author was hurling fragmented pieces of dialog and thoughts at us ... it was clear that the people in the story knew each other very well; they had been neighbors and friends and relatives before The Trail ... but we, the readers, don't know them at all, and here we are, making the bumpy wagon ride or walking along with them, hearing their intimate thoughts and words, and not understanding anything! It was very frustrating. But I kept going, and gradually I got to know and understand the characters in the story; I started to like it somewhere between pages 50 and 100. As I continued on, I enjoyed it very much. I found myself thinking about the characters throughout my day, and I was earnestly looking forward to the chance to start reading about them again. The author spent 17 or 18 years doing research and soul searching for this book, and she's a renowned poet ... all of this come through in her writing. At times the passages flow along in a linear, traditional way, and other times, the book seems "crazy" or nonsensical ... but to me, it is only nonsensical in the way a good poem would be. Reading the book all the way through, you get an eerie feeling of walking the trail all the way through, for four months ... hearing bits of dialog from others as you go along, and maybe bumping up against other people and imagining what their thoughts were. Sometimes you might pass someone on the trail and never bump into them again. That's how it is with life, and I can imagine, that's how it was on the trail. It's not a regular book where you've got these six main characters and they all get accounted for at the beginning and the end. Honestly, I feel the book is more poetry than prose. And I loved that, once I absorbed and understood it. Other things I loved about the book: * That the author included Cherokee writing throughout ... beautiful to see. * The maps helping us see where we were as we continued along the trail. * The way the characters of Maritole, Knowbowtee, Oganaya, Tanner, Luthy, and Maritole's dad changed and grew throughout the story * The way the author showed the mixed feelings of anger, bitterness, regret, self-blame, hurt, hope, and pride, on the part of the Cherokee people * The pieces of history the author inserts for points of reference * The shopping lists and inventories, which give a good picture of daily life * THE ENDING OF THE BOOK; thank God it was not schmaltzy at all. So many good books totally screw up the ending, but this one got it just right. I was going to give this 3 stars, but due to the excellent and VERY APPROPRIATE ending, I am cheerfully bumping this up to 4 stars. Yeah! Now for just some general comments. I disagree with some reviewers who say that the author makes it sound like the Cherokees were to blame (partially) for their removal; from the book it was clear that there was no other option; yes, there was anger at the Georgia Cherokee, but the North Carolina Cherokee didn't agree to the treaty and were removed BY FORCE ... so what other option was there? None. I think that was clear from the book. Yes, the Cherokee were tormented by self-blame and guilt, as in, "If only we had done X, Y, or Z ... maybe we could have stayed on our farms!" but that is only wishful thinking, something that nearly everyone goes through, whenever they suffer a huge loss. It is NOT THE SAME as the author blaming the Cherokee for their forced removal. There was no pretending that the white man was A-OK for the Trail of Tears; I don't know where some readers got that. Maybe the readers got it from the "Author's Note" at the end where she says it wasn't a "good Indian / bad white man" story. Well, I agree that it wasn't like that ... she portrayed the Cherokee characters in vivid color, with good qualities, and faults, too, so there was no glorification of the Cherokee. But there was also no "pardoning" of the white man. Essentially, she doesn't even portray the "white man" much, except for one white-man character (the soldier), but that was just one guy. Also, she never gets inside that guy's head (the soldier was never one of the characters talking in first person), so we never know what he was really thinking. I feel the purpose of this story is to bring the Cherokee people and their suffering on the trail, to life. It's not about the "white man" at all ... and I do find that refreshing. In this book, the "white man" is on the side lines, and he's not exactly evil or good. He's just doing what man does. I thought it was interesting in the Author's Note, she was saying that things come back around ... she said the same farms that were stolen from the Cherokee in Georgia were burned by Sherman's army in the Civil War; and that the Cherokee cheated members of a late-arriving tribe (Osage from Kansas) by selling them bad land, and then received their come-uppance when oil was found on that land. So ... yes, she is saying, no matter what race you are, you are capable of doing good and evil things. Meanwhile I think it was pretty clear that she was saying that the forced removal of the Cherokee was a very bad thing. No ambiguity there. I think you can acknowledge that evil is inherent in everyone (as the author does), and you can condemn certain evil acts (which I believe the author does), without condemning everyone of a certain race. Because of all of this, I'm a bit confounded by some of the reviews I see here on goodreads, expressing dismay because they believe that the author was at least partially "pardoning" the white man for the Trail of Tears. No, I don't think she was ... at least, that's not the impression I got. So ... I hope folks can give this book a chance and sink into it like a puzzling and interesting, yet deeply satisfying, piece of historical poetry. That's what it was for me.
