This review was originally posted on Addicted To Romance Thunder On The Plains is a republished book from Rosanne Bittner via Sourcebooks Casablanca. A few months ago, I read this author for the first time and I have been hooked on her ever since. In fact she is one of the best romance writers I have ever had the pleasure to read and This review will be a bit shorter than I would like, but there is so much that goes on in this story and I don't want to spoil anything for those that haven't had the chance to read it yet. Thunder On The Plains was a phenomenal romance that had me hooked from the beginning. This story kicks off when our hero Bo Landers takes a job at 20, to escort, protect and guide a father and daughter and group of men across the west to start a transcontinental railroad. Sunny, is the daughter of a man of wealth and she is his heiress because out of his three children she is the only one that truly believes in his dream to see this railroad come to be. Sunny, is only 16 but she is lovely, sweet and kind. She has a kind word for everyone and doesn't have a hateful or mean bone in her body. Instantly there is chemistry between Bo and Sunny even though they both know how far apart their worlds are. So they become content with mere friendship. Bo and Sunny are separated but are drawn back together over the years through various set of circumstances. But Sunny and Bo have a love that is destined and both of them will have to fight for it to keep it. What is truly wonderful about this story is how long their love story spans years, grief, tears, struggles, turmoil, and pain. This is a story that will be heartwrenching for the reader but will stay in your memory for years to come. This is an epic romance where we see that love isn't easy to find and can be hard to hold onto. Where you have to truly fight for it and that the cost can be high. Both of these characters are different, grew up in opposite ways, have futures that seem to be far apart from each other. But we see when every time they run into each other, how much they truly need each other in the right ways. This is a romance that kept my tissues right by my side and I couldn't help but feel for these two. It is quite a big book, took me two days to read with 600 pages but what a book!!! This is one of my favorites books of the year and Rosanne Bittner is classic and writes romance in a way you can never expect. We see a glimpse of history of the transcontinental railroad, and the surrounding conflict of the war between the states and other factors that caused many problems before it was fully built. We see the struggles the native Americans suffered through, but also the families trying to move west. The historical aspect is true to fact and had a unique experience seeing a different outlook on the history of the United States. This is a story that kept me spellbound from the beginning, that had me battling with my emotions and is one of the best reads I have ever read. This author is moving to the top of the best authors to read in romance. She writes in a way that is real and vivid and true. If you haven't read this author, pick her up right now and you won't have regrets....100% guaranteed.
