As a Westerner, I was astonished (and somewhat envious) to learn that the Japanese consider an 11th-century novel written by a woman to be the crowning achievement of their national literature. In the century after the author’s death, it was men who championed its merits, making it required reading material for the educated class. In the 20th century, the first Japanese author to receive the Nobel Prize said in his acceptance speech that “Even down to our day there has not been a piece of fiction to compare with it.” Needless to say, nothing like this happened for medieval women in the West. This does not mean that Japanese women of the era were treated as equals (we do not even know the author’s real name, as girl’s names were not recorded in genealogies). But apparently, they did have the opportunity to publish and have their literary efforts taken seriously. The other famous work of this period, The Pillow Book , was also written by a woman. During the Heian era, the Japanese Emperor would have relationships with many women – one wife (the Empress), then Consorts (women of high rank), and then Intimates (women of lower rank). Murasaki’s fictional Genji is born to the Emperor and a low-ranking Intimate. Though he is very handsome, talented, and the Emperor’s favorite son, Genji cannot by rights be granted a high-ranking position. The story covers his political and social progress, but is mostly concerned with his romantic exploits. Since poetry was essential for social communication in this era, both in and outside of romantic relationships, these exploits include many beautiful poems (795 within the whole book). Here is one written by a woman Genji loves who cannot be with him: “Leave me, if you will, burdened with your bitterness for all lives to come, but know your real enemy is your heart, and yours alone.” Genji is a novel’s perfect vehicle – primed for conflict, never to be satisfied. He is a man of desire, spurred on by obstacles, quickly growing bored with and rejecting the easily obtainable. He courts many women but gives adequate attention to none. I have heard it said that Madame de la Fayette’s The Princesse De Cleves (1678) is the first psychological novel, but surely Lady Murasaki’s work (more than 6 centuries earlier) deserves that honor, instead. The two novels even share the same themes of desire unfulfilled, and even one similar plotline (in which a woman who had desired and had been desired by the wrong man renounces the world and becomes a nun). I read the abridged version (325 pages out of a total 1125), so I only got the story of the young Genji. But I admit that, even in this short portion, I was already becoming worn out with repetitive scenes. Genji courts a woman with poetry, the woman is seduced to her own doom, rinse, repeat. In between seductions are scenes where a boy or man is so beautiful that everyone cries, a work of art is displayed and everyone cries, a touching ceremony is performed and everyone cries (there are many “sleeves wet with dew” in the Emperor’s court). There are only so many irresponsible seductions and outpourings of tears that a girl can handle. But I was incredibly impressed with the novel's modern sensibility, its handling of desire, and its poetry and language. It’s clear that it deserves its status as a work of literary brilliance. I may come back and read it in its entirety at some point.
