One should not become an artist because he can, but because he must. It is only for those who would be miserable without it. The Agony and the Ecstasy ~~ Irving Stone The Pieta There are books ~~ very few books ~~ that overtake you. Some books have that kind of power. Especially if you have that weird relationship with the book that nothing else can compensate, and if you lie down with it and get up with it for a long time, it is inevitable that you feel at a loss when you finish reading it. Irving Stone 's The Agony and the Ecstasy is one such book. For me, a good read is one where the author succeeds in creating the characters so well that I can associate with them and be a part of the story. Stone definitely succeeds in doing so. I was so engrossed in the book. I experienced what Michelangelo experienced; I was a member his inner circle. I dined with the Medici. I spent time with Popes and the cardinals of the church. I lived in 16th century Italy. I was with Michelangelo as he created his sculptures, paintings and other works. I have the vibrant and fluid language of Irving Stone to thank for this. Bacchus So why did I decide to read The Agony and the Ecstasy ? Well, largely due to my mother. She has mentioned Stone as being one of her favorite authors several times. So, when the opportunity arose to read the largely forgotten Stone, I jumped at it. I was not disappointed, and understood why my mother loved his writing. The Agony and the Ecstasy is slowly plotted ~~ as so many American writers of the 30s, 40s and 50s were want to do ~~ it’s a very straightforward recounting of the major events in Michelangelo’s life, and the people who populated his world ~~ the despised Da Vinci, the even more despised Raphael, the Medicis, Popes galore, French Kings, heretics, revolutionaries, reformationists ~~ including Martin Luther, and more Medicis. Cleopatra What truly makes The Agony and the Ecstasy > stellar are the lyrical, beautiful descriptions of both the process of sculpting, and Michelangelo’s sculptures and paintings themselves. The reader is transported as we learn how difficult it is to mine marble, how to transport it, how to choose a piece without inclusions by watching the sunrise through it. Then Michelangelo picks up his hammers and chisels ~~ made afresh for each sculpture ~~ and Stone masterfully takes us inside the mind of the master, so that we feel we understand the exact places to carve away the snowy grain of the marble to achieve the desired effect ~~ the reader tastes the marble dust at the back of their own throat. Reading The Agony and the Ecstasy is about as close as we’re likely to get to one of the greatest creative minds who ever lived. When I next travel to Italy, The Agony and the Ecstasy will make the journey with me as travel guide. Irving Stone has made me yearn to see these great sculptures and frescos, which he describes with such authority and conviction. Madonna of Bruges My one complaint here is that Stone writes Michelangelo as a heterosexual male. He was not. whether he was bi or homosexual exclusively is unknown. Stone avoids stating outright whether Michelangelo had a sexual relationship with Tommaso dei Cavalieri, the man he wrote dozens of passionate sonnets to. Their love is portrayed as platonic, but when one reads these sonnets, it is clear there was much more to their relationship than Stone shares ~~ it was a love that was powerful and sexually charged. I suspect this was due to the time in which it was published ~~ 1961. In the end, The Agony and the Ecstasy portrays Michelangelo the man, as both both a visionary artist and a son, brother, friend and lover; Stone makes human. It is humanity, as well as the injustice of his time that make Stone's depiction of Michelangelo’s story so powerful. The Torment of Saint Anthony
