The book is an important historical document that deserves to be read so that people can get a real sense for how life was really like in the New York of the late 1800s. Riis was a muckraker before it was even a term, and a photojournalist before such a thing ever existed. The stories are difficult and unbelievable to read - if Riis didn't have the documentation to back up his claims you would find some of the anecdotes truly fantastical. "'How shall the love of God be understood by those who have been nurtured in sight only of the greed of man?'" (p. 62) "On cold winter nights, when every bunk had its tenant, I have stood in such a lodging-room more than once, and listening to the snoring of the sleepers like the regular strokes of an engine, and the slow creaking of the beams under their restless weight, imagined myself on shipboard and experienced the very real nausea of sea-sickness. The one thing that did not favor the deception was the air; its character could not be mistaken." (p. 117) "I state in advance as my opinion based on the steady observation of years, that all attempts to make an effective Christian of John Chinaman will remain abortive in this generation..." (p. 120) "...the Russian Jew...The old women are hags; the young, houris. Wives and mothers at sixteen, at thirty they are old." (p. 128) "Lives, like clothes, are worn through and out before put aside." (p. 152-153) "Seventeen hours a day, seven days in the week, at thirteen cents an hour for the two, six cents and a half for each! Good average earnings for a tenement-house cigarmaker in summer." (p. 153) "It is not at all uncommon to find the hoards of a whole lifetime of hard work and self-denial squandered on the empty show of a ludicrous funeral parade and a. display of flowers that ill comports with the humble life it is supposed to exalt." (p. 175) "Another stated that she worked from 4 o'clock in the morning to 11 at night." (p. 217) "...the tenement that was built for 'a class of whom nothing was expected,' and which has come fully up to the expectation." (p. 227) "Natural feelings and affections are smothered in the tenements." (p. 230) "This is true particularly of the poorest. They are shiftless, destructive, and stupid; in a word, they are what the tenements have made them." (p. 239)
