Leslie J. Reagan’s When Abortion Was a Crime is the first study of the entire period of illegal abortion in the United States. Over eight chapters, Reagan examines “the triangle of interactions among the medical profession, state authorities, and women in the practice, policing, and politics of abortion during the era when abortion was a crime” (p. 1). The result is a multifaceted analysis of the still controversial medical procedure that connects the experiences of women and local medical and legal practice to national policy. Reagan divides the era of illegal abortion into four periods, which establish the structure of her work. The first, and focus of the first four chapters, begins in the late nineteenth century, when laws passed across the country between 1860 and 1880 prohibited abortion at any point during pregnancy. Each of the four chapters covers a different aspect of abortion through the 1920s – women’s experiences with the procedure, its practice, and political and law enforcement reactions. Reagan argues that despite the ban, abortion was widely accepted and practiced in women’s homes and the offices of both midwives and trained physicians. The prevalence of abortion was possible not only because of this diversity of practitioners, but also because the practice of medicine remained private. Yet, a crackdown on abortion occurred during the same period as specialists in the developing field of obstetrics renewed an earlier campaign against the practice and the medical profession was drawn into the state’s enforcement system. The second half of Reagan’s work covers the next three periods in a more chronological history of abortion. During the 1930s, economic hardships of the Great Depression led to an expansion of the practice. Trained physicians were more willing to offer “therapeutic” abortions based on social conditions and the practice not only became more widely available, but also moved from private homes to hospitals and clinics. According to Reagan, abortion was a recurring and common need for many women. In 1936, New Jersey police uncovered a “Birth Control Club” of eight hundred members who were entitled to regular examinations and abortions for an additional $75. “These working women bought a form of health insurance through dues paid to this ‘club.’ These women expected to have abortions in the future. The club provided a means of blunting the expense” (p. 134). Although the consolidation of the practice in the hands of trained physicians might have benefitted some women who sought abortions in the 1930s, Reagan asserts the increased visibility accelerated the pace of change in the following decades, especially in the methods of enforcing criminal abortion laws. The third period begins in 1940, with a backlash against the previous decade’s expansion of abortion. Hospitals adopted a more conservative stance, while police and prosecutors adopted new tactics. Prosecutors no longer focused on abortionists responsible for women’s deaths, instead working “to shut down the trusted and skilled abortionists, many of them physicians, who had operated clinics for years with little or no police interference…This system had created a space in which thousands of women obtained safe abortions from skilled physicians in an environment nearly identical to that of any other medical practice” (p. 161). The women were also at increased risk of being victimized by prosecutors, who could force them to testify about their sexual activity in open court, and by police, who according to Reagan would go so far as to capture women and invade their bodies to investigate illegal abortion. In December 1947, a woman picked up by police in Chicago while leaving the apartment of a midwife was taken to a doctor’s office. Once there, Clara L. “‘submitted’ to a gynecological exam performed by Dr. Janet Towne in the presence of a policewoman. Dr. Towne examined Clara L., determined she was pregnant, and then removed a rubber catheter placed in the cervix” (p. 168) to induce the abortion. Reagan argues that the intensified repression, and an increased demand for the procedure from women of all groups, resulted in a system divided by race and class. It continued with devastating results until methods of suppressing abortion were finally dismantled. The fourth and final period overlaps with the third and concludes with the 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe vs. Wade. The movement to decriminalize abortion that developed in this period was in reaction to a system that had fatal consequences for many women. Reagan asserts that during the 1950s, a handful of physicians began to challenge the laws their profession had advocated a century earlier and the progress of that challenge attests to the continuing power of the medical profession to make public policy regarding reproduction. Additionally, as legal reform moved forward, a new feminist movement arose, which radically transformed the movement for legal change. “When the women’s movement described abortion as an aspect of sexual freedom, they articulated a new feminist meaning for abortion; when they demanded abortion as a right, they echoed generations of women” (p. 15-16). Reagan employs a rich array of primary source material to develop her analysis, including criminal trial and other legal records, medical literature, government documents, newspapers, popular periodicals, hospital records and manuscript collections. In being the first to chart the nation’s enforcement of criminal abortion laws, Reagan gives ample attention to the state’s interest in suppressing the practice and the its alliance with the medical community. She uncovers the circumstances of actual abortions, revealing changing practices and the risks women have been willing to take to assume their reproductive rights. Reagan also effectively argues that the antiabortion campaign was antifeminist at its core, with efforts to restrict or reverse abortion rights sending a clear message that “women cannot be trusted to make moral decisions about children and family, but must be overseen and regulated by men; procreation is a state mandate not a choice; women’s lives, sexuality, and bodies are not their own” (p. 253).
