Nothing about Lucas Davenport was admirable or likeable or realistic. He's a womanizing attention whore with an inflated opinion of himself who doesn't seem to do much detective work what with all the trips up to his cabin (during a case?!) and working on the computer games he creates (what?). We do get lots of exciting phone calls where he uses his awesome skills to manipulate the press. So there's that. The fun begins as we learn that our "star" has the made-just-for-him title of Office of Special Intelligence and is a lone wolf operating without a partner and apparently assigned to whatever department needs him. Um, ok. He's put on a serial killer case AFTER he himself is cleared from possibly being that serial killer. I like him already! From there it's a series of things real cops would never do: the boss wants him to break into a suspect's house & have a look (p.150), he savagely beats a man (p.264) but I guess this is supposed to be ok because that man was much larger and had been a boxer, he calls a woman the 'c' word (p.265), he believes finding something incriminating during another illegal search of a suspect's home would allow them to get a warrant (p.410), which makes me wonder if they even had the authority to put the tracker on his car (p. 406), he PLANTS EVIDENCE in the house (p.411), puts an illegal homemade silencer on his gun (p. 427), and kills the suspect rather than arrest him (p. 473). On top of all that, it's never clear to me why these attractive, supposedly smart ('cuz that's the way he likes 'em) women put up with him, although I didn't like his main squeeze much either so maybe they deserve each other. We also never learn how he's come to be this wealthy game designer. I guess it's to allow him to have all his big-boy toys: the porsche and cabin and boat, etc, but it was an odd thing to throw in the mix with no explanation. The author excuses the lack of reality in the Introduction by saying he wanted Davenport to be a "star". I'll take the realism please.
