Read last year: am reviewing to make the historical connections. The story is a retelling of the latter end of Edward I's reign through to the beginning of Edward III. However it is told via a more modern scenario centred around an Irish estate called Cashelmara. Edward de Salis (Edward I) also has estates in England and is very wealthy. On a visit to the US he meets a much younger cousin, Marguerite Marriott (Margaret of France, 40 years junior), and marries her, with a resulting tricky marriage and 2 sons, Thomas and David (Thomas, Earl of Norfolk and Edmund, Earl of Kent) Edward has children from his first marriage who are of an age or older than his wife, causing family problems. Madelaine (Mary of Woodstock) is a nun, Katharine (Joan of Acre) is desperate for her father's approval and has married his contemporary to please him. Nell (Eleanor, Countess of Bar), his favourite child, has already died, which leaves him lonely and partly leads to his remarriage. Finally, Patrick (Edward II) is his only surviving son (Edward and his wife were as unfortunate in child mortality as Edward I and Eleanor of Castile were in fact). Patrick is a great disappointment to Edward as he has artisanal instincts rather than those of a gentleman. Patrick is made well aware of his deficiencies and rebels by running away. He has a boon companion from among the Irish peasantry, Roderick (Derry) Stranahan (Piers Gaveston), a boy that Edward had decided showed promise and was educating as an experiment, intending that he should study law. Derry and Patrick are inseparable. Edward dies and Patrick inherits. Despite an uneasy feeling Marguerite encourages him to marry her niece, Sarah Marriott (Isablla of France, known as the She-Wolf). Patrick is hopelessly poor at managing his estates and Sarah is as spendthrift as he is and also jealous of Derry Stranahan. The money is lost at cards and in spending and they are forced to retire to Cashelmara to live quietly. Derry interferes in the running of the estate to the ire of Old McGowan (Hugh le Despenser the Elder) and causes problems with the local peasants, with unfortunate results. Meanwhile Sarah meets Maxwell Drummond (Roger Mortimer), a local peasant and becomes fixated on him. Events remove Derry from the picture and Ian McGowan (Hugh le Despenser) enters stage left. Patrick is enchanted and hands over complete control of everything to him. Including Sarah. Hugh marries Edith (Eleanor de Clare), a plump and rather unpleasant relative of Patrick's and they form an axis of evil, controlling Patrick (who is delighted) and Sarah (who is very much not). During this time Patrick and Sarah have managed to reproduce, against both their inclinations, 4 children: Ned, John, Eleanor and Jane (Edward III, John of Eltham, Eleanor, Countess of Guelders and Joan, Queen of Scots). Events propel Sarah and Maxwell Drummond together and the battle for control begins...... This is brilliantly written as a Gothic mystery and I have endeavored to keep spoilers at bay. The POV changes from Edward to Marguerite, to Patrick, to Sarah, to Maxwell Drummond and finally to Ned. There are moments of icy cold suspense as the story builds. It's always a bit jarring when a book moves from one POV to another but it takes almost no time to readjust into the new consciousness we are hearing from. All in all, an excellent book which can be read as a straight Gothic mystery - but it is so much more when you are following the back story along as you read!
