Yet another childhood book that lives in the far reaching of my mind's attic. Subconsciously, whenever I re-tie my shoes, I think about this book. Since I've been recently revisiting some of these random, obscure books that I vaguelly remember, I decided to get this one from the library. Once again, I'm amazed by how much of this book I remember once I got reading it. The main character, Sarah Ida, is sent to live with her aunt so that her parents can have a break. And no wonder: Sarah Ida is a sullen, ungrateful, entitled brat who expects her aunt to just hand her some cash because she likes to "have a little money in her pocket". Sarah Ida immediately takes advantage of another girl living in her aunt's building, manipulating her into letting Sara Ida take most of the money out of her piggybank. When confronted, Sarah Ida storms out, vowing to get a job so that she can have her own money. To give credit where credit is due: she DOES follow through. She asks around, but no one wants to hire a ten year old girl, until she's pointed to an old man, Al, who runs a shoeshine stand. He begrudgingly teaches her the task, and she starts working for him. Like other books by this author, this one is very short, with sparse writing and limited dialogue....but somehow it works. Over a very short book, Sarah Ida has strong character growth as she learns the value of earning her own money (and not blowing it immediately on candy), and the value in other people. When Al tells her a story about winning a medal in school, and then shows her the little medal that he's cherished all these years, she initially scoffs at the cheap piece of tin....but soon feels bad, and is grateful when he silently forgives her. Later that medal becomes deeply sentimental to her as well as him. Oh, and the part of the book that I thought about often? Al tells Sarah Ida some of his shoeshine wisdom: "When a customer comes here, he gets more than a shine...When you ties his shoes a little tighter, it makes his shoes fit better. My customers go away feeling a little better. Anyway, I hope they do." (The other thing that I THOUGHT I remembered from this book was Al taking Sarah Ida to his apartment and showing how he cleans the floors by strapping scrub brushes to his shoes and skating around...Turns out: not this book. That scene never happened. A quick google search reveals that there's another obscure book that I've forgotten called "A Girl Called Al", which also features some pre-teen girls making friends with the old man in their building who does the skating thing. Similar style books, both featuring someone named Al.....I guess I merged those books together in my brain's attic.)
