Left Behind 2: Evangelical Boogaloo At the end of Left Behind: Ray, Chloe, Bruce, and Kirk Cameron agree to come together as the Christian supergroup: Tribulation Force. Now, two weeks after the rapture, the second book opens and we can catch up with our friends, some of whom have some sad shit going on. * Buck has been demoted, which really sucks for him. * Chloe is oh so horny for Buck, but she’s conflicted. Does he like her? It’s the end of the world, should she even be thinking about bearing his children? (Legit – that is her fantasy). * Ray, poor ray... Ray is struggling with not being annoying. He’s also being persecuted for carrying a Bible... I presume because, in the post-rapture world, everyone remembers how oppressive Ray’s religion has historically been and they’re just not into it. * Bruce... Well, it’s revealed he’s a bit unstable. “Sometimes I sit drinking it [the Bible] in for hours, losing track of time, forgetting to eat, weeping and praying.” (p. 17-18). HE. IS. NOT. HEALTHY. I want LaHaye/Jenkins to address this and, at the very least, indicate that Bruce had Cliff bars handy. * Oh, and our favorite ‘but is he really the bad guy?’, Nicolae Carpathia. The dude is hard at work getting religious leaders together in an effort to get them to “respect their shared beliefs.” I particularly relish the notion that any sort of tolerance of other viewpoints or religious opinions is evil. How dare Nicolae (who is TOTALLY the Antichrist, in case there was confusion) try to bring people together?! Fuck that guy! Wouldn’t you know it, right as the heat is rising for our heroes, Buck gets contacted by Nicolae. Nicolae, for whatever reason, really likes Buck and wants to offer him a job. He essentially sets Buck up with a dream gig of “live wherever you want and do whatever you want”, but Buck decides to play hard to get with the Antichrist. This, in particular, is just odd. As a Christian, Buck is aware of how everything is going to go down in the next 7 years. The Antichrist HAS to grow in power for Jesus to come back. Take the job, help Nicolae, and by extension, help everybody. No, that’s too logical and rational for Buck. Instead, Buck’s inner monologue during this exchange bounces between “God, tell me what to say” and “Fuck you Antichrist, you’re not my dad” . Oh, before I dive deeper into this book, I want to share something that I found hilarious and quite enjoyable. Buck and Chaim (the scientist who made the Eden formula) are in a restaurant and Chaim recommends food to Buck. “Buck had always, always made it a habit to ignore recommendations in restaurants. It was probably one of the reasons for his nickname.” Later, during Buck’s discussion with Nicolae, Nicolae says: “I am not naïve, Buck. I know the origin of your nickname.” So now it’s headcanon that Buck ordered chicken tenders instead of a recommended steak once and decided he was to be called Buck thereafter. Everyone in the book is aware of this and just plays along. Buck is concerned that working for Nicolae (who is going to buy all the media ever) is an unethical decision and he doesn’t want to do it. Chloe bravely questions Buck’s ethical dilemma, sending Buck into this inner thought: “This was one of the things he liked so much about Chloe. But independence and integrity had been so ingrained in him...” Integrity is the enemy in this book. Suddenly, and without much warning, Nicolae breaks character and suddenly he’s pure evil. This hits almost as sudden as Rayford’s new relationship. We find out that Ray is into this girl (and marries her) in the same chapter. True love and all that. Left Behind, for all its faults, at least had the redeemable quality of having a plot and sticking to it. Tribulation Force really suffers from being the filler book in between the rapture and the start of the tribulation. Plots don’t really move forward in any meaningful way until the last few chapters. They talk a lot about moving forward but then return to silly dialogue about Chloe and Buck holding hands or eating cookies at the same time. Perhaps the tagline is the giveaway here - " The continuing drama of those left behind" - I can only hope that the next one "The rise of the Antichrist" will be more apocalyptic. At the very least, I pray Nicolae will be a better book.
