I loved and will always love every bit of this book even when the only sratch from it on my memory will be left by images, flashing lights and stomach-churning acts of pluckiness (but purposeful). I am actually dreadfully sad that this had to end, I could go on and on with these youngsters' intrepid, grisly life. It had a 'hard not to notice' scent of Bret Easton Ellis and Burroughs in it, constantly chasing the reader. The only difference is that this is more soaked with meanings than many think (by only being the onlookers of a junkie's session) and mesmerizing pieces of what means to be drugged, depressed, not loved but looking for all of them at once without knowing how to approach any. This book is kind of a merged scream of helplessness like some sort of urge by a bunch of youngsters who just actually want to have fun and liberate themselves from their own problems with the use of ignorance or unconsciousness. After reading what would this be all about I just thought that this is some kind of a border between sexual complexes and irksome group... that would be it, without nothing more or less than an endless adventure that will leave no trace in my mind. That's why I want to count here some of the facts that prevented me from thinking the same after finishing it. To start with, the shakes that this book give to your mind and soul are indelible: how they are all together but still alone, how they can always count on each other even if the sense of death throughout the book will creep every single bone of yours. With the highly manipulation of one's ability for imaginary visualisation Ryu Murakami manages to bring the reader into the reel of the damned, meaning that wherever you are you are with them, wherever they are you feel how the walls just compress you into their comradely hug, while the drugs just bump into your skin without you even notice: the struggle, the joy, the importance of friendship where everything seems like melting away. You can just feel the flicker of the neon in your eyes, percolating your body with the infection that's so treacly when it doesn't remind you how small you are there... together but all alone. Imagine this power of yours touching every character one by one like a joint, but with another density and with another sort of pain at its means. Because this book has it all: callous true love, brutal sex, jealousy, chase of spirituality (e.g: Okinawa's covet of hearing Ryu again with his flute, with the aim of replacing the addiction by finding his lost self), desire, fights, friendship in the name of drugs and a guy that wants to see the life with another eyes (the writer). To continue with, next to the sense of death lays the incapacity of all of them to draw to a close their miserable condition... once the methamphetamine is over, when the bordeom finds its throne. No matter how much they want to find succour in one another they will never be able to change their character which is seriously lacking stability. That's why another layer that convinces the reader that they are not ordinary characters is their bipolarity, expressed poles apart but in the same place. By means of that they manage to give a slowly collapsing unity to the whole book... which is a masterpiece from my point of view. Like Ryu said: just like a doll, moving her body, her mouth... but maybe I am just a doll. You can call this a dark humour book, not because it has jokes in it but because the puzzle in which we are in that appears to be dislocated from the first thrust is funny from nature. I do not want to be what Umberto Eco called: 'blur' (you know... the one that always has something good to say and for whom all the books are the best books that he/she had ever read), but this book is something, a short unputdownable that has so much to say in few pages. A book that thrives in you with all the energy it has, boosting the reader to cogitate at low speed but with acuteness, trust, love all his/her values. I do recommend this book with all my heart and I will always remember it myself. Up to now this is the only book I will want to re-read just for the hell of fulfilling myself with all that this can give over and over again.
