1. Who was Charlie really? What was the point in his part of the story? Why was he so powerful? I don't know. Was he a government spy or thought police who was supposed to see if this group was strong enough for The Game? 2. Didn't the other group on the Subway say that this was their second year at The Game? Does that mean that they got stronger as a group and were ready for drop off to another planet? 3. So Lisse's special thing was being a writer. Gotcha. That's the reason I am forgiving of the holes in the story. It is only told through her perspective so we get a very limited view. 4. There were so many people to keep up with. 3/4 of the way through I think I finally got it. 5. Parallels to The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins include the name of the book, the concept of bread and circuses, and all of the outlandish clothing of the people on Earth. 6. This book made me really think at the end. What would happen if we had to start all over? Without being conditioned as they were in a government school, I'm afraid we may not succeed as they did. How many of us know how to build a loom? Make things from the various metals? Start a fire. Ok, I might be able to do that one. Maybe. We are way too dependent on modern conveniences. 7. I needed more information about how the government was run, the rules that the masses had to abide by, why the stores were really only open at night, why they never really met more groups like themselves on the street, what family life was like before they go to school, how the parents met, what the government school like (in more depth,) more backstory to the takeover of robots, more about the mechanics of the robots, more about the technology, what their space exploration was like. But again, Lisse doesn't know these answers, so neither do we. Maybe this story would have been even better in third person or with all of the information I want to know, a series? 8. So Earth is just going to suck forever? Earthlings, please rebel. Seriously, just throw some water on those robots and watch 'em rust.
