The heroine imagines herself to have a peaceful and normal life. She has her dream job at the library and routinely goes on missions to deliver books to less fortunate and has even been recognize with an award. She has a handsome and ambitious fiancé. Yes, he's a bit selfish and self-centered but she likes the hustle and bustle of his world. She likes helping him with his news stories. Life is good. And then one night she hits a man with her car.... Horrified and desperate for him to be okay, she finds an absolutely stunning man who obviously has severe brain trauma because he claims to be her guardian angel. She can't NOT take him to the hospital however and even though she's weirded out, it's in her nature to help everyone she can. But he's fine turns out, at least physically if not mentally and she's over the moon relieved. Hopeful to return to her peaceful life she aggravated by the fact that this man simply will not leave her alone. He hints at a lawsuit and she's furious that her stupid choice to drive a little drunk and speeding has landed her in this mess. But at least he's not claiming to be an angel any more. Now he's saying he's lost his memory and without her help, he's lost and alone in the world certain to die without guidance. Never mind the huge wad of cash in his pocket. But once again the heroine's bleeding heart takes effect and she find herself accompanying this stranger around town, buying clothes and watching him discover food for the first time. It's like watching a child. He has no idea about something as simple as juice and everything he learns is something fantastic and inspiring to him. But he's infuriating. He pushes her buttons like nobody’s business because he's so flippant. Nothing she says or does or threatens to do can take away that easy smile. But she feels like he's manipulating her. He is manipulating her because every time she brings up the fact that he's apparently a dead mob associate or the fact that she wants him to leave her alone, he laughs it off. And he can apparently read her mind because he starts spouting out what's she evidently feeling inside. Her sense of boredom with the fact that people consider her boring. Her sense of being used by the man she loves, that he doesn't really love her at all and cares only for himself. Her growing affection and desire for the completely strange who has managed to surge his way into life. But she denies all of this. She's convinced herself that her life was a happy one and every time the hero hints at otherwise she's instantly defensive. Now, upon everything else, apparently someone is trying to kill her. The hero, who once again claims to be an Angel- and actually turns out to have been telling the true when he dies sacrificing himself for her only to return to life- tells her it's his mission to discover who means her harm and protect her at all costs. Her life has changed in so little time, her fiancé is a total asshole, someone wants her dead and her guardian angel is destined to fly back to the heavens when the mystery is solved. Nothing at all is normal in the heroine's not so boring little world. At first, I was enchanted and greatly amused by the banter and arguments between the heroine and her unwanted guest. The childlike wonder the hero possesses paired with a habit of mixing up common sayings and phrases was super funny. The way he could trick the heroine and play her like a fiddle all the while pretending ignorance made for some very funny scenes especially when the heroine would lose her shit on what she deemed thee worst angel ever. I enjoyed that the plot was not written in the hero's perspective because you got the feeling of doubt right along with the hero that he's what he says he is, even though you know it's true. It helped that he was manipulative and opportunistic when it came to getting his way. But this made for a major flaw in the likable aspect of his character. What he did and how he treated the heroine was ' for the best and for her own good' but instead it came across as greasy and smarmy. I really did not like how he set the heroine up to fail or how he controlled her life and previous lives all because he imagined himself in love with her. The heroine was a love/hate relationship. On one had she was kind and selfless to the extent of allowing people to walk over her and on the other she was ignorant and stubborn to the point of stupidity. She wanted her happy little life even if it was a lie and I thought her weak because of it. Over all the book was humorous but its humor ran out closer to the end and what was left was a lackluster stalker novel with very little chemistry between the character beside for friendship.
