A story in the middle of the events leading to a united Italy is a very appealing idea, and seldom used in comparison to the frequent books using the French revolution. However, the novel would have benefited from more deep descriptions of these events, because people not familiar with them can have a hard time catching on. It isn't the most important part of the book, but I would have preferred to learn about it more. When Francesca's father dies, she is introduced to a new life with her mother's foreign family. She is accompanied by her new acquaintance Miss Perkins and the journey to Italy is long, but Francesca is soon to discover that life there isn't dull and eventless. A revolution is on the way. Spoilers! Unfortunately, foreseeing things didn't require much attention. * There was never anything charming or friendly about Galiana. * Stefano shouldn't have been considered as unfeeling. His emotions shone through rather well, and since the first time he saved Francesca I began to doubt his cripple condition and thus his true identity. I got the feeling Michaels wanted to emphasize the fact that people sometimes aren't what they seem, and the importance of being open-minded and not judgeful - good advices that somehow were waisted when not revealed at the right (intended) time as if they had been carefully concealed. Some problems * Francesca was foolish (sometimes to the extreme). * Galiana was spoiled and foolish. * What was with the grandfather? I didn't like Francesca and had a hard time understanding her illogical behavior. Her father died, and she forgot it in a few days when he ended up in the shadow of her new lifestyle. She liked Galiana, no more is needed to be said about that. Her new love interest only remained as long as she thought of him as the mysterious hero. Then, she must suddenly find another guy, and who is more suited for that role than the real Falcon? Seemed a little shallow and immature. Some credit * I liked Miss Perkins and her sharp-witted brain! * I found Stefano so amusing with his surly remarks and way of covering up his true emotions. I liked him from the very start and thought there was more to him than his rude manner. All in all, this is a rather amusing read and a lot of stuff is going on. Despite it's flaws it will surely keep you occupied for some time.
