To appreciate this book in all its grandeur one must contextualize it properly. We're reading a novel written in 1914, in a period prior to the Great War. The social environment was prone to philosophical and scientific positivism that would give birth to the Recieved View on the Wiener Kreis a decade later. The electricity takes over as core of industrial revolution, displacing the exhausted steam engine. Mists of Victorianism deviate to reveal a world transformed socially, intellectually and technologically. All miracles seem possible in the way of scientific progress. And The masses have become accustomed to passionate and detailed technical descriptions narrated in daily newspapers. It is in this context when Raymon Roussel dares to portray an applied science, almost (or completely) miraculous resulting in a horrific landscape of shocking wonders. The very detailed and aseptic narrative of the inventions in the garden hides monstrous events and assemblies: mosaics created with human teeth. reanimated heads, shaved aquatic cats, tableaux performed by zombies trapped in endless loops of the most dramatic moments of their lifes... If Jules Verne represents the sublimation of nineteenth-century positivism Roussel is the prophet of the disillusionment that will arise in The Interbellum. And it could seems contradictory but Roussel science (though fantastic) is closer in its development to the real scientific praxis that Verne's Wonders. Jules introduced scientific advances of the time in their novels and them He applied it in unexpected ways. He spared no descriptions of the theory and technique that underlay its wonders, but they were the descriptions of a finished product already extending into society.. Meanwhile Roussel describes the scientific process of discovery and its wonders are confined in a garden that is a metaphoric laboratory: One discovery leads to another and over time new derived applications crop up. You could say that Verne is pure sociological science fiction, while Roussel is the basis of a future Hard Sci-Fi. My personal recommendation is to read this book with all this in mind. You have to understand that the complication of narrative language, the nested structure of the descriptions and proliferation details are Roussel's tools to alienate the reader with a sense of scientific asepsis.
