When you imagine JG Ballard at work at his desk, you picture him holding not a pen but a scalpel. There's a sentence early on in this book, where someone fantasising about Elizabeth Taylor obsesses over ‘the exquisite transits of the screen actress's pubis across the vinyl seat covers of hired limousines’, and this is such a perfect Ballardian sentence. Human sexuality seen as a kind of astronomical phenomenon; the personal made coldly scientific. The amazement of Crash is how convincingly its form recapitulates its content – it's not just about sexual pathology, it feels like something pathological in itself. The repetition and the complete dedication to its central thesis seem unhinged. Like pornography, the same elements are recombined in innumerable ways to stimulating yet wearying effect, except that here these are not just body parts (‘penis’, ‘vulva’, ‘semen’ etc. recur ad infinitum ) but also aspects of modern technology – instrument binnacles, motorway embankments, central reservations, engine coolant. The intent is not just to talk about some people who find car-crashes sexy (which is what everyone knows the book is about). It's to turn sex itself into a kind of car-crash, a collision of strange technologies. Everywhere people and machines are elided. A driver's seat is described anatomically, as a ‘central sulcus’; reference is made to ‘the soft technology of Catherine's breasts’. The novel builds up a series of eerie ‘conjunctions between elbow and chromium window-sill, vulva and instrument binnacle’. The passenger compartment enclosed us like a machine generating from our sexual act an homunculus of blood, semen and engine coolant. This mechanised perversity doesn't appear in complete isolation: it's not just cars, it's the whole world. Ballard, as narrator, lives in ‘an immense metallized landscape’, bounded by ‘a continuous artificial horizon, formed by the raised parapets and embankments of the motorways and their access roads and interchanges’. He looks out to ‘the distant causeways of the northern circular motorway’, the skies peopled by ‘metallized creatures’ from the nearby airport. What does sex look like, within this vision of a late twentieth century dominated by technology and looming mass destruction? (That's one way to frame the novel.) Ballard sees (or foresees) ‘a new sexuality born from a perverse technology’, one ‘divorced from any possible physical expression’. In such an environment, sex becomes something like IT – ‘an exact analogue of the other skills created by the multiplying technologies of the twentieth century’. One of the things underlying this thought-experiment is a grotesque hyperawareness of how dangerous driving is. Ballard has talked about how baffling it is to see people carry on as though it isn't the most dangerous thing they will do every day, with their family happily on board. Here, that wilful ignorance is reversed: the danger, the injury and eventual death, becomes the whole point. Sexual orifices are elided with trauma wounds. And this is just the beginning – Ballard chillingly pauses to imagine how future developments will cause further perversions: What wounds would create the sexual possibilities of the invisible technologies of thermonuclear reaction chambers, white-tiled control rooms, the mysterious scenarios of computer circuitry? All this makes it sound as though Crash is a novel with an argument, a monitory fable about our unhealthy dependence on technology. And it is, maybe. But it doesn't feel like that when you're reading it – there's something fetishistic and masturbatory to its tone of complete belief, as though it's all a fantasy written by one of its characters (an impression stressed by the fact that the protagonist and narrator is also ‘JG Ballard’). I wish I'd read this in my thirties. In my twenties it would have shocked me, and now, in my forties, I'm a bit too liable to find it faintly silly. But five or ten years ago I think it would have blown me away. It contains words and ideas that have been put next to each other for the very first time. Though its characters are unreal and its themes repetitive, on a micro scale, sentence by sentence, and on a macro scale, in terms of its themes, it's completely extraordinary.
