Is Satan coming? Are we in the End of Days? Is the Earth heating, under the Sun's Rays? Is it all make believe, manipulation, or true? Why on this wonderful Earth, is everybody blue? Are we in the Rapture? Impending Doom? Lightning strikes, sink holes and thunderous sonic booms Ebola and earth quakes, hurricanes and tornadoes too Now I can see why we are feeling blue Forest fires, tsunamis, land slides and Hail Watching the mainstream news, it looks like Hell! Fake news and propaganda, rhetoric , is it all that is seen All this mayhem and misery, coming from the TV Screen Terrorism, false flags, usury and greed People living on top of each other, all race, and persuasion and creed We would get along swimmingly, if we were not controlled, Lorded over by a few Elite, cabal, hidden Knowledge kept esoteric, to us Forbidden Is Satan Saturn? The father of time. Old Nick, as in the Nick of time Are we trapped in a matrix, a primeval soup, dark matter, black slime? So dense with materialism, constricting like a snake Keeping up with this capitalism, something has to break The serpent swallowing its tail, does capitalism work? When the Elites own it all, people will go berserk Orchestrated chaos, civil unrest, no food in the stores Swallowed up like a black hole by Corporation Whores Inflation going up but, no paid work for people Replaced by Machines, useless eaters, Sheeple Is the Earth a farm? Are we the characters in Orwell's animal farm? All following the Pied Piper's musical charm In the words of the Killers, are we dancer? following in Formation, to a tune Like Lemmings, cartoon characters, loony toon Is a policeman acting? As in acting police officer, is this all a game? One is asked if we understand, or stand under, whilst having the point of blame Look around, see what is really going on, ignore BBC, CNN and SKY Make one's own decision, let them pass by After all they are reading from a script, edited and photo shopped, they have the means to fake Not some individual, who witnessed first hand, and managed to take A picture with their mob phone, it must be real Not according to MSM, its all fake, doctored and spiel What is really going on in the skies? Is the climate changing, geo engineering, or is it all lies? Is Satan coming? Is it the End of Days? Or is he already here? Been here always Armageddon, Jihad, Ragnarok, it's all the same to me Same story, different culture, that is History So what is coming? What is going to happen? To Ye and Me? One things for sure, you won't find out on the BBC By Leo.🐯👍 If he is already here, where does he reside? Is he out in the open? Or does he hide? Hmmm! Maybe it is both, hidden in plain sight The only few that know, illuminated by the false light!🐯👍 Maybe we are all Satan's children, Kids? Baby Goat of Mendes When did Children suddenly become Kids? It is Madness Yet parents call them thus Am I unnecessarily causing a fuss? Wake up and see, what words we use Words that are there, only to confuse Satan is androgynous! Both of Male and Female Sex Our children, being indoctrinated, by a Witchcraft Hex Nobody can see, this Paradigm changing fast All rational debate, or thoughts, will be our last As we move forward into this New World that is Abound The opening of Hades, a Three Headed Hound Return of the Old Ones, are we ready for this to begin? A world where anything goes, a world of debauchery and sin. 👍🐯👍
