This is a very clever book because the main issue with it is exactly the point Dickens is making: it is so long and dragged out . Bleak House is quite the achievement. It's a 900+ page monster made up a thousand different subplots with a large cast of characters. It also fanned the flames that led to a huge overhaul of the legal system in England . Buried beneath and entwined with the many subplots is the case of Jarndyce and Jarndyce - Dickens's parody of the Chancery Court system (because the case is dragged out over many years). I like Dickens, and I can appreciate what Bleak House does, but I'm sorry to say I won't be joining the ranks who consider this their favourite. His best work objectively? Maybe. Who even knows what that means? But definitely not my favourite. That would be Great Expectations -- a novel that just rips my heart out and stomps all over it. I really do understand that this is the whole point, but so many chapters and events in this book were extended needlessly, padded out with waffle and meanderings that seemed to have nothing to do with the novel at large. That's very clever and all - given that this is a critique of a court system that extends everything needlessly and gets nothing done - but it's a bit of a chore to read. It's a shorter book than Les Misérables , The Count of Monte Cristo and War and Peace , but it truly doesn't feel like it. The characters, too, were not as memorable as many of Dickens others. Having read it, I can now see why the Bleak House characters are not household names like Miss Havisham or Bill Sykes. I found them bland in comparison. I also think it was a mistake to have the simpering "I'm so modest and unintelligent" Esther Summerson as a narrator (Dickens's only female narrator). It's unfortunate because I think Dickens usually excels at first person narration, but Esther's constant need to reiterate her modesty and lack of intelligence is frustrating. If I were rating this book based on how well it achieved what it set out to do, it would be an easy five stars. If you believe classics are not there for enjoyment but for self-flagellation, this is an easy five stars. Dickens successfully wrote a long and slow book to show how the legal system is so long and slow. Some of the subplots and character dramas were interesting; many were not. Blog | Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | Youtube
