This is one of the first books in the US to attempt to codify the traits of psychopathy. It seems psychopathy used to be a sort of catch-all term for patients who didn't appear to qualify for diagnoses of psychotic or neurotic conditions, and could therefore be considered "sane," but still exhibited some form of maladjustment that severely impacted relationships with other people and society at large. These people who seemed to defy treatment (consciously and unconsciously) began to accumulate in mental hospitals. Psychiatrists began to pool their case histories together, research began to compile statistics, and eventually traits and patterns of behavior began to emerge. This book attempts to coalesce that research into a personality type describing people who compulsively lie, behave in antisocial and self-destructive ways, exhibit relentless narcissism, feel little to no remorse or emotion, and fail to find fault with themselves: the psychopath. The book begins with a very brief and broad overview of mental illness and ideas of sanity and insanity at the time (this book was originally published in 1941), then plunges headlong into case histories before beginning to delineate the characteristics of psychopaths. I found this to be a very interesting idea because it allows people to experience these patients' lives free from academic dogma. The author tries to keep these descriptions as factual as possible, but some editorializing does creep in, especially with the women. I've studied psychopathy a fair bit, but I think anyone reading this book would see the common thread that weaves through these peoples' profiles, and notice the traits and behaviors that cause these people problems that lead to jail and/or mental hospitals. After a brief discussion of psychopathy in the medical literature, the next chapters differentiate psychopathy from various other mental illnesses, disorders, and personality types. Some of these differences seem obvious: psychosis, alcoholism, neurosis. Others seem out of place at first but make interesting points: genius, hedonism. Chapters about antisocial behavior in general are very helpful, because not all people who commit antisocial acts are psychopaths, and the differences between antisocial and psychopathic personalities can be very subtle. The chapter about sexual deviance stood out most to me among all these. It's important to remember that this book was written during the time that homosexuality was considered a mental disorder. The author spends most of the chapter discussing the difference between homosexuality and psychopathy, and very little on other sexual behavior, generally concluding that psychopaths engage in sex less for pleasure than pure impulse. What I found most interesting, and what I wish the author had spent more time elaborating, is the recognition of psychopathic sexual sadists as extraordinarily dangerous people. He also identifies two grandiose and manipulative behaviors commonly attributed to psychopathic serial killers: inserting oneself into the investigation and returning to the scene of the crime, especially as it's being investigated. To me, the fact that these behaviors are now widely known shows how much Cleckley got right. The second half of the book lays out Cleckley's model of psychopathy, beginning with a list of traits and behaviors. Hare created the modern-day Psychopathy Checklist which lists 20 of these. He was strongly influenced by Cleckley's list of 17, so it's no surprise that there's a great deal of overlap, but I was struck by the direction that the research and clinical experience was pointing, even nearly a hundred years ago. Hare's list contains several of Cleckley's original 17: superficial charm, irresponsibility, compulsive lying, lack of remorse, impulsivity, poor behavioral controls, failure to accept responsibility for one's actions, lack of realistic long-term goals, shallow emotions, sexual promiscuity, many short-term relationships. Although not part of the modern Psychopathy Checklist, some of Cleckley's traits are usually demonstrated by psychopaths: lack of nervousness or immunity to fear, egocentricity and narcissism, intelligence, and suicide rarely carried out. Much of the rest of the book delves into the research of the time to attempt to answer important questions. What causes psychopathy? How can it be treated? How should society handle psychopaths? The answer to these questions, ultimately, is the same as it is today: we don't really know. I will say that Cleckley seemed to give "upstanding" families a pass when exploring nature vs. nurture's role. The fact that many psychopaths in his experience came from middle- to upper-class families with no backgrounds of criminal activity or mental illness seemed to argue against strong environmental and genetic factors. It seems like Cleckley couldn't see the forest for the trees since we know now that environment (especially in early childhood) and genes play a large part in the development of psychopathy, and he spent very little time exploring family background except as it differed from the psychopath's behavior. I think this is partly due to the author's disdain for Freudian and Jungian analytic interpretations. In his view, symbolism and analogy are unverifiable and therefore unscientific and offer no useful explanation or data regarding mental illness, including psychopathy. The story about the psychological symbolism of the toenail made me laugh out loud. I think Cleckley is mostly correct in this regard, although there does seem to be some sort of symbolism at work in psychopathic serial killers, such as Ted Bundy killing his girlfriend or Gary Ridgway killing his mother over and over again. I doubt that Cleckley would be surprised to find out that even though we know more today about how psychopathy arises, we still have no concrete answers about how to prevent it or treat it. The book closes with a discussion about what to do with psychopaths. Cleckley argues throughout the book that psychopaths are just as unable to function as severe schizophrenics even though they appear "sane." Many mental hospitals didn't want them, because they were treatment-averse, took up space that could be better used by people who could actually be helped, and generally caused problems among staff and patients. Jail was no help either, because psychopaths usually can't be rehabilitated. Acknowledging both of these facts, Cleckley argued that the law should recognize psychopaths as people that society should be protected against. He advocated for legal recognition of psychopathy and mechanisms for either indefinite commitment or constant outpatient supervision. He favored the Durham rule (not guilty by reason of insanity due to mental disease or defect) over the M'Naghten rule (not guilty by reason of insanity due to not knowing the criminal act was wrong), though he acknowledged that this might give psychiatrists and psychologists too much power over a criminal's ultimate fate, and the Durham rule fell out of use in America for that very reason. We seem to be in exactly the same position today. It's not illegal to be a psychopath (nor should it be), but we can only watch and wait until a psychopath commits a criminal act, sometimes so breathtaking in scope and scale that society is changed forever due to the acts of a single person's selfish whims. Prison seems to be the only recourse because psychopaths know what they're doing is wrong and no therapy we have so far can consistently and effectively turn them from their antisocial path, but rehabilitation is unlikely. Cleckley tries to end on a hopeful note, but almost a century later, little has changed. I highly recommend this book to anyone interested in the topic. Cleckley's work is compelling. His clinical experience and case histories add depth to his already-meticulous research. Even when he draws the wrong conclusions based on what we know today (which is infrequent), his ideas are still on the right path. He also freely acknowledges his work as incomplete and at times paradoxical, because psychopathy is a problem of extraordinary reach and complexity. Occasionally the author appears to veer away from objectivity into self-righteous judgement, but he always tries to bring it back to science as it was understood at the time. There may be a temptation to just close the book and discount the author as a racist, homophobe, misogynist, whatever, but the discomfort or anger is worth not just the insights and groundwork on psychopathy but the historical perspective on mental illness and society in general.
