I don't know why goodreads thinks I've read this book twice, I have not. There are spoilers below! Under Construction Mori Ogai 3/5 This was kind of a funny novel mainly due to the fact that it centers around a break up. The entire story is the build up to the break up between a Japanese man and a German woman. But interestingly, the characters are not really the main focus in this story, it’s the environment. Mori did something different in the literary community in an attempt to break off from the literary style (Naturalism) predominant during his time period. He wanted to bring in Western literary influence that focused on the aesthetics. Under construction does that as the hotel where the lovers break up is filled with many details that hint, repeatedly, at the changes Japan undergoes in order to catch up to their Western counterparts. There is a subtle criticism at the culture that is being gained and the one being lost and how the merging of the two is, for the time being, clashing and at odds with one another. It’s a sharp critique on a country under the guise of the tragic love story. Now, isn’t that romantic? The Decoration Tokuda Shusei “The relative gaiety of her sister’s life filled her with envy and she did her best to mix with the male customers. Yet she was not sufficiently self-confident about her looks or her manners. She tried copying the other waitresses by powdering her face and curling her hair, but it all struck her as rather pointless. As soon as she began to maker herself amiable, she felt that she was in some way betraying her own nature.” 5/5 I loved this story. It’s so rare to find a book that talks about the struggles a woman has to go through, especially when it comes to marriage. And this story was published in 1935! Imagine, the confines and pressures marriage put on a woman being discussed so eloquently. This story just blew my mind because it makes you question what really is the point of marriage? And the morals on viewing women as a means to “subdue” their soon-to-be-husband’s addictive/vice tendencies. The story manages to show that marriages aren’t a means to an end. They can’t solve any internal issues, they don’t suddenly sober up someone to responsibilities. In a way, they censor the spirit of both parties involved. The story ends rather ominously where not only does the reader question the relationship, but also whether this couple even survived. Review Continued Here
