I think I"m going to swear off food reading for a while after this one. This book was divided into three parts: the first about the grueling Certified Master Chef exam administered by the Culinary Institute of America, the second about then up and coming chef Michael Symon and the third about Thomas Keller, chef at the French Laundry and who many believe to be one of the best chefs in the country. The first part about the exam was the most interesting. How do you test the qualities of a great chef. Most of the exam had to do with classical French preparations it seemed. The second and third parts really dragged. Michael Symon is now a bonafide celebrity chef - He's an Iron Chef now!! When this was written we was still up and coming. I like Michael Symon a lot, but reading about him at his Cleveland restaurant, Lola, was a little boring. I'd have to say the same for the section about Thomas Keller. His restaurant in CA wine country is one regarded as one of the best restaurants in the country and he, one of the best chefs. But in spite of that, I didn't really enjoy reading about it. By the end of the book there had been so much discussion about veal stock that I started to dream about it. They also talked about offal meats so much in this book that it was pushing me toward becoming vegetarian. Eating calves brains, kidneys, tripe and pigs ears may really be delicious when you eat them at The French Laundry but reading about them - the butchering, preparation etc., was just grossing me out. I did have an "a ha!" moment at the end of this book. Chefs aren't the only ones who strive for perfection. To be good in any industry requires the same dedication and attention to detail. Even in my home life I am, in some ways, striving to be perfect. It's not a destination. As Thomas Keller was kind of saying, you work at it all the time. Once you achieve some level of "perfection" the bar is raised higher. And you must work at it constantly with every little detail. So there were some interesting parts to the book, but I liked Michael Ruhlman's book The Making of a Chef (about culinary school) a lot better.
