❖︎︎Characters❖︎︎ Ruby is our protag and a super naive, sweet girl from the bayou. She is pretty gullible, yet still wants to trust people, even by the end of the book. There were people she could have, and should have, written off, but still wants to develop healthy relationships with them. By contrast, her twin sister Gisselle is just horrible. She is mean girl that everyone hates, but somehow still sort of wants to be. She has all the fun. Goes to all the parties. She has no reason to be a miserable cow, but she is. I don't know that she really deserved what she got in the end, but I'm not going to say that she didn't either. Of course, she learned it all from Daphne, her 'mother.' If Gisselle is the Mean Girl, Daphne is the Queen Bitch. She's super manipulative and plain hateful to Pierre, the twins' father. Pierre, for his part, is pretty much a pushover. I'm glad he stuck up for himself and Ruby in the end. Grandmere was great. She was strong and independent and helped everyone she could, giving up her own health in the process. Grandpere, the opposite, was a terrible person. I almost felt sorry for him in the beginning, but then the scene with him and Buster through me over the edge. He's horrible. I am so glad that Paul made another appearance in the end. I really like him. He's just a good guy. In love with his sister (and Gisselle was totally flirting with him! WTF is with these siblings???), but a nice guy. Rating: 👍︎ ❖︎︎Setting❖︎︎ I loved the description of the Bayou was perfect. I'm not super familiar with that area, but I got a really good visual. With New Orleans, I think we got more sights than an actual description, but I think it was such a huge place to cover, that it was well done. Rating: 👍︎ ❖︎︎Plot❖︎︎ A true rags to riches story with so much family back story thrown in. I'm not going to go into that tangled web, but suffice it to say, when this truth does come out, some people ->Daphne<- are going to be humiliated. That makes me happy. Ruby had a rough time of it through the entire book. She loses everyone who matters to her and is thrown into this new world with a jealous sister, hateful 'mother,' somewhat unstable father, and a guy who claims to be in love with her and is pretty pushy for sex, but is questionable after. I really do think Beau has genuine feelings for her though. He's just a teenager with raging hormones. Kind of glad that they are going away to a private school after this. Ruby needs to start over and Gisselle needs to not have the upper hand with her socially. Rating: 👍︎ ❖︎︎Random Thoughts❖︎︎ Muskrats? Eek Is this backwoods bayou magic for real? Oh, a prostitute? Nice. Voodoo? Wonder if that is really what did it. Wasn't planning on this being a supernatural story. Evaluated???? Nasty trick, Daphne. And she had the shrink in her pocket to claim Ruby was a nympho. Dirty playing.
