It’s been a while since I last hung out with Joanna Brady and the gang: daughter, Jenny, and their pups Tigger and Silvy along with Joanna’s mother, Elinor and her in-laws Eva Lou and Jim Bob. These stories were written back in the 90’s and there are good and bad things about stories in this period that I like and dislike. It makes me wonder if this is just some questionable character development of some of the characters or if it’s reflective of Jance’s true feelings and opinions. Anyway, the book summary lays out the primary storyline of the death of a man who a year earlier, while driving drunk, had killed a woman while walking across the street, holding the hand of her husband of 19yrs. What the book summary doesn’t say is that the drunk driver was the local veterinarian, Bucky, who only spent two months in jail and paid a fine for vehicular manslaughter. The husband, Hal, of the woman that Bucky killed, was found in the barn where Bucky’s body was found and is considered the prime suspect. There is also a storyline of Joanna and her chief deputy, Voland, still butting heads with each other over everything and anything. Voland was Joanna’s opponent in the election for Sheriff and is now constantly trying to tell her what to do and Joanna has to remind him that she is the Sheriff, not him. There’s another storyline of Joanna and Elinor, who are also still butting heads with each other too. Throughout the whole series, Joanna and Elinor have never seemed to get along with each other. Most of the story revolves around the investigation of Bucky’s death. As far as Joanna is concerned, there are one or two other suspects other than Hal, but, of course, Voland is dead set on Hal. Clashes and arguments ensue – again! Personally, the identity of the killer wasn’t a surprise or ever in question (at least for me); I knew who it was from pretty much the get-go. The continuing character development of Joanna and the rest of the cast of regular characters was questionable. The pacing was fine and the story was interesting enough to at least finish it. The writing was questionable in some spots and actually getting a little irksome in other spots. In other words, not the best installment of the series so far. Don’t even get me started on the narrator. What started as just a little melodramatic (in the first installment), three installments later, the narration has now become really annoying. I’m looking at an overall rating of 3.3 that will be rounded down to a 3star rating. I’m probably going to give this series a long break before I decide whether or not I’ll continue with it.
