Just when I had discovered Ayn Rand and she had created a revolution in my thinking, Barbara Branden's biography, The Passion of Ayn Rand came out. I think if there had been any danger I'd become a "Randroid" as I've heard some describe it, this book did put paid to that, because goodness the book did do a good job of idol smashing--and I think that's healthy actually if we're going to judge Rand by her ideas--and not worship her (or condemn her) unthinkingly. Mind you, Barbara Branden did have good reason to be bitter towards Ayn Rand. She was Nathaniel Branden's wife. Rand informed both her own husband and Barbara she was going to pursue an affair with Nathaniel. And when Nathaniel fell for yet another women and decided to break things off, Barbara supported him and both were relegated to the outer darkness by Ayn. Judgment Day , published after The Passion of Ayn Rand , told the story from Nathaniel's perspective--although like The Passion of Ayn Rand it's about more than that. It gives us his observations of Ayn Rand and her circle over the decades of their association. And the observations of a trained psychologist and psychotherapist. It should be noted that some time after this book's release, Leonard Peikoff, Rand's designated "intellectual heir" admitted that having gone through Rand's papers, the affair did happen much in the way the Brandens described. This book is readable and gives a fascinating perspective on Ayn Rand--at least if your neither a doctrinaire devotee outraged by a critical perspective nor someone who can't repeat Ayn Rand's name without a sneer and a jibe. That's why I'm giving it five stars as amazing, despite that it is true--Nathaniel Branden did have a vested interest in making Ayn Rand look bad and defending his own actions--and at times it shows, so this should be taken with many a grain of salt. What I thought was remarkable about Barbara Branden biography was that despite having reason to be bitter towards Rand she displayed both empathy and admiration for her subject. I think the tone in Nathaniel's memoir is much more bitter and self-serving. And certainly if you find Ayn Rand's ideas and life of interest, there are two recent books from outside, I dare say more "objective," perspectives that are well thought of and from what I've read not hatchet jobs-- Anne C. Heller's Ayn Rand and the World She Made and Jennifer Burns Goddess of the Market . I haven't read either yet, but I already picked up Heller's as an ebook.
