I've read Fern Michaels before, and honestly I liked her work. I mean, it was something that I would read if I was just wanting to read something and I couldn't find anything I liked- then I would settle for one of hers. It's never anything complicated, but you get a decent story. Now to be truthful, I read her many years ago. I think my taste has changed quite considerably over the years. I like plot twists and stories that have depth and so on. That is not what you will get with Sara's Song or any of the ones I've read. This one was so elementary that I had to stop and find the publishing date. It was 2009- and this is why I know I've changed. Maybe this would've been okay in 2009, but it's 2018 and this was for lack of a better word corny. It is predictable beyond predictability and it's sort of weird. You have a female doctor who is very straight laced and I assume her only flaw is that she smokes. This is how she is first presented. She is encouraged to loosen up by a supporting character in an elderly spit fire nurse- Nelly. The good doctor meets Dallas Lord a rock musician and her life changes. He is not what she would typically date and when she gets to know him, she finds him strange or simply put slow. He isn't very smart and tries to hide it, in her perspective. Here is my problem at this point in the story- The writer makes you feel like Sara is having second thoughts about him because of his weird behavior and his lack of sexual prowess if you will. Here, it begins to shape the reader's thoughts that, yeah, he is a little different and there isn't really that magic that you look for in sweet love stories. The writer further solidified this by using another supporting character- the MC's sister in pointing out some things that the reader was not privileged to see. You know how writers use a character to talk about scenes or conversations that happened, yet only that character heard them. They were never revealed to the reader. This happened a few times in the book with more than one character. The use of supporting characters revealing information that changes the way you view the MC#2 - Dallas Lord. So a string of events happen and Sara becomes acquainted with Dallas' brother. Very aquatinted, but not very, very acquainted. Once this is developed the plot thickens and you are left wondering whom she will choose. It's very obvious and very predictable which makes it boring. There are no sparks. The language that the characters use is so antiquated and odd is very crippling to the story. The dialogue is like so weird. People do not really talk like that. It's like one of those really bad dramadies . (Drama/comedy) sp?
