This is absolutely one of the the most overrated books of all time. Soul on Ice is a collection of outdated essays, along with a few love letters to his attorney written while Cleaver was serving time for being a serial rapist. Cleaver shows a poor understanding of the political workings of the elites, the reasons why many middle and working class whites are "racists", and virtually every other thing he opens his mouth on with one major exception. His observations about the disturbing mental and sexual pathologies that exist in the American black males mind towards white females are very insightful and realistic. At one point Cleaver actually says that his whole motivation for raping white women was that he considered it a "revolutionary act", it was his way of striking back at "white" society. He also goes into blacks pursuance of white females having more to do with black self hatred more than anything else. Although I think the general pathology black males have towards white females has evolved into something slightly different now, given the system now approves of and out and out promotes relationships between black males and white females, this book is still brilliant as far as delving into the psychological illness that exists within that dynamic. Other than that most of Soul on Ice is a complete lump of garbage. I can't fathom why this book is used in many University literature and sociology classes in America except to brainwash and indoctrinate white students with white guilt. I bet those classroom discussions are a real hoot! Cleaver was certainly the weak link in the Black Panther leadership, ultimately contributing more towards its destruction than helping it. He wasn't really a hardcore black nationalist or racial seperatist when you get down to it, he wasn't, which was common for that time, an overblown hardcore Marxist or leftist. What Cleaver was really all about was expanding his overblown ego more than anything else. He also later proved himself to be a complete flake going through stages as a black right wing conservative, a born again Christian, and I think he even got involved in some sort of bizarre eastern religion for a while. There are lots of reasons to admire the Black Panther Party, Cleaver is not one of them.
