This is an old school novel (copyright 1987) about forbidden love between a Native American man and a white woman during the time from 1888-1890. I love this trope and this book did not let me down. It was so easy to feel the pain and agony of Tohave while his people were shoved onto reservations and he was powerless to do anything about it. It was easy to see why he didn't trust any white men after the lies, massacres, and injustices doled out to the Indians at the hands of white men. There was so much needless tragedy and infliction of suffering due to greed and ignorance. The author did a fantastic job of portraying this and obviously did a lot of research on the subject. Being a South Dakota girl myself, I knew of these stories before I read this book and have always found them gut-wrenching, but we can't change history no matter how ugly or unpleasant it may be. Just a word of warning, some lightweights will find this book offensive. I, however, loved it. Onto the story. Katie Russell and her husband, Ezra are headed for a plot of land in Nebraska to start a homestead when a band of renegade Indians harass them and scare the daylights out of them. This is when Katie met Tohave and knew instantly that there was something different about him. I would go as far to say it was love at first sight. Her husband is an unfeeling, mean old bastard that was her father's friend and her father forced her to marry him. She was 19-years-old, is naive, has been used and abused her whole life, yet still hangs onto the idea of love and someday having a man love her and being happy. Frankly, I hated Ezra. I wanted to hit him in the face with a shovel. Repeatedly. I could've handled his looks not that much was said about them other than he was ugly. He was just so damn mean to her and worked her so hard. He was controlling, lacked compassion, selfish--everything I despise in a character and even a real person. I longed for him to get his comeuppance. I wasn't sure how he was going to get it or at whose hands, but I wanted him to get what was coming to him. Tohave was a polar opposite. He was handsome, smart, kind but fierce when he had to be, spiritual, loving, open about his feelings for Katie, despite the fact she was married and there was no chance for them to have a life together. He gave her hope when there was none to be had and that's what pulled her through. I loved him from the moment he was introduced to the story. He went through so much and I wanted him to get his happily ever after. This book is dark and full of angst. I spent some time in tears and angry, but it was so worth it. A good book will make you laugh; a great book will make you cry. There are instances or rape, abuse, and violence that some people won't appreciate, but it was an integral part of the story no matter how distasteful it was. This was a wonderful story that was true to the times. I'd give this book ten stars if I could. It will undoubtedly end up on my Top 10 Favorite Books of the Year on my blog in December. Any book that can make me feel this way deserves to be on this list. Show more
