Not shown; another half-star. As most books go, this earthy installment of a Montana horsing-around romance is good, but by McGuane's standards which are set considerably higher than flatlander zipcodes, just not good enough. Whether his experimentation in prose was intended to create some poetic license, or to let his stream of consciousness meander, instead, for the sake of a style-bending genre, is anyone's guess. (?) There are so many detours (whiskey-induced tangents) occasioned randomly throughout his bumpy rancher's narrative, that one is forced to hit "pause" questioning whether what was just read would be more meaningful if by careful and methodical rereading--like a water witcher retracing his steps--there might be divined some inspired context. Regrettably, came up with more dry holes than I'd care to count. The story's protagonist is a horse-smart and woman-stupid Army tank captain returned home to his family ranch from Germany. His father, a Boeing test pilot, is deceased having made a very expensive hole in the ground with an experimental aircraft. His mother is remarried to a California businessman and has his child. His full-blooded younger sister is, to put it politely, not correctly herself. Committed, eventually, to a mental institution whose therapeutic methodology spectacularly fails. Suicide, after release, is not surprising to anyone in town given her behavior. Though gifted with handling horses, Mary is a part-time prostitute, becomes impregnated by a Cheyenne ranch hand, David Catches, and oil paints her bedroom sky blue (floor, ceiling, walls, curtains, bedding and all) then sets the barn on fire. The whole Fitzpatrick family, in fact, is rather profoundly disturbed if not broken (nobody writes, or calls, or talks) and the son moves back in with his cranky grandfather who, despite the hard bark on him and criticism of his grandson's efforts, can't keep up with the homestead falling down around them, wants to pack it in, sell-out, and move his old bones into town. Deadrock; a frontier misnomer (is there any other kind?) from an attempt in the Indian Wars to settle a treaty that was deadlocked. Location for the ol' cowboy Grandad is everything. Nine Montana bars within crawling distance of his apartment overlooking the main street. A nextdoor view of the Emperial Theater. And a hop, skip and a jump from the hospital. Patrick, who narrates in first person is smitten by a golden-haired Oklahoma homecoming queen and trophy wife of a rich oil man (is there any other kind?). Being bored, he throws in with ranching up north--as either a bad investment he can write-off, or as a curious hobby--even though he doesn't ride. All hat, no horse. But he has a helicopter. Tio leaves the pretty missus, Claire, alone to Patrick who is commissioned to stud and break-in his stallion for him. Among other serviceable duties, which will create the ambivalence of a potentially life-threatening love triangle as one might expect. Lives are lost. Loves, not so much. But not the way the reader--and the characters involved--ever see it coming. No spoilers. But things get a little out of hand. Like skinning coyotes inside the dude rancher's abode (with two West Coast hunters hopped-up on amphetamines--a "Sheetrocker and Perfataper" four pelts shy of the record from out-of-state) during a whiskey binge, then leaving their carcasses to rot--the stinch, the mess of broken glassware following gunplay and what not and a hasty retreat, and well...flies. Have to confess a crude fascination with McGuane's neo-noir vision of the American West, not unlike the seething, cowboy-equivalent of Oliver Stone's "U-Turn" (1997) with Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Joaquin Phoenix, and scene-stealers Billy Bob Thornton and Jon Voight. The casting (obviously) photography, editing and musical score are purely the gothic pastiche of Stone's dark genius. Speaking of detours. Anyway, McGuane's style sticks with the reader like a tick to a mongrel's ear. It's vivid and cinematic even allowing for the fact it can be hard to follow. A gnarly, lasso rope-burned thumbs-up.
