February 22, 2024 reread thoughts: There are some issues I have with the stories of Pern, but when I simply suspend disbelief and allow the author to have it her way, and remember that it's fiction , I love these stories as much as ever. They are always human stories. Except for the dragons, of course, though it's their human, sometimes childlike, and sometimes incredibly wise, personalities that keep me coming back. I think it's the relationships and the politics of these stories that continue to appeal to me. They're stories in which innately good, though somewhat ordinary, imperfect people are inspired by circumstances and love for their fellows to do heroic things that they themselves didn't realize they could. February 29, 2020: This is a collection of longer short stories. The Survey: P.E.R.N. This first story in the collection takes place about 200 years prior to the colonization of the planet Pern and covers the brief survey of the planet by a team that is too small because it's already suffered casualties. The team of three people, after a brief visit and a superficial survey of the planet, makes the determination of whether the planet is safe for colonization, even though there are many unanswered questions. I find this first story a bit dry, in fact it reads a little like how I imagine a planetary survey would, but it explains a lot about why people might colonize Pern to begin with, and provides some background for the book, Dragonsdawn . The Dolphin's Bell This story, which occurs within the later timeframe of Dragonsdawn , introduces the Dolphins of Pern, which have a whole book written about them later in the series. Jim Tillek, one of the captains of the original three spaceships that brought colonists to Pern, is a sailing enthusiast. He brought his sailing ship, The Southern Cross , to Pern in a disassembled state, and assembled it there, where he loves to sail the open seas in it. There are also a number of dolphins who were brought to Pern in cold sleep, and wakened on arrival. They are dolphins who can communicate with humans, and who work with human partners. When disaster strikes the colony, Jim Tillek as well as the dolphins and their human partners are called on to help out, and they all make heroic efforts. This story covers that, and I find it heartening and delightful, as well as a great prequel to the later book about the dolphins. The Ford of Red Hanrahan This story takes place after the book Dragonsdawn , in fact a lapse of about eight years has passed, and the colonists have mostly moved from the southern to northern continent, where they have established Fort Hold and Fort Weyr, which are both now quite crowded. Red Hanrahan is the veterinarian father of Sorka Hanrahan Connel who is now a gold dragon rider and Weyrleader along with her husband Sean . Red has put up for a long time with the need to centralize the population of Pern in order to survive against Thread, by crowding his large family and breeding horses into Fort Hold along with thousands of others. Now he has found a place of his own to settle, about two to three days' journey away, and he undertakes that journey during a break from Threadfall. But there's a river now swollen with rain, which he and his large party need to cross before the pattern of Threadfall catches up with them. Along the way, Red contemplates what name to give his new hold. This story gets quite intense, with the need to get across that river, and a report of tragedy. The colonists have been through hell during the past several years, and the idea that one family will finally get to claim its stake of land and live as they always intended is compelling to say the least. The Second Weyr Just as Fort Hold has become crowded with people who would rather be farming their own land, Fort Weyr is now overcrowded with dragons and riders, after breeding for years in order to have enough dragons and riders to protect more of Pern from Thread. Now it's time to expand to other Weyrs. But who will lead the new Weyrs? This is a romance, but it's a McCaffrey Pern romance, which means it involves dragons. Rescue Run It's been about 50 years since Thread first fell on the Pern colonists, and that pesky homing beacon, which few besides Ted Tubberman wanted to send off to the Federated Sentient Planets for help, has been received but ignored until a ship, the Amherst , is in the sector studying the unusual Oort Cloud in the Rukbat system. The orange flag on the system captures the notice of Ross Benden, who happens to be a nephew of Admiral Paul Bendon, one of the colony leaders and a former war hero. Lieutenant Bendon is sent as leader of a landing party that will check whether there are survivors. I won't go into much detail about this story, but it's by far the most dramatic in this collection, and marks the reappearance of one of the villans of Dragonsdawn .
