This review consists of two parts: 1. My daughter's review (she's 8) and 2. my review (the Mom's). DAUGHTER SAYS: I think Judy Moody is funny and I would be friends with her in real life. We have some things that are the same; like, we're both in Grade 3, we both have little brothers, and we both have a pet cat. There are some really funny parts in this book. In a spelling test, Judy has to find five words out of GINO'S EXTRA CHEESE PIZZA, she finds the words tree, Texas, and taxi, but instead she writes down 1) no, 2) no, 3) no, 4) no, and 5) no. When her teacher asks her to share her words she says "no, no, no, no, no". I found this really funny. I like the part where they find a "moon rock" and smash it to make "moon dust". Her brother Stink then sells the moon dust for 50 cents a bag. I like this club called the T.P. Club which stands for Toad Pee Club because Judy and her friend found a toad and it peed on them so they started a Toad Pee Club - but I don't really want to join that club. I like her brother Stink's crazy costume when he goes to see the President of the United States. When he gets back, Judy and her friend had stuck a fake plastic hand out of the toilet and when her brother goes to the bathroom he gets scared and yells: Hey, Dad! Mom! There's somebody in the toilet! I can't think of anything I don't like about it. I really liked this book and I would recommend it to my friends who are girls. Boys my age might also like it because Judy's friends are two boys, Rocky and Frank. I would read the next Judy Moody books. MOM SAYS: At first, I was a bit taken aback by Judy's sassiness toward her teacher. That kind of back talk would not be tolerated in our house! Then, she's just downright mean to a little boy in her class, Frank. Fortunately, Judy's character develops in a positive direction throughout the rest of the book; so, theoretically a young reader would see that once Judy loses her negative attitude, she befriends someone new, fully enjoys Grade 3, and really just becomes a better human. One of the things I particularly appreciated about this book is that Judy is portrayed (in the end) in such a way that she could be a good role model for tween girls. For example, Judy aspires to become a doctor and her role model was Elizabeth Blackwell, the first woman doctor in the United States. She collects atypical items such as dead moths, scabs (ok, a bit gross!), body parts (from dolls), and Band-Aids and isn't afraid of holding toads! She won me over with the problem-solving she did after her brother dumped juice on her Me Collage the day she was to present it to the class. In the end, I really liked Judy! In fact, I felt that Judy was a rather realistic representation of 8/9 year-old girls. Yes, they are moody. Yes, they can be sassy. Yes, they would rather get soaking wet than use a "baby" umbrella. Yes, they can be mean to their little brothers/sisters. Yes, when they are not busy tormenting their younger siblings, they can be kind and compassionate. Yes, they are smart, imaginative, and groovy. IS IT JUST ME? Judy's parents go to Washington with Stink and leave Judy with Rocky presumably under his parents' supervision. Yet, Judy and Rocky sneak back into Judy's house to pull the gag on Stink - - literally waiting for him to come home so they can guide him to the bathroom. The parents don't seem surprised or concerned that the two kids are in the house unsupervised. Ok, so two 8/9 year olds are in a house alone unsupervised - - does anyone else have a problem with this? Just asking... Oh, and while Clementine gets in trouble calling her brother vegetable names, apparently Judy has the go-ahead from her parents to call her little brother Stink! Really?! Derogatory nicknames are ok?! Weren't there other nicknames available? While Judy is not exactly as charming as Clementine, I still did like her overall. The author cleverly uses the first book in the series to introduce us to Judy through the Me Collage project. Judy has moods - so do most girls that age! I feel she does redeem herself by the end of the book and therefore I would recommend this book to girls up to 9 years old. The book has many illustrations which are excellent and the text is not particularly dense therefore it probably would not be very challenging to read for older tweens. I think boys in the same age range may like this book as Judy is not a typical girlie-girl and her friends in the book are boys. I reserve the right to change my rating if I read the next books in the series and find Judy's character deteriorating. For the full review and for other reviews of children's books. Please visit us at www.motherdaughterbookreviews.com
