"Her slow drawn-out sound was the sound of her time: People then took time to listen to a story, and she could tell one. I'm not sure, but I think that the first time I heard Billie Holiday's singing was the first time I realized that a singer could approximate all the bullshit and beauty that goes into a love affair." -(Hilton Als' introduction to the book) Just picked this book up at Half Price. I'd heard this book mentioned somewhere before, perhaps on NPR, and I like the concept. It's not just a biographical sketch of Holiday, but the biography of a song, the singer's signature song -- one that nearly moves me to tears whenever I read the first two lines and one that breaks my heart when I hear Holiday sing it. Read all of the lyrics of the song, and it's an incredibly gruesome thing, full of blood and rotting corpses and bulging eyeballs plucked by crows. It sounds like it was penned by Edgar Allen Poe rather than being an anthem for racial justice; a plea to the decency of humankind. It's all in how it's handled, how it's felt, and how it's sung. Holiday didn't "write" it, per se, but her voice writes it. It's hard to imagine a lynching better described in so few words. A swinging corpse treated no differently by the forces of nature than the fruit itself. The moment in 1939 when Holiday sang it was a seminal moment in civil rights. It was an incendiary song. The audience at Cafe Society did not know how to react when such a frank and brutal protest was put forth, no matter how artfully. The book relates this history; the song's rather checkered history thereafter and Holiday's own sketchy life. Interestingly, the title of this book was changed from this to "Strange Fruit; Biography of a Song." And I think that's probably for the better. I just read the first few pages. I like it. FINAL THOUGHTS: I'm just over halfway through but am confident enough to issue a final judgment. I'm thinking that even at this short length, this might have best been fodder for a long magazine article rather than a full book. But, in any case, it's the last word on the subject. The song, the artist, the issues and the period interest me greatly. A smoothly written tome that sifts through facts and myths, an interesting "micro history" that looks at the macro via the device of a popular song and its history, and a good pop cultural summer read -- and I would recommend it as such. Addendum: Something I failed to mentioned previously is that the book is spiced up with nice oral history segments from various witness and commentators in the civil rights, labor and protest/activist movements, as well as music critics, scholars and performers in various genres of music -- people who either heard Holiday perform the song or simply heard recordings of it and were influenced by it. The very back of the book contains a discography of all known recordings of the song.
