In a society where technology has made it possible to track nearly every action of nearly every citizen, is there any place left for privacy? Or is privacy a myth? And are there things more important than privacy? Noted science fiction author, futurist and scientist David Brin tackled these questions in this 1998 book. Some recent reviewers have commented on the fact that Brin's ideas and argument have been outpaced by changes in technology and news headlines (e.g. Edward Snowden) over the past two decades, but the basic premise of the book is philosophical and remains relevant, despite changes in how the ideas might have to be applied to current situations. Brin's basic premise is that in a world of increasingly powerful tools for disrupting privacy, it becomes more important to protect freedom through mutual accountability than to protect privacy. Clinging to privacy (or anonymity) only enables those who have disproportionate power to use the aforementioned tools with impunity. Brin suggests that those who have more power than most are the government, corporate interests, the wealthy and even those who are part of the technological elite (hackers, programmers, etc.) The average citizen will be at a disadvantage to these powerful forces in scenarios that favor privacy; the shadows hide indiscretion more readily if you have the money, power or skills to know how to use them. Brin also points out that most arguments on the topic of protecting privacy point to only one bogeyman - the government, corporate interests, hackers, etc. - at the expense of others. Thus, interest groups suggest strategies that hobble their particular enemy while letting the other potential abusers of power go free. Hackers attack the government, government tries to control business, businesses hunt down hackers, etc. Brin instead calls for mutual accountability. A transparent society would be one in which we all have the same (or similar) access to information about each other and where we all become both watchers and watched. The theory has a close relationship to the concept in criminology that social pressure is the greatest deterrent to aberrant or anti-social behaviors. The goal would be for no privacy law to be passed or privacy right to be granted that privileges one group in society ahead of another. We would all have equal (or nearly equal) ability to "spy" on each other. This ideal is a bit utopian, but Brin makes a compelling argument for it. He spends much of the book discussing alternate solutions that have been suggested by others and pointing out the flaws in those options. He also readily acknowledges that he believes in the ideals of transparency and freedom over privacy, he does not have perfect suggestions on how to implement these ideas at a policy level. He offers a few suggestions, but stops short of making any one idea a panacea or even suggesting that it should be normative. He is more interested in the principals than in specific policies. The book is probably longer than it needs to be; Brin is nothing if not thorough. But the point of view which he is promoting deserves further consideration. The one thing I think that has changed since Brin wrote this book is the proliferation of bad information in the world. Brin assumed that openness would lead to greater accountability, which makes sense. But when the airwaves and internet are being inundated with unreliable information, how does one sort the wheat from the chaff? I think Brin needs to write a sequel and this time, he'll need to talk about "fake news" and how we hold powerful people and organizations accountable when all information sources are not created equal. All in all, this is a worthwhile read. And it's less dated than I would have imagined.
