This book is a masterpiece, an absolute masterpiece. I was mesmerized by every page, all 800+ of them. Each chapter is its own all-inclusive story, and they span several centuries of Caribbean history. Their plots/characters connect only loosely, but also brilliantly: by echoes or passing allusions, and of course by geography. In that way, it's like Michener's Tales of the South Pacific. As to the stories themselves: From now on when I think of the term "short story," I will simply think of this book's first chapter, "A Hedge of Croton." It's perfect. Or to put that another way, if anyone ever asks me "What is a short story?" I'll just say, "Read 'A Hedge of Croton.' " All the other chapters, too, are outstanding. Themes that struck me, and stick with me: 1) The killing, killing, killing, across the centuries and cultures and places. So much killing. 2) Humanity's endless quest to start fresh. I feel that drive in myself, so I can certainly appreciate it, though now there are no fresh places left (on Earth). Still, I can understand what once drove men to seek them. 3) Religion. This colors the book from front to back, particularly the theme of killing in the name of religion--or the complex intersection of politics and religion, which is so often the same thing. ...Human sacrifices of this or that tribe, long ago. Or persecution of this or that denomination, more recently. So much to think about. (Though on my end, I'm not ready to lump everything together and throw it all away. If someone once ripped out a man's heart, or burned him at the stake, in the name of god, that doesn't mean all God-seekers are disposed to that sort of behavior. Once upon a time, captains keel-hauled crewmen, but I'd be painting with a pretty broad brush to therefore go out and sink all ships.) 4) Rich and poor. Have and have-nots. What is yours and what is mine? Or the big one: Who gets to live where? 5) How any and every thing--an island, a crop, a talent, whatever--is always, eventually milled through the one question that someone inevitably asks: How can I convert this to money? Thus, everything is soon exhausted. For what, exactly? There's too much more to list, so I'll just close with the greatest mystery of all: Given books like this, how in the world have so many schools managed to make history classes boring?
