Started this last night as a break from "War and Peace." We'll see how it goes. Already there's a potential disaster caused by a super-collider thingee. People have been protesting the existence of those dubious contraptions. There was one in "Angels and Demons" as I recall. Moving in a bit after last night. As with "War and Peace" there are several plot trains running here. As is common with sci-fi, especially so-called "hard" sci-fi, the ideas are interesting while the writing is merely functional. In other words, Mr. Brin is no Tolstoy! The writing seems a bit dated already. Any time a sci-fi writer sets a story in the very near future he/she runs the risk of occasionally looking foolish. It seems very unlikely that the world will look like this in only 23 years. Maybe in 123 years... I'll say one thing, this book is packed with various stuff. Other G'reads reviewers have complained about all the "content" and I guess they do have a point, but I'm enjoying it so far. Most recently a hapless bio-preserve employee has gotten mixed up in the politics of a baboon troop and is facing off against several pairs of angry canine teeth. Ever see the canines on a baboon! Moving on and trying to remember who everyone is - just like War and Peace! - Speaking of Russia, there's a bit of a tribute made to "A Clockwork Orange" via use of some of the lingo by some lay-about teenagers. - The Chinese are fingered specifically for eco-criminality(powdered rhino horn etc.) specifically - good! - Roland's fate is a BIT overdone. The author's sympathies are clear enough anyway. And I agree with him by the way. - Another reminder... "Silent Running." The author is smart and perceptive about our Earth problems and where we might be heading. He and I are on the same wavelength in a lot of ways, although that hard science stuff, mostly physics, is beyond me. I'm better at the biology/behavior/evolution stuff, having been an Anthro major. Moving onward and thinking that this book ought to be shorter. Most of its parts are interesting but there does seem to be an indulgent amount of verbiage. Not a BIG issue but it's there. - 'thumpers' = "Dune" Well... I "finished" this book by skip-skimming to the end. Mr. Brin finally wore out my patience with mediocre writing, endless, repetitive digression and a denoument that took about 200 pages to resolve itself. In a word... BLOATED! At first I was not in agreement with those cranky G'reads reviewers who took exception to the complexity of the "plot" because the author kept me interested. Things began to go downhill as soon as sex and romance popped into the narrative view. The author is not exactly Tolstoy, in fact he more closely resembles Dan Brown in his good days(does he actually have those?). Examples... "Sometimes it was just enough to have someone to hold." or "Among other things, June had at least given him back his sexuality." - Dear... GOD!!! Awful Brown-like word-barf. Then there're all those mini-cliffhangers, another Brown device. And more: the creation of a "new" slang favorite: "dumpit" seems to have COMPLETELY replaced "damnit" just 50 years into the future. Why?????? Let's end this... - Why would destroying the Glen Canyon dam NOT restore "the world's beauty one iota" Seems to me that it would indeed - a lot of iotas in fact! - After a bunch of cataclysmic occurrences, Logan thinks "This may be serious." D'ya think? - The author loves the weird words and deploys as many as a graduate of the Iowa writer's workshop. "Noctilucent" comes to mind. Please... - I wonder what the editor must have felt upon reading this immense word pile. The only sane alternative would have been to tell the author that all those neat ideas were really interesting but he needed to go back and write it all again with HALF as many pages. The alternative apparently was to publish as is - a bad decision. I have to admit that I'm not at all sure what happened by the end but the author killed most of the interest I might have had in the outcome. Going back to Dan Brown: the ending of "Angels and Demons," a boring, ridiculous seemingly and endless affair, has nothing on this thing. On and on and on it went... I reduce my rating to 2.0* Mr. Brin is not a bad writer but he ain't a good one either. He really needs a tough-love editor!
