The first books I read about the mystery-solving medieval monk were a bumper edition of the first three: “A Morbid Taste for Bones”, “One Corpse Too Many” and this one Monk’s Hood . There are twenty books by Ellis Peters (a pseudonym for Edith Pargeter) about Brother Cadfael, as well as a few later ones about her invented character by other authors. They are collected together in various ways; this is not the edition I read. Several of these novels have also been dramatised for television, with Derek Jacobi in the lead role and a good supporting cast. The dramatisation here though is the first part of a series of 3 radio dramas on one DAISY disc: Brother Cadfael: A BBC Radio Collection of Three Full-Cast Dramatisations . Philip Madoc stars as Cadfael, who used to be a Crusader in the Holy Wars, and also a sailor, but is now a Benedictine monk at the monastery in Shrewsbury. He has skill as their herbalist, and spends his days ministering to his brothers using the medical skills he acquired in the Holy Lands. With his knowledge of the world and wide experience of human nature however, he often finds himself called upon when there is a murder to solve. All the books are historically accurate and set between about 1135 and about 1145, during “The Anarchy”. This was a destructive contest for the crown between King Stephen and Empress Maud. In Monk’s Hood the year is 1138. Brother Cadfael is asked to supply a healing potion for a sick monk—but the monk’s hood oil he uses could kill as well as cure. Gervase Bonel, a local landowner is poisoned, and suspicion falls on a young lad who happens to be the son of Cadfael’s old sweetheart from years earlier. Since the victim had recently changed his will to benefit the monastery, instead of this stepson, many people are interested in the outcome. The rich, sonorous timbre of Philip Madoc’s voice is perfect for Brother Cadfael, the stolid but compassionate Welsh monk who used to be a soldier. Other stand-out characters in this story were Prior Robert (Geoffrey Whitehead), the monk who has an eye to becoming the Abbot; Hugh Beringar (Alan Barker), a sympathetic local deputy sheriff; Brother Mark (Ian Targett), a young monk who is Cadfael's bold, sometimes cheeky apprentice; Aelfric (Mark Straker) Edwy Bellecote (Stephen Garlick) and Edwin Gurney (Richard Pearce), three youths on whom suspicion falls at various points; and Richildis Bonel (Pat Heywood), the woman to whom Cadfael was once betrothed. Michael Hordern’s intermittent narration is also excellent. The adaptation was made in 1991 by Bert Coules, one of the BBC’s best writers in my opinion. He has managed to include a perfect balance of plot and description, so that we get a real sense of medieval Shrewsbury and the Welsh borders. The theme tune is played on contemporary instruments. The entire production lasts for 2 and a half hours (5 episodes). It is recommended. Also on this disc are dramatisations of “The Virgin in the Ice” and “Dead Man’s Ransom” .
