Phew!!!! THANK FUCK FOR THAT, EVERYBODY!! I've been reading this for research for a story. Perhaps fortuitously I picked the toughest book I needed to read for this research. That means I'll be able to plough through the rest by the end of the month in time to get back to editing the story throughout October in time to start a new story for NaNoWriMo November! We're on schedule, everybody! Pfffft not like you'll get to see anything I'm writing until someone publishes it, but, sorry folks, that part of the process is out of my hands. I'm holding my end up, he said. Oh, what do I think of this? I understand the need to include so many case studies, but as Cleckley openly acknowledges, psychopaths are utter dickheads. The problem here is that, as it turns out, everyone is happy in their own way, and unhappy people are all unhappy in the same way. Isn't that interesting? That's something I honestly believe. Side note: sorry, but I wish you'd stop writing about your depression for other people . By all means journal your way to good mental health again, but that's it! Write it off. While once the material of this book was important clinical evidence, hearing different unhappy people be unhappy in the exact same way again and again and again becomes hypnotically bleak, and that's all. That's just what I think. That's why you're reading this, right? Anyways, the book opened with countless case studies and only later developed interesting arguments and suppositions that were worth reading. I'm glad I began to skim and picked up what I could of these. Including an account that you'll understand was hilarious for multiple reasons about a normally heterosexual gentleman who drove to a worksite and picked up four "unwashed" "Negros", transporting them in his pickup truck to a tent were he was caught performing fellatio on them. To quote Cleckley (if I recall correctly), "He took on the oral role." This after a decent chapter of interesting reasoning about how the reader was not to consider homosexuality a psychological disorder based on scientific evidence of the comportment of homosexuals. Indeed, they are lawyers, scientists, architects and other decent folk contributing to their society! What a modern marvel! Okay maybe that chapter is worth reading but in general this is not recommended to the general public, who should instead read Hare's Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us , which was designed for public consumption and incorporates the necessary theories and info from Cleckley's work. Oh: you should also read the story I'm writing based on all this research because it's going to be meticulous as FUCK.
