What an amazing book! Profound, intriguing, emotionally heart-felt, disturbing. Everything you could want out of book. Which is to say - an incredible novel... but not for everyone. Reading HAWKSMOOR heartily rang the area of my aesthetic bells that J.G. Ballard or Steven Millhauser also chime - and I can distinctly remember being dismayed by reviews on Goodreads that dismissed those authors with "unlikeable characters", "too cold", "too British", "too removed" or, in Millhauser's case "more interested in ideas than people". Now, this does not seem to be a problem for *me* as, on the one hand, I know some cold, distant, removed people (a few of them may even be British) and so this writing approach strikes me as true to life - there are all kinds of people in the world. And as for "interested in ideas" - well, yes, novelty for its own ends itself can be a trap (especially in genre fiction) but, in the hands of an able-bodied author... who *wouldn't* be interested in an examination of ideas? So, for some, you *may* not like HAWKSMOOR (even the author considers it something of a flawed work because of his inexperience in writing characters at the time) - and yet I say, *perhaps not*, because the authorial investigation of the two main characters was one of the things I personally loved about this book! Here, too, a word about genre. HAWKSMOOR is a crime novel that is more about the murderer than the murders, a detective novel that is more about the Detective than the process of detection, a mystery story that is less interested in solving a mystery than it is about expounding on "mystery", an historical novel that is a-historical and, it could be argued, a horror story that utilizes some standard tropes of the genre (primitive demonology, occult architecture, human sacrifice, the mutability of time) but not in any of the usual, mechanical ways (no chants, no tentacled things reaching through holes in the air, no master plan to birth the Anti-Christ). This is the kind of book "postmodernism" was invented for! The plot is fairly simple: we follow parallel strands of narrative taking place in London - one in the 17th Century, as Nicholas Dyer, architect under Christopher Wren, plots his building and refurbishing of London's great churches after the two-fisted historical sucker-punch of the Plague and the Great Fire has nearly scoured the map clean. Dyer has a very particular worldview, heavily informed by arcane knowledge of the past and occult philosophy, as well as his harrowing early life as an orphan in the squalid streets - he is a calculating but emotionally unbalanced man, scheming, paranoid and very intelligent - and he means to make his mark on London and history itself through his Great Work. Meanwhile, in 1980s London, DSI Nicholas Hawksmoor is set to the task of solving a series of murders taking place on the grounds of these selfsame churches. Hawksmoor is a rational, controlled man as befits a detective - he could be seen as the end result of the "Sherlock Holmes" character: a man who sees patterns in everything and is adept at separating useless information from worthwhile data. But then why is he having so much trouble with these murders? Beyond the basic plot, though, HAWKSMOOR is a fascinating and deep interrogation of rationality and superstition, of humanity and science, how one lives one's life by a belief system and what happens when that system finds itself under assault. If all that sounds intriguing, read this book. There are echoes of the recent TV show TRUE DETECTIVE here and Alan Moore built upon some of the ideas from HAWKSMOOR in his brilliant work about the Jack The Ripper murders, From Hell , which is why I first added this to my reading list decades ago (Gull, in FROM HELL, could be seen as taking advantage of Dyer's groundwork). I'm glad I did. And now, into the spoiler zone and some more in depth analysis for those who have read the book: Ackroyd's use of an Olde-English writing style does a marvelous job of not only capturing a voice and the time period, but also of resonating with the material and its concerns - the capitalizations and occasional antiquated word or term reminding us how powerful language is and yet how easily it falls aside under the sway of history ("Words must be pluckt from Obscurity and nourished with Care, improved with Art and corrected with Application. Labour and Time are the Instruments in the perfection of all Work" says Dyer). No mere po-mo affectation, this! What impressed me was how sympathetic Dyer is as a character. A poor wretch, a smart boy born into terrible circumstances who rises by a combination of luck, cunning, intelligence and perseverance, yet driven by a belief system that puts him at odds with his own time. And even this belief system, atavistic and superstitious as it is, holds some appealing truths - not just the sour reflections on corrupt humanity (Dyer can not bring himself to believe in mankind, and thinks they are ruled only by profound terror, a view supported by the cesspit around him and mirrored in Bedlam - and given the scenes of Modern London we are also shown, not so squalid but still as inhuman for the mentally ill and those made lonely by "civilization", we understand Hawksmoor's emotional anomie as well) but also canny reflections on rationality's propensity to demystify and reduce, to atomize and disenfranchise (well shown in the dialogue at the playhouse). We find ourselves questioning Wren's assurance that there is a difference between "phrensies and inspirations" - from our personal experience if nothing else. In this sense, Dyer is fascinating as an occupant of a particular moment in history, as the new system begins to uproot the old - yet the implications of the "new" are just as terrifying, in different ways, than the barbaric "old". But, in the end, Dyer is also a monster, murdering men and children (powerful sequences sketching the varied vice-ridden inhabitants and criminals of London brought to mind the police line-up opening of Algren's The Man With the Golden Arm of all things, as well as contrasting the viciousness, barbarity and general abuse with Dyer's methodical, ritualized murder), biliously mocking the beginnings of our scientific age (the scene of Wren's speech to the Royal Society - with Dyer's sarcastic, sinister asides - is also excellent) and yet forced to hide his monumental works in plain sight and guard their secrets jealously and murderously (even, as it turns out, mistakenly). His grand philosophy is informed and poisoned by his own personal history, motivated by fear, paranoia and awful example. And this depth of character is also helped by the resonance and echoes to be found in the victims - the young boy who builds model cathedrals, the harrowing history of a poor man's descent into mental illness (his social incapacity seen also in Dyer) and homelessness. I felt the origin of Dyer's belief system, his being taken in from the awful street-life by the "Enthusiastiks" (who strike me as learned Decadents/Hellfire Club types, although this is cannily left to the imagination) and tutored in a schismatic, esoteric thought that builds on his own naturally cynical view of humanity (given his experiences, who could blame him?) was quite well done. Rarely has the psychology of the sinister character that motivates plots like these been so well developed. On the other hand (and in retrospect rightly so) Hawksmoor starts out as a cold, mechanical cypher, slowly unraveling in the narrative before us as he questions the subjectivity of reality. And why "rightly so"? It seems that applying terms like protagonist and antagonist to a book like HAWKSMOOR is near-useless. The doubling and twinning of Dyer (an apt name, in retrospect) and Hawksmoor that builds throughout the book is subtle, deep and amazingly deft ("'He's cunning, though.' Then he pointed to his own head. 'He's very cunning'"). The repetition (plotting of blueprints and building of models shaping space to human intent, a figure is seen falling across the sky), the echoes (a compass lost is found again, listeners to popular music keeping time in storefronts, two landladies, two Walters), the turns of phrases and subtle indications of malleable time (Hawksmoor just cannot find the famed Meridian, even when directed to it, "the timing" is the major problem in examining the crime scenes, time and geography are frequently blurred, smudged and distorted under the monuments' influences - or is that just the nature of time and the human mind?) all seem to point towards success in Dyer's obscure plans ("I have built an everlasting Order, which I may run through laughing: no one can catch me now.") but... to what end? The framing of that quote seems to imply that the desire (despite all the profound talk) is to escape the absolute that is Death, a basic human motivation. And does Dyer succeed? There are no solid answers given to almost any of the novel's questions (frustrating for some, I imagine). One could argue that in essence what Dyer has achieved is to have metaphorically placed a mirror in time: on one side is over-emotional Dyer, fighting his arcane war against rationality as he rages, plots, murders and succumbs to paranoia while achieving his goal - and his inverted reflection centuries later is Hawksmoor, the stolid, reliable, rational and emotionally disconnected man who eventually unravels under the weight of a mystery that doesn't make sense, and which causes him to question the entire foundation of his worldview, to wonder whether all the patterns he sees are parts of a larger scheme or merely the human mind sifting reassuring order from chaos (itself merely a hard-wired animal survival technique and not indicative of any larger "truth"). One could phrase this in numerous clunky ways - Hawksmoor is Dyer "reincarnated" or that Dyer "possesses" Hawksmoor - but these are reductive genre terms and don't do justice to the intense and evocative writing. My own take is the visual one I presented - Dyer and Hawksmoor are the same person, a continuum or life-line split halfway along its length, each side reflecting an inverted vision of the other. So, who is the murderer in modern London? Again, in clunky genre terms we might tick off the usual suspects: "an unknown killer", "an unknown killer possessed by Dyer", "Dyer himself, moving through time", "Dyer himself in the past, his actions on his victims echoing in modern time through some arcane temporal power", "some evil force conjured by Dyer's action working in the present" - but none of these answers are satisfying and again the author does such a good job of making these narrative concepts moot that I can't help but feel the answer is contained in my given conception - the reason why Hawksmoor can't solve the murder, the reason it makes no sense is because HE is the murderer, acting unconsciously (thus reinvigorating an old noir trope without resorting to the predictable amnesia card - although, as I said, the actual "how" of it seems moot) - at least in the sense that he IS Dyer inverted. And so does Dyer's plan succeed? Yes and no. On a large scale, yes, he has created his churches and they are sunk deep into the history and fabric of London like monumental stone sentinels around which the temporal currents of history crash, ebb and churn, never changing in themselves but deforming the flow of life and events. Elaborating from Alan Moore's conception in FROM HELL, Dyer can be seen to have magically, symbolically "locked" the heart of London into place as a vast Pitte, a frozen point in time, leaking corruption into the city and the world (I mention FROM HELL because I felt Moore's point in that work was not just that Gull had merely succeeded in killing some women and attaining his personal "enlightenment" from the power released, but that he had also succeeded in binding, in the occult sense, the symbolic concept of "women" to this fearsome invention of the "serial killer," codifying it into the culture of the 20th Century as an awful, real-world bogeyman, the manifestation of his own and his culture's misogyny let loose to threaten and terrorize as it echoes through time). But on the human scale - no Dyer does not succeed in cheating death by dodging through a hole in time ("no one can catch me now") - instead, he plunges through the metaphorical mirror and lives the awful life of Hawksmoor - himself - from the heights of respect and notoriety down into despair of failure and loneliness and then, finally, terminating by facing his own reflection in his church - and thus there is nowhere to go, there is only solitude and loneliness because there is only "yourself" and your actions... after all.
