I bought the 5th volume of Philip K. Dick’s collected stories because of the one advertised in the cover, We can remember it for you wholesale, since I had enjoyed Paul Verhoeven’s Total Recall and wanted to know what inspired him. This volume has 25 short stories covering topics such as reality and perception, space colonisation, interaction with alien races, religion, nuclear war, time travel… Having read other of his novels, like Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep , The Man in the High Castle , or The Minority Report , one is already expecting -and ready to welcome!- some of Dick’s oddities. It wasn’t hard to rate this book: there were a couple of stories that left me indifferent, but most of them were very good, and some were simply brilliant! In some cases, it was as if Philip K. Dick was right there, next to me, ready to shake the foundations of my understanding of his work. I wrote some notes for each of the stories. I’ve tried to keep them spoiler-free (unless you display the spoiler section), but it is not always easy due to their short length. The little black box. A new religion threatens the world’s stability: Mercerism, and the strange empathy boxes that allow people to communicate with the even stranger religion’s spiritual leader. Some people have psychic abilities and can read each other’s minds. A woman dating one of them is sent to Cuba to spy on Chinese communists under the pretext of teaching Zen Buddhism. However, she’s being investigated herself for their future interest on Mercerism. Nobody knows really who’s behind the religion, who manufactures the empathy boxes, or which resistance network manages to come up with alternatives. Mercerism plays a major role in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep , and there is some connection to The Minority Report as well pre-crime-like . The war with the Fnools. An alien race is threatening the Earth. But they take strange appearances and each country takes different measures to fight them. This is one of the most surreal stories of the collection, simply brilliant. Initially small and easily detectable, smoking and drinking makes them grow to the same size as humans. However, having sex makes them grow even larger than us, becoming obvious again. This part of the plot is magistral. A game of unchance. A story about colonists living in Mars, under hard conditions. They often receive visits of spaceships which set up a Carnival for them, with prizes and games. Among the colonists, some people have developed psychic skills, and they are usually the ones trying to identify the games with the best odds to win prizes. However, things aren’t that simple and the prizes end up being “poisoned”. Sentient robots that kill the colonists’ cattle, ruin their fields, and threaten their security. Although the colonists go to the United Nations for help, there’s nothing they can do, and instead focus on resettling them and protecting the Earth. But then, another Carnival comes and offers a system to defeat these robots. Or is it another trick…? . Precious Artifact. I liked this story very much. A terraformer working on Mars finishes his assignment and is ready to receive his allocated piece of land, but before that, he wants to go back to Earth for visiting: there is something odd that worries him. Here again Philip K. Dick plays with reality, perception, our subconscious… As the main character suspects, in a war between the “Terrans” and some alien race, the Terrans lost. He is afraid they have been kept into some sort of deception, so they now terraform Earth for the aliens, but he can’t even imagine to what extent this has happened. It is show how these aliens also play with the different psychological needs of each terraformer expert: this one is satisfied with a kitten, but that’s only the most sophisticated artificial artifact. Retreat syndrome. When two policemen stop a driver going too fast, he shows them how he can get his arm through the windshield -without any damage to him or the windshield! The main character is confused: he thinks he is part of a simulation, but has no means to discover. However, he keeps trying to find flaws in such simulation… or is it the reality what is flawed? In a deliciously confusing story, one doesn’t know which side to believe: is the character crazy? Is he right? But then, how can one explain certain things? Very much in line with “We can remember it for you wholesale”! A Terran Odyssey. This was probably the most ordinary of the stories, and not in a bad way at all. A post-apocalyptic account of life after a nuclear war, displaying telepaths, trading, scavenging… It was very good, and didn’t use any of the typical twists of the author. Your appointment will be yesterday. And again, into a very original story where, after some invention, time moves backwards within a certain region. People cease to exist when they return to their mother’s womb, they are born when they are “assembled” together from DNA remains, and pretty much everything is amazing. Another interesting passage is an account of how one would eat if you look at it with an inverted time reference. This story led to him writing Counter-clock world , which is mentioned by Sean Carroll in From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time . Holy Quarrel shows a computer that not only becomes self aware, it becomes superstitious. It tries to obliterate a region of the US for apparently no good reason, so a team of engineers try to “debug” the problem. Brilliant! We can remember it for you wholesale is the short story behind Total Recall. Philip K. Dick plays with the reader and shakes us, so we can no longer tell what fiction, false memories, and reality are. A worker with a regular and monotonous life dreams of travelling to Mars and being a spy, but when he finally decides to go and get a memory implant, something odd is found. Another extraordinary story! Not by its cover. A company in Mars sells Wub fur! The surprising thing is that these Wubs, somehow, manage to stay alive through their fur, and when this is used for bookbinding, it leads to extraordinary situations, with the Wur interacting with the book in clever ways. The story ends with a theoretical application of this Wub fur. Return match. What starts as a “regular” police raid against an alien casino, ends up wrong after a pinball survives the self-destruction initiated by the aliens to destroy any evidence. Somehow, the pinball doesn’t like to be played with, and eventually… gets ready for vengeance. Faith of our fathers. In the future, after Communism has won, a large bureaucracy apparatus exists. One of the workers there receives an almost impossible task, and things get very odd when drugs and the recurring topic of altered reality come into play. It turns out that God Himself is the leader of the party! The Story to end all stories. A short story in a couple of paragraphs, describing war, mutants, sex, cannibalism, God… Reminding, maybe, of Greeks myths. The electric ant. This story plays with similar concepts to the ones found in Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep . Here, a sentient robot founds out who / what he really is. Only then he starts considering what reality is, where he gets his stimuli from, etc. Very good. Cadbury, the beaver who lacked. I am still puzzled, this was too surreal. Could it be a fable? Or is it simply a random collection of thoughts? I wasn’t ready for this: a beaver with a wife he didn’t love and a job he didn’t like starts visiting a psychologist and tries to find a way out of that life into something better. It is unclear if what he finds is actually any better. A little something for us tempunauts. What if instead of a Space Race between the U.S.’s Astronauts and the Soviet Union’s Cosmonauts we would have had Tempunauts and Chrononauts? What would happen if things go wrong and they accidentally entered a closed loop? How could they tell? Another great story. The Pre-persons. Abortion of children younger than 12 is now legal. I found the story very good, but with a clear (and manipulative) anti-abortion message. It is sort of exposing a slippery slope, where you start aborting embryos and end up with children. It was very, very good how he proposed that the soul would only arrive when the pre-person learns higher math: algebra. The eye of the Sybil. This story tells of an Oracle that gives a view of the future from Roman times (and eyes). It is very nicely written, maybe showing the things that seemed to annoy Philip K. Dick as he grew up, such as the lack of support from his family and relatives... It also talks about the future collapse of society, dark times to come, etc. The day Mr computer fell out of its tree. Everything is controlled by a supercomputer. Clothing, food, transportation... Everywhere. But since this computer is a sentient being, it can get crazy. This has been accounted for, and a psychologist is always ready to help. In this particular case, the fact that there is an unhappy person is what gets the computer unhappy. The exit door leads in. A contest gets a person in a college where they submit him to a test. It is about ethics, about what's right and wrong, authority and so on. This is another story in the same topic of reality and perception, "things are not what they look like". We see intelligent computers again, pre-Socratic philosophy, and some of the problems of following rules without questioning them. Chains of air, web of aether. In another colony, dome operators are living in isolation, with little human contact. One of them gets sick, and so another tries to help her. However, caring for a sick person takes its toll. Strange memories of death. Although this story seems to talk about an eviction in its surface, it is mostly about psychopaths, social conventions, and… how the agreements between adults is, in a way, what constitutes reality. I hope I shall arrive soon. The cryogenic system of a spaceship fails, and the passenger stays awake for 10 years. The ship (which, of course, is sentient) has to feed him with stimuli to keep his brain from dying, but there is nothing available other than the passenger’s own memories. However, everything goes wrong because of some memories deep inside him -of a bird he killed. At the end, he can't tell reality from memories any longer… Rautavaara’s case. After an accident in a space vessel, three humans die. One is “restored” to life by some aliens from Proxima Centauri (they are called “Approximations”, a term they hate), and hallucinates with Christ and the afterlife (or quite so). However, things quickly deteriorate when the aliens modify the life support system… The alien mind. A guy kills his pet in retaliation for touching some buttons that divert his track, as he travels in a spaceship on his way to deliver a vaccine. However, the aliens receiving this vaccine don't like it at all. They disable his cryogenic system, remove all the entertainment tapes and leave him only with pet food for a long, long travel back.
