As I said for volume A, volume B is one of my textbooks for school and so I only did the assigned readings for the class. I thoroughly enjoyed all of the pieces I read and I have plans to read this volume from start to finish at some point, however, I will say that a lot of fantastic English authors are not represented for the 20th and 21st centuries which makes me a bit sad. Other than that, I think it’s a fairly good survey of writers as far as the lauded Canon goes. I’m only going to do small blurbs for each piece because that’s the only feasible method. Songs of Innocence and of Experience , William Blake 5/5 Blake is possibly my favourite poet hands down. There is just something about his imagery and subject matter that leaves me simply entranced. This book which features the naïve interpretation of life paired with the cynical gives wonderful insight into the human mind and imagination, in my opinion. Lyrical and poignant lines reflect each sides emotions in each piece. “The Tyger” is probably the most famous in this collection with “The Lamb” following closely on its heels, however, my favourite is “The Chimney Sweeper” tying with “The Poison Tree”. That probably paints me as morbid but those are the ones that speak to me the most. A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , Mary Wollstonecraft (Introduction, Chapter 2, and parts of Chapter 4) 4.5/5 Wollstonecraft’s work is not intended to be entertaining in it’s design and implications yet her writing style is very fluid and easy to read. She writes as the men of her time did (which is no small feat during the 1700s), but her prose lack the drying austerity and tiredness of the men. I think Vindication is one of the most underappreciated texts in western feminism and probably one of the most interesting, compelling, concise, and honest ones out there. There is nothing boring about it and it is one of my favourite texts of its genre. I think all women should read it. Selected Works of William Wordsworth 4/5 The poems I read from Lyrical Ballads were all well written and evocative (obviously, since he was England’s poet laureate during his lifetime.) I enjoyed all of the pieces I had to read, and I think that Wordsworth truly made his dream come true –making the ordinary extraordinary. As far as nature poets go, he’s one of the masters. Kubla Khan and Selected Chapters of Biographia Literaria , Samuel Taylor Coleridge 4/5 Hand in hand, Coleridge and Wordsworth compiled Lyrical Ballads , Wordsworth tackling the everyday and Coleridge the supernatural. Both did superb jobs and met their ends. Thinking about Coleridge always makes me sad, me reminds me of Aristophanes because both of them were two beings of the greatest potential that threw it all away. It drives me crazy! Anyway, my readings of Coleridge were fantastic, the man had an amazing gift. His lines are lush and lyrical in all forms. It’s my hope to read The Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner very soon and I’m looking forward to it. She walks in beauty , Lord Byron 5/5 Oh Byron. I don’t think I need say more. Yet another man with a fascinatingly chequered history full of unbelievable talent. I love Byron, the man was a god among men when it came to words and this poem is no exception. I can’t wait to one day read the entirety of Don Juan . Selected Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley 5/5 Shelley is a lot like Blake in terms of reputation: both were unbelievably talented and both were unbelievably undervalued during their lifetimes. I don’t know what the Romantic era had against Shelley, but it’s moronic. Whether it’s a eulogy, a sonnet, a workers song, or an ode Shelley could do it all with ease and fluidity. His words are wonderfully vivid and bring his works to life right on the pages they’re written on. I’m not the biggest fan of poetry but I thoroughly enjoyed Shelley. Ode on a Grecian Urn , John Keats 4.5/5 This renowned poem lives up to its fame and its author was an honest to God genius. If Keats had not died so young we would have so many more classic poems with his wonderful flavour and flare. It’s a shame. I like Keats, he writes with grace and ease and his works are nothing if not a little bit awe inspiring. I love this poem for the portrait it paints and the emotions it evokes; a lot of people would love to take a snapshot of their lives at its perfect moment but I think this poem illustrates the cons and frustrations of that. It’s interesting to think about the thoughts and feelings of people depicted on an urn and I enjoyed Keats’ thoughts on the matter. Sonnets from the Portuguese, 43 ( “How do I love thee? Let me count the ways” ) , Elizabeth Barrett Browning 5/5 I positively adored this poem and I truly like it’s author. Browning’s history is an interesting one full of strife, gosh it was hard to be a female poet back in the day! In any case, this is a love poem of loves poems, beautiful in its intent and honest in its construction. My goal is to one day read the entire collection of sonnets. I hope her husband knew what a gem he’d found. Ulysses , Alfred, Lord Tennyson 5/5 I can’t describe the depth of my love for this man. He’s one of my all-time favourite poets because not only is his subject matter fascinating as well as resonating, but his words stay with you forever. They vibrate through your soul. Ulysses ’s subject is, obviously, the man of legend whom Homer made famous. In Tennyson’s work we learn about the old age of men of war and how these men of action deal with stagnation. This is a fantastic poem I urge all people to read. Dover Beach , Mathew Arnold 4/5 This isn’t one of my favourite poems, personally I think it’s a little overrated but it has its moments and its message is a good one. I like it but its low high on the totem pole. This is a poem where you really have to like the art of poetic structure and sound, and I’m too dense to notice those things on my own unless they’re really obvious or someone shows me. I like it for its depiction of industrialization and the warning it issues. Song ( “When I am dead, my dearest” ) and In an Artist’s Studio , Christina Rossetti 5/5 I love Rossetti’s work! She makes my heart bleed sometimes her words are so simple but gripping. Song concerns love and the one left behind after death. The speaker implores their lover to remember or forget them, whichever would make them happier and able to live on. It’s so sad and lovely. In an Artist’s Studio is a critique of artist’s (the Neo-Raphaelites at the time) and men, mainly those that believe that a woman’s identity is interchangeable and insignificant. She outlines the four basic identities men assign women and then calls them out on it. It’s a great poem with a great message. As I said I’m a fan of her work and I look forward to reading more of it. The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , Robert Louis Stevenson 5/5 RLS is one of my favourite writers of all time, Treasure Island is still one of my favourite books and I’ve read a lot since then. Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde is the classic tale of the mad scientist with its roots reaching back to Frankenstein . Nearly everyone out there knows the story of Dr. Jekyll and his evil alter ego but many of them haven’t read the actual story. I seriously urge people to do so! It’s a wonderful tale from start to finish, full of Stevenson’s memorable characters, questions of morality and sharp wit. He’s such a fantastic writer, I can’t say that enough. The Importance of Being Earnest , Oscar Wilde 5/5 This is one of the best plays I’ve ever read. I’m not a huge drama fan so I always start reading plays with a bit of trepidation, I’m not sure why anymore since I’m rarely disappointed with them. I think this is the funniest piece of literature I’ve ever read. I was laughing so hard I was crying at some points. Wilde is the wit of all wit when it comes to writers, there’s no one like him and there never will be. He too is one of my favourite writers, The Picture of Dorian Gray is one of my favourite books, so I was so happy to get to read some Wilde this year. I can’t recommend this play more, or any other piece of writing by the extremely talented Mr. Wilde. The White Man’s Burden , Rudyard Kipling 3/5 This is a poem most people have read…I think. In any case, the poem’s title pretty much tells you what it’s all about. This is Kipling’s tale of British Imperialism, mainly in Africa, and how the white man should “better” his savage cousins. It’s definitely not a message I condone or believe in at all; we all know what imperialism led to in 1914. It’s not a half bad poem, but it’s not a favourite of mine as it’s dated, racist, and wrong. Heart of Darkness , Joseph Conrad 5/5 Before reading this novella I had heard nothing but negative things about it: that it’s boring, too dense, horrible. Now that I’ve read it I have to ask if I read the same book? I loved Heart of Darkness ! It was poignant, interesting, deep; the message was clear and heartfelt. The characters were intense and served their purposes well. Furthermore, as a native Pole, Conrad’s grasp of the English language is remarkable. I would encourage everyone to read this at least once, it’s a classic and it’s very good despite the bad hype it gets. When You Are Old , William Butler Yeats 4/5 This was a strong poem about lost love and buried resentment, at least that’s what I got out of it. I took the speaker as someone scorned by another, looking forward in time and letting that person know all that they had thrown away. I thoroughly enjoyed the poem, Yeats is a true artist and his work is timeless. Every time I read this poem I feel a little ping it’s so sad and beautiful. A Room of One’s Own , Virginia Woolf 5/5 Whether it’s the prose of a story or an essay, Woolf was a master with words. I didn’t read the entirety of this essay, however, the portion I did read still resonates. This is a feminist essay decrying the place of women in society and how every woman needs a room of her own in which she can learn and grow. Her most profound analogy concerns the hypothetical life of Shakespeare’s fictitious sister, Lilith. Woolf makes you look back to the 16th century and imagine what would happen if Shakespeare had had a sister, a woman born with his exact genius and who had followed in his footsteps, following him to London. The story isn’t pretty, but it wouldn’t be. I fully agree with the ideas expressed in this piece and I enjoyed reading it. The Garden Party , Katherine Mansfield 4.5/5 In this short story Mansfield tackles the issue of class in New Zealand, a British dominion. Laura, the protagonist, wonderfully illustrates the push and pull of class divisions and how beliefs are passed from parents to children. Laura finds herself in a quandary, she mimics her mother’s ideas but at the same time they feel wrong to her. She doesn’t really see the difference between the people in her neighbourhood and those across the road. I really like this story, the characters are intense considering its length and the message it sends is clear and undeniable. Mansfield is also a very good writer. The Day They Burned the Books , Jean Rhys 4.5/5 Rhys is another master in the literary world and another sad case because she has been so greatly underappreciated. Rhys’ stories focus mainly on the conflicts between colonizers and the colonized; she herself was of English and Creole descent, born in Dominica. Many of her stories involve misfits, those that feel as though they belong nowhere, and the narrator of this story is no exception. I love Rhys’ work, her Wide Sargasso Sea is a beautiful book, and this is a beautiful short story. I agree fully with her message, the colonizers always take so much away from those they see to civilize and it drives me crazy. It’s an old story but it’s still an infuriating one. Anyone interested in Post-colonial studies or stories would appreciate this one. The Moment before the Gun Went Off , Nadine Gordimer 4.5/5 This short story concerns racism in South Africa, a major issue that made headlines around the world. Gordimer has an interesting writing style; she tells you so much in such a small amount of space that by the end of her story you’re left wondering what the heck just happened. You have to reread it a hundred times to make sure you grasped everything. This is a sad story involving a terrible hunting accident that the narrator knows is going to be misinterpreted by the world. I really enjoyed it. The Prophet’s Hair , Salman Rushdie 4/5 Indian literature is always extremely interesting, it has so many layers to it and so much culture present that it leaves you a bit shocked when you’re done. This short story by Rushdie is no exception. It tells the story of an ideal, progressive family torn apart by religion and fanaticism. Considering how the world views Muslim’s at this particular historical moment, I thought this was an intriguing story. I look forward to more Rushdie in my future, he has a great writing style and his ideas, as well as his characters, stay with you. I can definitely say I wasn’t expecting the ending I got. Last but not least, I’d like to comment on the editorial notes this anthology is chock full of. The introductions and historical snapshots that the editors have put together are the best part of the Norton books; they’re interesting, enlightening, and highly educational. I would buy the books for the editor’s information alone. Anyway, those are all the texts I was required to read for winter of 2011.
