Loosely based on the real life account of a Christian railway employee, Nagano Masao, this is a story of a boy (later a man) finding faith and the love of his life through constant self-questioning. While a lot of this book revolves around Christianity, it doesn’t preach to you. Instead, it comes off more as a regular coming of age narrative that just happens to have religion as a major theme. The plot started very interestingly as the main character, Nagano Nobuo, struggle to come to terms with the sudden revelation that he has estranged Christian mother and sister—having previously told by his grandma that his mother was dead, and that Christianity (and “Yaso”) is BAD. There’s a variety of interesting and memorable characters along the way, including Nagano’s family members; his childhood friend and role model, Yoshikawa; his co-worker and the most annoying character in the novel (albeit for a thematically relevant reason), Mihori; and last but not least, Fujiko, the other half of a bittersweet love story that goes all the way back since Nobuo’s childhood. In many other cases, I tend to scoff at seemingly perfect characters like adult Nobuo, as I often found them uninteresting and unrealistic. However, the first half of the book did a great job portraying how Nobuo’s experience and people around him shaped his worldview and contributed to him becoming a great idealistic man beloved by everyone. In fact, Nobuo’s childhood was the best part of the book: it’s funny, poignant, and thought-provoking, relying on small intimate moments and the boy’s candid earnestness to deliver a great reading experience. As Nobuo grows up, the book mostly shunned unnecessary melodrama and antagonists in favor of internal conflicts, as Nobuo has to make tough decisions related to his family, work, love life, and religious belief. So yes, I enjoyed the grounded slice-of-life vibe that was present for most of Shiokari Pass , which is why the climactic scene comes off as jarring and perhaps even regrettable. While (somewhat) based on a true story, the way it was dramatized kinda left a sour taste on my mouth. There’s no denying it’s a powerful tear-jerker ending , but it’s still a clichéd way to deliver a message and didn’t jive well with the rest of the story. Still, there were many great values imparted throughout the journey. The romance could’ve been better (sharing more from Fujiko’s PoV would’ve been a good start), but it’s also genuinely touching. Regardless of one’s personal religious belief, the journey of Nobuo Nagano is a poignant universal reminder that you are always what you choose to be, instead of what you are born with.
