Undaunted Courage gets 4.5 Stars. Stephen Ambrose brings a special passion to this tale of exploration. Ambrose relates in the foreword, his lifelong fascination and exploration of the Lewis and Clark adventure. I like how he brings all the characters, Lewis, Clark, Jefferson, various Indian chiefs, members of the “Corps of Exploration” and many other participants to life. Perhaps Ambrose exaggerates some events but he tells a riveting tale. The Lewis and Clark expedition was as significant to that age as Apollo 11 was to the Space Age. And the nation was just as taken with it. If history was taught with this much passion and excitement, school would be much more fun. Meriwether Lewis gets the lion’s share of coverage but Clark gets a fair share of attention. Lewis is the reason it came to be known as the Lewis and Clark expedition, offering Clark co-command of the party and always giving him an equal share of the credit. This is amazing because the War Dept made Lewis Captain while only commissioning Clark as a Lieutenant. This was kept secret by Lewis and Clark and the men in the command regarded both as “captains”. The task given to the captains by Jefferson was to explore the Missouri River and more. Final instructions issued by Commander-in-Chief Jefferson instructions to Captain Lewis put exploration and commerce ahead of agriculture. “The object of your mission,” Jefferson wrote, “is to explore the Missouri river, & such principal stream of it, as, by it’s course and communication with the waters of the Pacific ocean, whether the Columbia, Oregan, Colorado or any other river may offer the most direct & practicable water communication across this continent for the purposes of commerce.” Good maps were essential to commerce, so Jefferson’s orders read, “Beginning at the mouth of the Missouri, you will take careful observations of latitude & longitude, at all remarkable points on the river, & especially at the mouths of rivers, at rapids, at islands, & other places & objects distinguished by such natural marks & characters of a durable kind.” Jefferson admonished Lewis to write his figures and observations “distinctly & intelligibly” and to make multiple copies. Jefferson instructed Lewis to learn the names of the Indian nations, and their numbers, their possessions, their relations with other tribes, their languages, traditions, monuments, their occupations—whether agriculture or fishing or hunting or war—and the implements they used for those activities, their food, housing, the diseases prevalent among them and the remedies they use…” Lewis was the perfect person to head the expedition. He was a natural leader of men but he was also a true man of the Enlightenment. He was a botanist, mineralogist, ethnologist, geographer, astronomer, navigator and so much more. He lived and learned with Thomas Jefferson in the “President’s House” for two years before going to Philadelphia to learn more skills for the trip. Ambrose highlights the many key decisions that Lewis had to make that ensured success. But Ambrose doesn’t hide Lewis’s faults. His attitude toward the Indians and slaves are fully explored—Lewis doesn’t fare well here. I was particularly struck by how involved Jefferson was in this event. Jefferson envisioned an empire stretching from sea-to-sea. It was interesting to see this advocate of strict construction of the Constitution throw that principle to the wayside when necessary. This proposed expedition was highly political and Jefferson’s opponents made every attempt to sabotage or screw with the proposal to explore the Louisiana Purchase. I had not realized the territory considered under the Louisiana Purchase was so extensive, basically any territory bordering a river or stream that entered the Mississippi or the Missouri Rivers. Ambrose gives plenty of buildup to the launch of the expedition but his account of the travails and excitement on the trip is riveting. The various tribes are candidly described, some are admirable, some detestable, some are friendly, some passive and some fierce. The attitudes of the white men towards the natives are generally arrogant and condescending. Lewis gives his standard speech about the “Great White Father” at every stop and thinks that he can “make peace” among the warring tribes. The Native American tribes run the gamut from ones who would steal everything to ones who would share whatever they had. Interestingly, many braves would share their women with the explorers, believing that having sex with the whites would transfer power to them through the women. This practice had unfortunate side effects, which are described. Life was a challenge and Ambrose relates the curse of mosquitoes, malaria and many other maladies endemic to the age. I can’t recommend this book enough; I was unable to put it down. The tragedy of Lewis’ end explains why we simply don’t know enough about this seminal event. He committed suicide a few short years after returning and he never published the much sought after books on his trip. The account of the expedition was not published until much later, reducing the impact. I am now off to learn more about Indian history from the time of this expedition to the end of the 19th century. Jefferson’s tribute recounted at the end of the book sums up how unique Lewis was: “Of courage undaunted, possessing a firmness & perseverance of purpose which nothing but impossibilities could divert from it’s direction, careful as a father of those committed to his charge, yet steady in the maintenance of order & discipline, intimate with the Indian character, customs & principles, habituated to the hunting life, guarded by exact observation of the vegetables & animals of his own country, against losing time in the description of objects already possessed, honest, disinterested, liberal, of sound understanding and fidelity to truth so scrupulous that whatever he should report would be as certain as if seen by ourselves, with all these qualifications as if selected and implanted by nature in one body, for this express purpose, I could have no hesitation confiding the enterprize to him.”
