“The Good Apprentice” is included as a contender for lasting literary influence in Bloom’s “Western Canon”. This was my first reading of Murdoch’s work and I was not convinced. The novel is clearly rich in symbolism—biblical, classical, faeries, elves, “tree men”. Much of it went over my head but is probably a gold mine for academics. The novel was sufficiently engrossing to make me think hard about why, in the end, I didn’t admire it. Several reasons: —The characters in the story are more archetypes than unique individuals. The brilliant but manipulative psychologist; the naive but well-Intentioned youth; the wounded youth; the charismatic sex-god painter; etc. They are effectively puppets for working through the author’s intellectual ideas. —The world of the novel is blinkered, hermetic. Relatively wealthy individuals, educated, thoughtful, articulate. But also blinkered about life outside their social setting. Only a passing mention of pollution and other global dangers. No attention to the wider national or global context. Life outside London is lived in an architecturally interesting country home. And life outside the U.K. is represented by the US (luxurious lifestyles and good academic work opportunities), Italy (home of book publishers and a possible retirement setting), India and Paris (exotic holidays). From today’s perspective, this looks willfully ignorant; surely it seemed narrowly confined even in the 80s. —the sense of hermetic, cloistered world is underlined by the structure of the novel. Rather than branching out, it folds back in on itself through coincidental meetings, and the discovery of unknown connections between events and characters. This is a world of no more than 2-3 degrees of separation: old school friends; therapist clients; love interests, etc. —Much of the novel relates to the challenges of doing good in the world. How to decide what is good. How to do good, when others interpret “doing good” as interfering or being judgmental. My problem is that Murdoch’s world has an instinctive bias towards the good. Even though situations feel desperate and individuals are in mental agony, the clear message is that this will not last. A combination of generally well-intentioned support from others, guidance (by the universe?) through magic and coincidence, and the healing powers of time lead eventually to positive outcomes and personal growth. Murdoch’s novelistic arc bends strongly towards the good. Given this philosophical set-up and the puppet-like nature of the protagonists, I didn’t feel the novel was taking many risks.
