My thoughts a day after. The hero was his mother’s only child and they were living in poverty. She waited tables. They lived in a very tiny house. The mother brought lovers home. So when she married the heroine’s father the hero’s life must have drastically changed. Wealth. Comfort. Good education. The hero was good looking and a good athlete. Was expected to go to Oxford. But that inconvenient thing. The heroine’s absolute hero worship for him and his budding fixation for her. The heroine was never treated kindly by step mother. Not unkindly. Just that the woman was insecure, very selfish. A narcissist basically. She kept a tight rein on her husband and on her son too. The son naturally felt more attached to mother. He was all she had no matter what a c*nt she was. I mean she had a husband but hero just felt love for his mother even knowing she was a lying bitch. Another thing. Hero low grade assisted her and listened to her Machiavellian thought processes. He wasn’t unaware of how bad she was. Anyway. Back to their school days. He flirted with the heroine or rather made some loaded remarks. Touchy feely. Was always hovering around her in school. She went to his room one night. She saw he was sleeping naked. Here I hold her responsible for whatever happened. She did not have a mother to protect her. I guess. She went and touched him. He was already in lust with her. But was he so illiterate that he could not protect the heroine? It was truly stupid and selfish and extremely thoughtless in the worst way for him to not get in touch with her to find out if she was pregnant. His mother found them both. Screamed at them. Told him he had done wrong and his step father would be angry and the best thing to do was stay away from the heroine. He was ashamed and frankly scared. His mother orchestrated that they both stay separate. He slunk away like a pie dog with his tail between his legs. A year in Europe back packing. He came back probably went to Oxford. The heroine miscarried within a month of conceiving and was wiping out the evidence when her step mother found her and gloated. The girl quickly found an American boy got married and went away to New York. The hero meanwhile kept living a comfortable life. Travelling. Writing coffee table best sellers. Meeting heroine’s father supporting his slutty mother. Having a valet cum butler who took his phone calls and cooked for him. Heroine was left out in the cold. She wasn’t invested in her own marriage. She’d gone through a lot of trauma and rejection. One must remember that. She and her husband were not so mature or invested. The marriage broke. Not unamicably. The husband’s uncle was in fact her employer. So she lived her life away from her father. I don’t count her living away from the hero as a loss because what they had was a nascent immature relationship if we call it a relationship at all. Heroine’s father lived alone and died alone. After seeing the step mother in bed with her best friend’s husband. Hero and heroine met again and were back to the equation. Attraction. Lust. Touchy. Feely. Fascinated by the other. The hero was truly a low grade narcissist. Not understanding what was happening to anybody but himself and his mother. But the heroine wanted him. Hopefully she was able to beat out the selfishness from inside him. But we never got an epilogue. So we can’t really say. ***************** The hero is terrible. A mama’s boy. His mother was a waitress till the heroine’s father who was a vet found her just a few months after the death of his wife. He married the gold digger. She had no feelings for him or his daughter. Manipulated him. Hero grew up in the heroine’s house. She was always fixated on him. Went to his bedroom one night when she was 16 and he was 19. Inevitable happened. Too much lust. They slept with each other. The mother sent hero off convincing him it was the best thing to do. Several years later. Heroines father is dead. He lived in an old old house belonging to heroine’s mother. The funeral and will reading are imminent. Hero and heroine come back. Meet. Still have feelings. Finally all misunderstandings are solved. They come together again. I’ve liked it much better on this reading. Upgrading it to four stars in spite of the mother oppressed hero. He was basically a selfish bastard. Had his cake and ate it too. But anyway.
