Nestled on forested land, the beauty of the woodland is beckoning. Teeming with the verdant vegetation that changes color every season, ponds that glisten under the light of the full moon. There is a calm disposition that only nature can reveal, often interrupted only by the occasional gust of storm, life simply unfolds seemingly undisturbed. But the fitful sight of turnpikes and narrow roads, of paddocks, of haystacks, of huts and cottages on the crest of a hill, it betrays human intervention, which disrupts this tranquility of nature with the inevitable chaos of the human drama... "What is in all this beauty for me when every minute, every second I am obliged, forced to know that even this tiny gnat, buzzing near me in the sunlight now, is taking part in all this banquet and chorus, knows its place in it, loves it, and is happy, and I alone am an outcast"-- Fyodor Dostoyevksy, The Idiot The Woodlanders is perhaps not the best work of Thomas Hardy , but it is well written in such a way that one's imagination can be totally immersed in the beauty there is in nature. Hypnotic is the narrative utilized especially at the beginning of the novel as if to lure the audience to read on, blending the intertwined lives of his characters like twigs, branches, brambles and boughs of the woodland itself and at the same time, make it stand out in evident contrast appearing like conscious outsiders from their own unconsciously peaceful habitat, which can only be done magnificently by a talented writer like him who knows his subject well by heart. Like Prince Myshkin 's reflection in The Idiot , the woodlanders appear somewhat estranged, separated from the collective mass of beauty there is in nature, making them strangers in their own home. My predilection in reading dead writers is rooted in this manner of abstraction that only dead writers can do, that is write about their time, which is as dead as the past that can no longer live except by reading what has been scribbled by their pen. Incorporated with ideas that seem remote from our own time, but nevertheless reverberating with an appeal of timelessness esoterically imparted like a residue of a lost ancient knowledge to any welcoming reader. Hardy is part of this distinguished coterie of writers in the English language and The Woodlanders is an intrinsic part of his legacy available to those who want to unfold the mechanism behind human existence that unconsciously contributes to his own tragedy. Tragedy that seems a corollary part of human life to bring a clarity of sight, penetrating his impenetrable, often intractable nature of his own doggedness. It also shows that no matter the height of elevation we place ourselves over our peers, station in life does not really matter. Rich or poor, beautiful or plain, sophisticated or uncouth, whether one comes from Great Hintock or Little Hintock , tragedy hits like a lightning that can strike down any tree. In the same manner, goodness, truthfulness and whatnots are not exclusive to those whom we consider with good breeding, for just like in the novel, it usually comes from those who are the simplest untainted by human hubris just like Marty South and Giles Winterborne . Love, unrequited it may be, is not dependent in reciprocation, free from all forms of demands that define human love, it grows unattended in the fertile soil of an unselfish heart. It blends with the whole of nature as it loses its own individuality to stand out. No more tending is required, no attention necessary for this love which only intention is to give...
