Wings of the Falcon is what happens when a woman with a Ph.D. in Egyptology gets curious about the Etruscans and then uses her fun-time research as an excuse to re-write The Scarlet Pimpernel set in 19th century Italy. That's my headcanon for how this classic piece of romantic suspense came to be, anyway, and no one but the ghost of Barbara Mertz herself will ever tell me different. Raised on romantic tales of her parents' star-crossed romance and sheltered from the harsh realities of the world by her dying father, Francesca Fairborn is ill-equipped to cope when she finds herself at the mercy of a just-this-side-of-mustache-twirling peer of the realm mere hours after her beloved father's burial. Happily for her, a cousin from her mother's estranged family arrives just in time to prevent anything worse than a literal bodice ripping, and at his behest she soon finds herself - along with her companion, the magnificent Miss Perkins, a middle-aged lady of decidely Mertzian aspect - traveling to Italy to meet her long lost relatives. Upon arriving, she meets her unexpectedly affectionate grandfather and her decidedly-cool cousin Stefano and discovers she's walked right into the middle of Italy's battle for unification, lead locally by a mysterious man known only as Il Falcone. If you've read Pimpernel or The Mask of Zorro or any Batman comic ever, you more or less know where this is going, but that's hardly the point. The joy of this thing is in the goofy, high drama journey, which the author takes seriously - but not so much she can't wink at the audience a bit. An older, wiser Francesca narrates the novel, and isn't shy about calling herself out for acting like a ninny during the action, and that and the heroine's clear attempts to become a better person over the course of the novel help ease the itching palms of readers who might otherwise feel the need to seriously smack some sense into such a traditionally bubble-headed gothic heroine. Still, if you've made it this far in life without burning Marguerite St. Just in effigy, you'll make it through this, and Francesca's sillier moments are more than compensated for by the fascinating lesson in Italian history and Etruscan archaeology the novel offers. And, honestly, Miss Perkins is the clearly the real hero of this story, so who cares about little Franny, anyway? It has been, God help me, almost thirty years since I first read Wings of the Falcon , and it works just as well now as it did then, as perfect a piece of Pimpernel -inspired romantic suspense as exists this side of Percy Blakeney, and a perfect escape for fans of the "We seek him here, we seek him there" genre.
