Conjecture! This book is full of it. Apparently, this is the first of the Rafferty and Llewellyn British detective series, and it does not appear to be very well written. In this novel, the author depicts Rafferty, a Detective Inspector who is disorganized and prone to snap judgements, and his teammate Detective Sergeant Llewellyn, highly educated, and cool as a cucumber. It appears that the author uses Rafferty's conjectures to fill otherwise blank pages, and it does not help this slow-moving story at all. A girl has been brutally murdered on the grounds of a private sanitarium in England. (The author calls it a "sanatorium," which is a hospital used to treat tuberculosis patients in the US, but apparently not in England.) The owner and general manager of the facility is the wealthy and powerful Dr. Melville-Briggs, and his clients (patients) are the members of England's wealthy and powerful families. Rafferty immediately suspects him. Until, that is, he learns that the doctor was attending an event for physicians that even the police surgeon was attending, giving the man a perfect alibi. Rafferty's suspicions then turn to Dr. Simon Smythe, a researcher who works for the powerful man. Not to forget Charge Nurse Allward, who is male, and who is known to occasionally leave his station at the hospital of an evening and sneak off to the local pub. Then there is the competing physician, Dr. Whittaker, who runs a lower-grade facility just a few miles from the site of the murder. He has clashed physically with the great Dr. Melville-Briggs, even though they hardly compete for patients. Dr. Whittaker is focused on finding a cure for Alzheimer's Disease, and on caring for the poor, while Meyers-Briggs focuses on making money. The dead girl's face has been beaten so badly that she is not recognizable, but the police are eventually able to identify her as a local prostitute who was two months pregnant at the time of her death. The murderer must have been a man, right? Rafferty isn't sure. He continues to run around that part of England suspecting everybody with little evidence against anybody. Does he come across as being incompetent? I think so. He is hardly my idea of a competent detective, or of a likeable principal character in a novel, but you might not agree.
