I rarely re-read a book, even one I’ve loved. The fact that this is the third time I’ve read this wonderful novel probably says enough about what it means to me in its own right, but I felt the need to write a review anyway! First point to make, however, is that I have now resolved to return to other favourite books regularly, as the experience of encountering this one again has proved unexpectedly rich. The reason I rarely re-read is because the most important part of reading for me is the uncovering of the narrative; the story being told…the way it’s told and the ideas that it reveals, while a vital part of the enjoyment, are less important. What I loved about this recent experience was that, knowing where the author was headed, I found passages in the book that I had totally forgotten that brought real delight, and ideas explored that meant a lot more to me and made me think more deeply as an older man, 40 years after I last read it. The book itself is based on an extraordinary conceit: that the reigning Pope claims to have been granted a vision of the end of the world by God and believes he has been charged to proclaim it.The first half follows a German professor -a dear and longtime friend of the Pope- as he struggles to judge whether the vision his friend has had is madness, delusion, deceit or truth, at his friend’s request. The second half explores how the ex-Pope gets his message out into the world, and what happens to him. All of this is set in the most dark context…that the world is hurtling inevitably towards imminent nuclear holocaust as its leaders can’t find alternative ways to resolve the inequities and conflicts that their ideologies have created. What was frightening in many respects was that the fragile, torrid world West describes (written before the fall of the Berlin Wall) and the reality of possible nuclear Armageddon (which was at times I remember being oppressive as a youth) bears more striking resemblance to our current geopolitical situation than at any time since! This extraordinary story is told deftly, compassionately and through the eyes of an author whose obviously genuine faith has been tested -and still is reshaped- by rigour, scepticism and reason. The way that he juxtaposes huge global issues with the experiences of individuals struggling to navigate an unimaginable present/future or living with inescapable personal struggles is beautiful. West doesn’t shy away from the complexities and contradictions of faith, and he doesn’t offer easy answers to the deepest of questions, but the utterly audacious, shocking ending (which some may find as disappointing as I have always found it deeply moving) still has great power. I had really hoped that re-reading this book wouldn’t spoil it for me so many years on. I needn’t have worried. I love it even more now than I did first and second time!
