Before I get to my actual review, a quick disclaimer: Ever since I learned that Netflix was reimagining one of my favorite childhood book series, I had decided that I would be embarking on a re-read of this series, reliving a series of books that helped to shape me into a voracious reader. I am so excited to embark on this travel back in time. I don't expect to be mentally stimulated -- I mean, I'm not exactly a pre-teen middle-schooler these days -- but I make no apology for choosing to enjoy this series from the perspective of adulthood. Don't expect me to have any sort of psychoanalyst or feminist sermonizing on the appropriateness of the situations or the effects on a young girl reading these books; there's plenty of that to go around already. I'm here for the nostalgia and the meander down memory lane. ********** This was another installment where I remembered more as I read than I could have told you about the book before revisiting it. There were a few sweet moments that made me smile, a couple of hearty chuckles, and quite a few instances of "oh yeah...how did I not remember this happened in this book?". What I liked about Hello, Mallory : Getting to know Mallory - This book definitely has a more immature voice. While it was occasionally a bit annoying, mostly it was endearing. I appreciated how awkward she was. I'm not sure there is any more awkward time in life than 11 and 12 years old, trapped between being a little kid and a big kid. Jessi - I think I maybe appreciate her presence more as an adult than I might have as a kid. Jessi being one of the only African American students at school sounds about right for the demographics I grew up with in Connecticut myself. There were more people of color in my schools than it seems were in Stoneybrook, but still the ratio of white to not white was pretty notable. However, I never recall personally hearing anyone I was friends with or even around acting the way the mean girls did in Mal's class or the Ramseys' across-the-street neighbor. To me and my immediate peers, kids were just kids, at least as far as I knew, and I was always more concerned with personality and character than what people physically looked like, but it does make me wonder about the experience from another perspective. The test - Nothing makes me laugh more than how outrageous Kristy can be. Exactly how many tourniquets does your average person administer over the course of their lifetime, much less middle-school-age babysitters?! I mean, I am clocking in at almost 46 years and have yet to encounter the need for one, thank the Lord. What I didn't care for: A bit repetitious - Not so much in the actual content, but in the "competition for the BSC" plot point. Granted, it wasn't the same as when the older girls tried to compete with our trusty sitters, but still. What left me conflicted: The logistics of the Club notebook - I was pondering to myself how exactly this worked. There were a minimum of four girls, and often more. They took calls and goofed around during three half-hour meetings per week. When did they find time to both write up every single job they went on and read all the other entries?? I mean, it's one notebook which, by the laws of physics, can only ever be in one place at a time. I really want to understand how it worked. Once again, a fast read for me and a good palate cleanser after a book that was so unappealing, I stopped halfway through the first chapter. Mallory provided a hard reset, which I needed. I am still keeping this one at three stars, though. It felt a little under-creative at parts, and while I can tolerate the original crew, emphasizing that Mallory is two years their junior came with an immaturity that was, at times, somewhat painful.
