I loved this book! I can't wait for the second one. Fortunately, I was in a used bookstore not long ago and found the first three volumes in pristine, unread condition for very cheap. I wish the fourth had been with them to complete the set, but am happy with what I have. The books feel so good in your hands, are an easy to read font, and are printed on luxurious paper. My dad taught me to always appreciate books and pages printed on fine quality paper. I love stories of the American West, especially stories with vivid descriptions of the country, wildlife, people etc. One thing McMurtry is good at is vivid descriptions. In this book those descriptions may be of buffalo afterbirth, tortured captives or sweaty sex - but, he manages a fair amount of description of the land, people, weather and animals too. The book is not up to the political correctness standards of the 21st century, as many reviews point out and belabor. However, it is set in 1832 and nothing is gained by pretending those times weren't rough and filled with slurs and demeaning language. If you eliminate all that then the reader doesn't get to experience all the things we are supposedly "better than" now and why. For example, at first I felt there was gratuitous violence against animals. But then I realized that was exactly how privileged European settlers treated the native animals of America. The book is fiction, but the characters are representative of the larger universe of settlers and explorers at that time. After all, we of European decent eventually killed almost all of the millions of buffalo, so for a British Lord to shoot 40 at one time for "sport" and leave them to rot is pretty representative of how things really were then. Overall, I was able to take the actions of the characters as I believe the author intended, appreciate the ample humor throughout the book (most of it at the main characters' expense), and thoroughly enjoy this wild romp up the river and across the plains. PS: It is not fair to compare this series to Lonesome Dove. That was about Texas Rangers, this is about English aristocrats - they are two different series set in different places (this one literally in the rivers of the West). If you want to read only about Rangers and mostly men go re-read Dove - this one has women and girls in the main characters, sorry. Also, for you who couldn't keep the characters straight perhaps you overlooked the character index so thoughtfully provided in the front. If you want a book with few characters I recommend 2001: A space oddity, it only has an astronaut dude and a computer named Hal.
