THE GOOD APPRENTICE was published in 1985, yet it feels both older and more modern. It intertwines Victorian roots with a contemporary sense of unforced farce. Like in a Victorian melodrama the characters are impossibly entangled in each others' lives. Edward Baltram is the love child of Jesse Beltram, renowned avant-garde artist, and Chloe Warriston, one of Jesse's favored young models. Tragic pregnant Chloe, spurned by Jesse before the child was even born, married Harry Cuno, and died when Edward was around seven. Harry is Edward's stepfather. Harry's own son, Stuart, is about four years older than Edward and is the offspring of Harry and his first wife Teresa, deceased. Meanwhile, Jesse has remained with his wife May Barnes and produced two daughters, Ilona and Bettina. Chloe's younger sister Midge Warriston is married to a prominent psychotherapist named Thomas McCorkerville, who is best friends with Edward's stepfather Harry. Thomas and Midge have one son, Meredith, who idolizes Harry's son Stuart. Got all that? I found it useful to draw a family tree to keep these entanglements straight. Nor is this the end of it. As the story progressed so many other surprising connections emerged that my notes became a sea of exclamation points. Yet, somehow Murdoch persuaded me to accept this unlikely state of affairs in the service of the subjective and self-assured speculations that could only occur within a familial circle. Victorian melodrama is also a major plot element. The exposition of a clandestine love affair is voiced in breathless hyperbolic declarations: “...I'm starving, I want you in my house, I want it to be your home, I want you forever.” (p.88-89) And “I love you so much, I feel your kisses all the time, all our touchings, all our joys, are about me like a net, I nearly swooned with desire during that dinner party, when I sit alone at home and think about you I could bite my hands off.” (p.90) Yes, it's the 20th century and he says “swooned.” Murdoch even throws in a séance. She describes it from Edward's point of view. Her prose carries such conviction that any skepticism on the part of the reader is not just stifled but rendered irrelevant. In Part 2 Murdoch draws on the Gothic novel with equal adroitness. Seegard, Jesse's abode, is set in semi-marshland, a landscape constantly being reshaped by the weather. “...[H]e was walking upon a black sinewy surface, springy underfoot and less muddy. Then, as he looked, trying to see a way, the light changed, the sun was clouded and the water in front of him became dark, almost black. He stopped and looked back. Seegard, upon which the sun still shone, was already far away, now seen to be upon a slight eminence. As Edward turned about, straining his eyes, he was suddenly removed as if his surroundings had been quickly jerked upward. He did not sink, but fell abruptly, vertically, as the surface beneath his feet gave way and his legs descended into two watery holes.” (p.116-117) Murdoch never descends into cliché. Edward politely praises a tapestry based on one of Jesse's designs. “ 'It's beautiful,'....But he found it like the painting in his own room, rather distressing.” (p. 111) A lesser author might have sprung for “disturbing.” The nuance, the suggestiveness, keeps this novel afloat. The story opens with an innocent prank gone wrong. Edward slips a hallucinogen into his strait-laced roommate Mark Wilsden's sandwich. He imagined he was opening up new vistas of experience for Mark whom he practically worshipped. Mark falls into blissful sleep. Edward slips out to meet up with a girl named Sarah Plowmain, whose mother knew May Barnes, Jesse's wife. He loses track of time, rushes back to the apartment and finds that Mark had gotten up and jumped out the window to his death. The reader is led to believe that the remainder of the book will be a dense examination of Edward's moral responsibility for the tragedy. Edward is overcome by feelings of guilt and depression. The tragedy, however, is a McGuffin, a catalyst for a series of events eliciting shifting subjective viewpoints. From this unpromising beginning Murdoch actually provoked me to laugh out loud when a series of coincidences and mistakes come to a head in Part 2 (Seegard). No doubt there is much philosophical nuance in this novel. After all, she was a fellow at Oxford where she taught philosophy. This is the first book I have read by this author, and I found it easier, however, to sit back and enjoy her characters and careful writing. At a dinner party shortly after the tragedy, Harry tries to console his step-son with a “stiff upper lip” harangue. “Edward looked at Harry, or glanced at him, with an expression of faint wincing distaste, huddled himself into his chair, and resumed gazing into the corner of the room.” (p.16) No sentence could better convey this particular character at this particular moment. This book was the selection of my local book club.
