Cam Jansen's career as a fifth-grade sleuth gets off to a fine start in her inaugural adventure, Cam Jansen and the Mystery of the Stolen Diamonds . Cam isn't a proven veteran of dozens of investigations at this point, merely a bright girl hailed for her unfailing photographic memory, but that gift is in rare form as her first case ever pops up when she's at the mall with her friend Eric. The case is challenging, convoluted enough that the police can't get to the bottom of it, but no detective on the force is as observant as the soon-to-be-legendary Cam Jansen. Trusting her own instincts and faultless memory, she's about to establish her reputation as a kid detective on par with the very best. Eric's mother leaves him with his baby brother Howie at the mall for a few minutes on the morning Parker's Jewelry Store is robbed at gunpoint. Seated on a bench with Eric outside the shop in the mall's main corridor, Cam sees only the commotion after the heist, when a man pushes his way out of the store and runs away. Other patrons file out moments later, looking dazed and frightened: a man with his wife and baby, a pair of elderly ladies. The police arrive shortly and go after the man who ran off, but Cam asks questions of the other people in the store when the holdup occurred. These witnesses should be able to identify the culprit. The authorities conduct their investigation professionally, but only Cam perceives the situation well enough to deduce how the jewelry theft really went down and who's responsible. There's no time to alert the cops; she and Eric must bring the perpetrator to justice on their own, or the bad guy will get off scot-free. It's Cam's debut as a detective capable of solving crimes the police can't, but it might be her last case if she's not careful about getting involved with armed robbers. Desperate criminals take desperate actions to preserve their liberty. Can Cam and Eric prove the offenders' guilt and alert the police to come rescue them before the robbers silence the junior gumshoes permanently? Easy-reader mysteries are a popular genre, and David A. Adler put together a propitious start to this series with Cam Jansen and the Mystery of the Stolen Diamonds . The case makes perfect sense, with a few smart twists I didn't see coming. The solution is simple enough for the earliest readers to grasp, yet with plenty of pop to keep older kids engaged. The climactic chase is exciting, with the thrill of real danger for Cam as she eludes capture by villains. Kids who enjoy this book are sure to want more, and there's a whole Cam Jansen series out for them to find, thanks to the great David A. Adler. I look forward to many more adventures with Cam Jansen. She sure is a brilliant detective.
