Categorically unsurpassed, this revolutionary method is simple but effective. A must read for all dog owners! I cannot recommend this book highly enough to all dog lovers and owners, who want to gain an understanding of how their canine friend communicates and acts in the way that he/she does. With a foreword by legendary and highly renowned horse trainer Monty Roberts, one knows instantly that Jan Fennell’s advice and study of canine behavior is going to be spot on. Learning the language of your best friend is such an important step to take, for then you are able to understand one another and the dog (pet) to human relationship is strengthened. Gentle, straightforward and uncomplicated it is quite remarkable and successful, which professes results as to amaze and shock you (as it did with me and my dogs). Jan’s unique and deep understanding with dogs has enabled her to help solve countless problems, such as biters to bicycle-chasers, making the animal respect humans and learn to heel. In this first book she teaches how we all can communicate with our dogs sharing with us those precious secrets that unlock the barriers between us humans and animals, so as to strengthen our partnership with man’s best friend. The author has not only spent her life growing up with dogs and sharing her home with these wonderful animals, but has also judged at one of the most prestigious dog shows in the world ‘Crufts’. These lovely animals give us such unconditional love and if you appreciate dogs then you will naturally want to become closer to them; understanding the reasons why they act as they do and how they are trying to communicate with us. Similarly with any animal and/ or domestic pet to really get to identify with them better one must learn to think like them, by putting yourself in the animal’s position and thinking about how you would react to such a situation. A dog may show aggression due to fear, or a bitch may show submission to the leader or dominant alpha within the pack or hierarchy. It is always good to remember like when Monty studies horses and equine behavior that he can understand their conduct in relation to herd instinct, just as likewise with domesticated dogs one must always respect their natural instincts in relation to their pack behavior. Even in the home a dog will comprise within its pack the humans as well, and their behavior reflects how they regard you in the hierarchy or level of the pack. (i.e. If you are perhaps not considered the dominant alpha then the dog will not show you full respect and may try to exert his/her authority, usually with classified ‘bad behavior’). This beautiful book adorned with stunning color photographs takes you on a journey of discovery, seen through the eyes of your canine furry friend whom you wish to learn more about. Your relationship with your dog(s) can only become stronger with reading this remarkable and engrossing book that will fascinate and delight you from beginning to end as you learn so much from Jan Fennell and her experience and knowledge. From puppy hood to adulthood regardless of the dog’s age or gender this book I can grantee is applicable to any animal *although it is not a solution to aggression. I was thoroughly entranced by this intriguing, absorbing and completely captivating book that truly impressed me, and if nothing else made me appreciate my loyal and trusted companions even more. Using case studies as reflections alongside talking about her own dogs, and dogs in general Jan Fennell paints a clear picture of dog behavior, instincts and attitude towards other canines and humans. This is a read that I cannot fault and nor can I not enthuse about enough, for it is truly magical and a very bold step which I recommend that we all take. *It is important to mention that this method cannot remove any aggressive tendencies of any dog, and is not designed to do so. Certain dog breeds have been raised specifically for the purpose of fighting; hence this book will not be able to alter their potentially savage nature. Always exercise caution when working with dogs, as like any animal they can be unpredictable in some cases.
