I decided to read this book on a whim. I am (or perhaps was) sorta lukewarm on Frank Bruni as a New York Times op-ed columnist, but I saw this book referred to in another piece and thought, hmmmm, I should give it a try. I was fully prepared not to like it. Basically, Bruni was part of the press corps assigned to the first Bush campaign in 2000. In this capacity he followed Bush on the campaign trail even to the extent of being allowed to fly with then Governor Bush as he travelled across the country. My first observation was that Bruni writes in a very down to earth, readable style and his descriptions of the bag drags, junk food, smoke filled bars, and more left me with the impression that he is honest, humble, and a guy I’d buy a round or two for. Secondly, when Bruni early on in the story characterized things thusly: “Campaigns often have aspects of cult: the leader is all powerful, all-knowing and everyone publicly defers to his or her wisdom” well, I thought yeah, Frank Bruni gets it.” Bruni also offers interesting tidbits that for me helped flesh out the image in my mind of George Bush. For example, Bush was basically ignorant of pop culture and came from a somewhat sheltered background. He did not know who Leonardo DiCaprio was and had not seen “Titanic.” Nor was he familiar with Michael Moore or Stone Philips, in fact, he thought “Sex in the City” was perhaps an erotic novel and had to be told it was an HBO tv offering. As expected, Frank Bruni does record several gaffes and Bush’s propensity toward malapropisms. However, in fairness, Bruni also notes that Bush has some serious interpersonal skills. He was almost hypersensitive to peoples’ needs, moods, and concerns. In Bruni’s words: “Bush sensed little disturbances in the atmosphere around him and calibrated his actions accordingly. Politicians are seducers — at least the good ones are — and Bush was practiced in the art of seduction.” That, I think was one of the finer insights that Bruni provided. Over time I have met a few politicians; specifically, Orrin Hatch, Danny Inouye, Carl Levin, John Chafee — each had the capacity to seduce. Perhaps surprisingly, none more so than Orrin Hatch. But, enough digression. Another observation Bruni makes near the end of the book was, in my view, especially apt, it had to do with spin. Now we had had two great “spin machines” before George Bush’s; namely, those associated with Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton. Bruni discusses the Bush spin machine noting: “Of course there was aggressive spin at work. But the thing about spin was that it had to be tethered at least somewhat to the truth or somewhere down the line, it might be revealed as utterly mendacious and backfire.” We may well be seeing untethered spin in today’s White House. To close, I think this book is well worth reading. It is not totally unbiased, yet it is remarkably free of bias. And, I think Bruni saw things in Bush that others missed. I come away with a fuller appreciation for both Bush and Bruni.
