Excellent book!!!!! I can highly recommend this book! big kudos for the insightful pieces about Aileen Wornos!! i got that book about twenty years ago and it was hughly influential to me. Lots of cutting edge brilliant artists using their art to raise awareness and create solutions to the most challenging problems at the time with in the violence against wimin issues. This book is still ultra relevant. Lots Powerful writing and early work by Safire! Art can communicate, create culture and help to solve seemly inpenatrateable social issues such as violence against wimin, violence against sex workers, violence against forgotten and poor wimin such as with Aileen and the victims of the green river killer. This book show artists grappling with these human rights issues brilliantly! As a side note and showing how influential the book was for me, being inspired by the artists in this book, I put together a benifit show for Aileen Wornos in 1995-ish in Atlanta ('Pagan Holiday' my '90's riot grrrl band & 'Smoke' fabulous band supportive of Aileen, also played at it) I did a spoken word about her situation, and I wrote to her being that i was also a sexworker at the time and from the american south, to encourage her to talk with her defense team/lawyers. but she had 'found jesus' and she had entered a guilty plea and stopped talking to her defense team. so sad! The book Critical Condition also had lots of photos and talked about the NHI project where artists/activists used billboards to raise awareness of a the green river serial killer that had killed 60+ wimin (all sex workers) and the police had made a file called "NHI" - no humans involved. thats the file name the cops used to put the paper work from the wimin (sex workers) who had been killed. the killer hadn't been caught then. I most definately give this book five stars! It's a ground breaking book showing fabulous use of art/activism for sexworker rights/wimin rights which are of course human right!! x i may write some more about this book later... xo Show more
