I finished this book about three weeks ago and I’ve been unable to write a review. From the moment I closed the cover after reading the last page I’ve been stuck. It’s not that I don’t have a lot to say, I do, this book is incredibly moving. My mind runs at light speed and my fingers move at tortoise speed. So I’m lost, plenty to say, but can’t express it in writing. Now it’s time, readable or not, let my rambling begin. First the author, after reading Strange Fruit I read a few articles about Lillian Smith. She was a remarkable woman. She held strong and rational opinions about racial intolerance. She also had courage enough to express these opinions and ideas to a mostly hostile public. One of the pictures I saw of her shows a white haired elderly woman, with a softly wrinkled face, but her eyes were slightly hard. Her eyes were intelligent but showed a woman who could be at times, quite fierce. She reminded me of my grandmother, both were true southern Steel Magnolias. They were ninety percent sugar and cinnamon, but when angered, the remaining ten percent would be pure tornado. Now the book, it’s brilliant! As brilliant as it is, it’s oh so depressing, mostly because even though it’s fiction, everything about it rings true. A young couple is in love, one is white and the other is black. In a town where the separation between white and black is often reinforced with violence, this love is doomed. The characters Ms. Smith invents are all deeply developed, even minor characters are full and richly complex. The reader can vividly see and hear in each character, their appearance, their personality, their vocal tones, and even their racial attitudes brilliantly become pictures in the readers mind. She is especially insightful and compassionate when describing the turmoil Tracy feels about his love affair with Nonnie and the almost spiritual unconditional love Nonnie feels for Tracy. The resolution for Tracy and Nonnie is indeed tragic and will squeeze your heart. Be forewarned there is death and there is no happy ending for anyone. If I have any complaint about this book it is that there is no conclusion for most of the characters. This lack of conclusion is part of what makes this book so memorable, you can’t help but wonder, what happens now. Nonnie Anderson, she alone is the character that I felt most drawn to and wanted to know her future. What happens to the woman whose only flaw seems to be that of loving a white man. For me she was pure in spirt and character, and I hate being left wondering.
