Let me start by stating that I really enjoy Foster's works. I first came across his short story collections With Friends Like These... and ...Who Needs Enemies? in high school and loved them. I also read his Clash of the Titans literary version of the movie (BTW, the 1981 original is orders of magnitude better than the remake). While I never got into his Spellsinger series, I've admired his prolific and fun writing style. So this rating of 3 stars is not necessarily typical of Foster's body of work, but more of a disappointment in this particular story. The plot makes for a great starting point that at times delivers while also falling short. Frank Sonderberg, the president and CEO of a thriving sporting goods business, is taking his family on an annual trip to Las Vegas, but rather than fly he rented a motorhome to try to instill some sense of wonder and beauty in his 16-year-old daughter and 10-year-old son. On the way, they pick up a strange, ethereal woman who goes by "Mouse," and then all heck breaks loose. Pretty much literally. The family finds themselves in one heap of trouble after another since, as Mouse tells them, reality is falling apart and it is now up to the Sonderbergs, and another passenger they pick up along the way, to make sure she gets to the "Spinner" in order to soothe him and make things right again. The premise to the story is fantastic, and the character of Mouse could likely be a series all its own. There are points in the story where the characters really shine, but then others where they fail to make sense. Their words and actions just seem a little out of character at times. And then there's the ending. It's not that we don't know the deus ex machina is coming (it's been obvious for maybe 50 pages), it's that it all seems so anti-climactic after what we've already endured for almost 300 pages and more than a little contrived. Plus, I felt there were some resolutions that were also missing. In other words, after (at times) plodding through this book, I felt I deserved more than an ending that seemed a little slapped together. Had this book been maybe 70 pages shorter, I wouldn't have felt so cheated and could rate it higher, but as it stands, this is not a shining example of Foster's work and unless you're trying to fill in your library or kill 5 hours, you're probably better off letting this one pass.
