Csikszentmihalyi is a professor of psychology at University of Chicago. His ideas on shaping the direction of evolution in the 3rd millenium are interesting and neatly presented. He will rebuke the increasingly alarming worship of materialism, instead accentuating the importance of finding moments of "flow" in which your self is detached from concerns and worries, and instead highly focused on the challenging activity at hand. It is through these moments of flow that allows us to find our skills and purpose. The book can be a bit dry and unsubstantiated at parts, but not any more so than similar attempts at discussing this difficult topic. It is especially good around the middle third. I found this book further confirms many of the realisations that I thought of as I map my way through the world. An emphasis on complexity was a refreshing read, since I have always been an ambitious person whom sometimes had trouble explaining to my friends why I want to push my tastes in music and film. Oscar Wilde's quote, "The problem with school is that it got in the way of my education" has always been important to my learning and personal development. Csikszentmihalyi also disapproved the lack of integration of the disciplines that we learn as a student, if only we could go to school and learn some of the most important skills we need to live a purposeful life: kindness, the causes and consequences of the world's problems, history of some of the world's greatest people, respect for others, manners, social skills, autonomy, spirituality. It would be a breeding ground for political indoctrination if done poorly, but a powerful ripple to spark a generation of successful humans if done well. The progress starts with a single person, and then onto a small group of four (evolution cell) and then a community. So, I therefore must continue working on improving myself, hitting my goals and targets, be an individual which aims for complexity rather than entropy, while watching out and alarming others of individuals whom attempt to exploit the psychic energy of others. I <3 minimalism and anti-consumption. -"what happens is that attention turns to information that conflicts with goals; the discrepancy between what u desire and what is actually happening creates the inner tension." p36 -"the world we can see is only the part that registers upon the senses. There are all sorts of things happening around us about which we have no idea because they are beyond our perceptual threshold." p60 -"each person creates the world he or she lives in by investing attention in certain things and by doing so according to certain patterns." p65 -"to lift the second veil of illusion involves realizing how partial a view of reality even the most sophisticated culture affords...those who adopt a counter culture stance end up being just as controlled, or more so, by their rebellious views as they would have been by the mainline ones they abandoned." p75 -"with the advent of reflective consciousness, the ego begins to use possessions to symbolize the self." "The more the ego becomes identified with symbols outside the self the more vulnerable it becomes." p79 -3rd veil of Maya: "it distorts reality so as to make it congruent with the needs of the ego." -the ego of the future: "secure enough to forgo desires beyond what are necessary...relies on possessions that are not scarce...satisfied with what is unique about itself and its experiences...identified with the greatest common good - not only with kin and country, but with humanity as a whole, and beyond humanity, with the principle of life itself." p82 -"people whom we would call happy - are generally individuals who have lived their lives according to rules they themselves created...they do what they do because they enjoy meeting the challenges of life, because they enjoy life itself." p82 -"we devote more energy to train young people to be consumers than to be autonomous individuals." p116 -"complexity (optimal development of both differentiation and integration) is not necessarily the direction in which evolution inevitably progresses, but it is the direction in which it must move to secure us a livable future." p157 -4 noble worlds: learning, realization, Bodhisattva (compassion, altruism), and Buddhahood (absolute freedom and understanding of ultimate truth) -"this Buddhist hierarchy is built on the assumption that the ideal direction for human development involves differentiation (ability to free oneself from genetic and social determinism by developing control over one's impulses and desires) and integration (compassion, altruism, and finally a blending of one's hard-won individuality with the harmony underlying the cosmos)" p161 -"(religions) ...if they were only able to see buying the veil of Maya spun by the historical accidents that account for the superficial differences between their creeds." p161 -"progress means freeing oneself from genetic commands, then from cultural constraints, and finally from the desires of the self." p161 -"all too often we make even important decisions - such as which person to marry, what job to take - for reasons that are dictated by unexamined genetic instructions or social conventions." p167 -"the world in which our children and their children will live is built, minute by minute, through the choices we endorse with our psychic energy...our small habits of mind and behavior: the way we talk to our children, how we spend our free time, whether we always increase the consumption of finite resources or whether we find ways to live within less wasteful limits" p167 -moments of flow can occur in a sewer when she stops seeing it as a job and more as something enjoyable. This is a great way to get people to do things - make the chore fun. -"(flow).. This escape does not represent a descent into entropy, as when one dulls one's senses with drugs or simple pleasures; it is an escape forward into higher complexity, where one homes one's potential by confronting new challenges." p184 -"the normal condition of the mind is chaos." p190 -"in an ideal society each person would carve, weave, program computers, paint, tell stories, sing, and dance, and there would be little need for professional performers to take people's minds off the monotony of what they do day in, day out." p198 -"...combine harmoniously these opposite tendencies: ...original yet systemic, independent yet responsible, bold yet disciplined, intuitive yet rational. He balances a healthy pride in his uniqueness with a deep interest and concern for others." p238 -"the first step to wisdom is to realize that we cannot trust implicitly our senses and our beliefs, yet to still be eager to understand the reality that lies behind our partial perceptions of it." p242 -"Socrates kept claiming ignorance all through his illustrious career, to bring new knowledge to light." p242
