Niagra, so full of scrumptious hope, is looking at me, there, afraid I won't share her vision. She's afraid I'll tell her that the world won't let her have her dreams realized quite so easily, and probably not at all. That her dream is just a thread of fantasy to hang by for a while, but it'll go limp one horrid night somewhere down life's road and start coiling around her pretty neck. But I don't want to tell her...Because those young dream-years are by far the best years, when you have hardy faith and gallops of energy and go for it all, perhaps in a dumb fashion but with gusto, right up 'til the night the dreams goes limp and starts that coil. Where were you when the dream went limp? Daniel Woodrell is probably best known for writing Winter's Bone , source of the movie with Jennifer Lawrence. I read that book over 10 years ago and loved it. The movie captured the plot but not the plain spoken, sometimes gloriously vulgar, often transcendent tone of Woodrell's writing. Reading his prose is like swooning, repeatedly, and wanting to grab a highlighter but you'd highlight damn near the whole book. This is a story about Doyle Redmond, an Ozark boy from West Table, Missouri, (a stand in for the author's hometown, West Plains, a recurring location in Woodrell's work) A charming shitkicker with a poet's soul, Doyle has tried to make it as a glossy yet earthy literary type and even made it to the Iowa Writer's Workshop but has remained obscure and never quite ditched his shitkicker roots (Doyle, also, shares at least some of his life story with Woodrell.) So when his marriage hits the skids, he borrows (more or less, probably less) his wife's prize Volvo and heads back east and finds himself on an errand back to West Table to get his older brother Smoke out of trouble. But it turns out neither brother are much invested in that errand and much more invested in a huge marijuana crop Smoke and his girlfriend Big Annie are clandestinely growing in the woods. Doyle is also instantly invested in Big Annie's daughter, Niagra, an otherworldly beauty with an oddball intellect. Smooching at the Dog'NSuds, my class ring worn on a string around a girl's neck, parents who just didn't understand--I'd never been there. Now here I was, having a sort of teenage love affair, only I was thirty-five years old having it, and hear this clear--it was everything common legend had glossed it up to be, and more. But full of hidden shoals. (Hear this clear: the way Woodrell writes is like sunlit honey in your mouth.) Alas, there is trouble on the wind in this hawthorn and cannabis-scented Ozark paradise: the local bad element know the Redmond brothers are up to something in the woods and have been skulking around looking for any opportunity to make mendacity. And as the money garden continues to ripen, the dread does as well as you wait for bad shit to manifest. Recurring Woodrell themes of land and family resonate here, not just of those things in the present but the eternal endurance of those things and the celestial destiny that binds you to both. He's also a genius at making you love small time cons. Maybe Doyle and Smoke are lovable because they're the protagonists, but their steadfast commitment to each other and their own brand of mud-and-blood-spattered chivalry make them a pair you can't help but love, as long as they aren't your neighbors. Do you like grit lit? Are you interested in hillbilly noir? Do you like writing that can turn an anecdote about the dates on pennies into a tragedy of Aristotelian proportions? Then you-YOU!-need Daniel Woodrell in your life.
