I have absolutely no idea how this book lost its fourth star and ended up as a very strong 3 . Ironically, in one respect, this was a breakthrough novel for me because something about PKD’s reality-blurring narrative style of addled consciousness really clicked with me for the first time. Now I loved The Man in the High Castle and thought that A Scanner Darkly was both original and very moving. However, my enjoyment of those works occurred despite his confused/warped non-reality format, not particularly because of it. This book may have changed that. PKD is someone who I have found has a lot to say about the human condition. While on the surface, he can often be harsh and critical in his portrayal of humanity, I’ve always sensed an underlying note of optimism in his work. I think he spent most of his time pessimistically waiting for the world to blow itself up and yet he strongly believed/hoped that humanity would somehow overcome these obstacles of our stupidity and find a way to move forward. Ultimately, I think he believed in us and this book exemplifies that philosophy. PLOT SUMMARY : In a nutty shell, this story traces the lives of a group of people living in the U.S. through the aftermath of a nuclear war. Dick assembled out of his prodigious imagination a wonderful ensemble of off-beat players to portray various aspects of the human reaction to such a catastrophic even. You have: Dr. Bloodmoney: aka Bruno Bluthgeld, an Oppenheimer-like nuclear physicist who’s universally hated as the scapegoat for mankind’s atomic stupidity. Of course, as a classic PKD character, he is uber paranoid, megalomaniacal and believes that he has magical powers…which may or may not be true. Hoppy Harrington: A phocomelus (i.e., born with no arms or legs…and yes, I had to look it up) who was constantly discriminated against as a result of his condition and finds himself with strong telekinetic powers in the aftermath of the war and see his chance to climb the power ladder. Stuart McConchie: An African-American salesman whose natural optimism and contrasting normalcy remain largely the same both pre-war and post-war. Stuart exemplifies the adaptability of the human animal to extreme changes in circumstances and represents PKD’s ultimate optimism. Walter Dangerfield: On his way to colonize Mars when the bombs went off, Walter ends up stuck in orbit and playing disc jockey for the survivors. Edie and Bill Keller: A very unusual pair of siblings that I will not say more of here, but stick in my head as memorable PKD characters. …and another handful whose roles or impact on me don’t feel like they warrant a special intro. But they are there and you should read about them because some of them are very nice. Written in 1965, the story takes place chrono illogically over about 10 year period beginning in 1981. In typical PKD fashion, the world-building is sketchy and revealed slowly and piece-meal with hints and info nuggets air-dropped in occasionally to add color. At the beginning of the story (pre-kaboom), you have a large segment of the population that suffers from phocomelia and other genetic disorders as a result of both chemical poisoning (e.g. Thalidomide) and a 1974 atmospheric atomic explosion that for which Dr. Bloodmoney became the public scapegoat. In addition, the U.S. is fighting the Soviet Union and Communist China in Cuba and Mars is set to be colonized in the next phase of the space race following the disastrous and deadly Russian colonization of the Moon. THOUGHTS : I had to suspend my disbelief quite a bit with this one to be able to accept a massive nuclear exchange in 1981 that would permit communities to begin to rebuild a mere 7 years later. Ditto for the amount of mutation necessary to allow cats and dogs to attain rudimentary sentience in that short period of time. However, this is a very minor quibble. This is PKD and the emphasis is on people, psychology and the human condition. Take the world-building as you find it and concentrate on the characters. They are quirky, flawed and wonderfully drawn. I really enjoyed the interaction and dialogue between the characters. It seemed both unusual and not what you would expect and yet this somehow gave it more of an air of authenticity. Hard to explain, but it was very interesting, as were the numerous internal monologues of the characters as you try to parse through what is strange reality and what is delusion. Still, somehow over the last quarter of the book, I seemed to have lost a bit of momentum for the story and I am not sure why that is. I do know that this book, even more so than The Man in the High Castle , which I liked better, has encouraged me to read more of PKD’s work. There is something special in his stories and I want to continue to search until I find it. What all of the above should tell you is that this novel really deserves its 4th star. If you happen to find it, please let me know. 4.0 3.0 stars. Highly Recommended!!
