Well this one wasn't as impressive. It's actually a rather ugly and sordid story thanks to the middle part when McGee tracks down a suspect hiding out on the island nation of Grenada. Though it did have some good points. It's my third Travis McGee novel and it's definitely a product of it's time - late sixties/early seventies. As has been pointed out by another reviewer this novel smacks of the Macho Man mentality that was very popular at the time.I have encountered a few men who are big believers in the philosophy and I don't like them. More than a few of them are practitioners of domestic battery and I've taken them to jail in the past. I was surprised by how prevalent it was in this story.Oh well it was the start of the Women's Lib movement. Perhaps MacDonald was feeling the sting of the changing times a little and this was his way of pushing back.Still didn't care for this aspect of the storyline. Guess my own experiences play a part in with the uneasy feeling. I was uncomfortable with the way McGee treats the female suspect. He chokes her out not once but twice. Regardless of how the narration is written Attempted Strangulation is very dangerous and one very tiny slip-up can lead to death in just a minute or two.So while I get that McGee is not a shrinking violet in this situation he's playing around with Attempted Murder and it seems out of character for him. Not only is he physically abusive to her, but he's emotionally abusive to her as well. Later he changes his approach to her, but I was left feeling dirty. Perhaps that was the effect MacDonald wanted and if that was his intention he succeeded. Then there is the chartered schooner with the all female crew that works naked and will sleep with the various (male) customers if they so desire. What the hell is that about? There is a real sense of leering and lechery in this novel. It was disconcerting and I was caught flatfooted by it. Like I said I can't help but wonder if Mr. MacDonald was reacting to the changing times. He would have been in his late forties by the time he wrote this novel and sometimes it's hard to deal with dramatic changes as one gets older. I'm forty-four now so I also speak from experience. Another weak point is Travis does a little too much "navel gazing" in the story. Okay he's getting older, is more aware of his mortality and wondering about his future. Okay got it. So lets get on with the story and get past the mid-life crisis please. Now the male villain is good. He's a psychopath who not only kills without any remorse, but enjoys doing it sadistically. He was creepy and his demise is not only appropriate, but poetic considering what he does to other characters in the book. As usual MacDonald shows in this installment that he would do his research before writing. In 2012 we have gotten used to being able to find information without too much effort thanks to information technology - or whatever you want to call it. But in the early seventies it took some effort to find out how real estate and banking worked. There is some fairly arcane information in the story and I appreciate the work that Mr. MacDonald would of had to put in. I also liked his description of Grenada (interesting to think that just twelve years later the U.S. military would invade that island) and found his description of racial politics and the economic conditions in the Caribbean very interesting. As I stated at the beginning of this review there were some good points. The novel starts of strong, but goes off the rails in the middle part when McGee goes to Grenada. However the last third of the book gets back on track when Travis returns to Florida and Meyer joins him in the investigation. However I just can't give it three stars with a clear conscience. However I did really enjoy The Green Ripper . MacDonald wrote twenty-one Travis MacGee novels over a twenty-four year period. That's twenty-one novels that he wrote not a series of ghost writers. That's quite a load and one can't expect a home run every time.
