This is a hard enough book to understand without at least some idea of what the previous books in the series are about. Here is quick summary: Book 1 - Emerald Eyes , pub. 1988. 5 stars. Introduces the genegineered humans, or genies, characterized by green eyes. They win emancipation from the government but are subsequently nuked by the Peacekeepers, or PKF. Several manage to escape. Book 2 - The Long Run , pub. 1989. 5 stars. Features the genie, Trent. The PKF continue their search for the survivors and get on the track of Trent. But Trent takes them on a long, perhaps unlikely chase through Occupied America, the Lagrangians and Luna. Book 3 - (this review), pub. 1993. Book 4 - The A.I. War: The Big Boost , pub. 2010. About a big boost, perhaps? Book 5 - Lord November , only the first 2 chapters are published and available on the author's blog page. In total the supposed plan was for a 30-book series. DKM became a little more ambitious with Book 3, broadening his canvas with more focal characters and expanding the Continuing Time universe back by about 50,000 years. Also, there's quite a few obscure segments which appear to be setups for some future aspect of the story but do not have direct bearing on what takes place in this book. The first part of the book centered on Denice Castanaveras, one of the surviving genies. Her back story is engaging and filled with quirky turns that recalls the story of Trent from Book 2. Next, book 3 introduces Sedon/Obodi, and his hunter Dvan. Both are imbued with some special abilities that allow them to survive through the prehistoric period. There are several other focal characters, and if you are familiar with DKM's style, he constantly switches POV throughout the narrative, making it tough to follow the individual threads. But he does conclude with a monster mash-up similar to that of Book 1, where various forces come into play at the same time and place. While I enjoyed following the experiences of Denice, none of the other characters were interesting or sympathetic enough to engage. This much I can say about DKM's style, he seldom telegraphs his punches and the story can turn dynamic and consequential at unexpected points. That's probably the most enjoyable part of the reading experience for Book 3, the surprise twists. I think if this book had stayed more on Denice that it may have worked a lot better for me. As it is, it is still a good 4 star read.
