3.5 stars, rounding up. So we've got a rechristened Retro Reads GR group (for early- to mid-20th century nostalgic type reads, mostly historical fiction with some mysteries and romances mixed in), and there's an upcoming buddy read of Victoria Holt's Mistress of Mellyn in about two weeks. It sounded kind of fun to me, and I found a big fat omnibus volume of Holt gothic romantic suspense novels on Abebooks: $4 for the hardback of all four novels, and no shipping charge. Score! It arrived in the mail yesterday and I was having a really hard time not jumping the gun on the Mistress of Mellyn BR (I may or may not have read a few chapters). So to distract myself from that one, I opened up Bride of Pendorric , and read the whole thing last night (it's only a couple of hundred pages in this book). It's a pretty classic novel of the gothic romance type, published in 1963 and set in that era. 18 or 19 year old Favel Farrington lives with her widowed artist father on the island of Capri. A 32 year old British man, Roc Pendorric, visits their studio and sweeps Favel off her feet, marrying her a few weeks later in a whirlwind romance. When Favel's father mysteriously dies while swimming in the ocean, Roc takes Favel back to his Cornwall mansion, Pendorric. Roc and everyone else in the area have a habit of calling Favel the latest Bride of Pendorric, and the ominous story soon comes out: some Pendorric brides have died young, and there's a legend that each Bride will haunt their home in turn, until the next young bride dies. Favel is a practical person, so she shrugs it off, or tries to. But soon dangerous accidents (OR ARE THEY?) start to happen, and Favel has no idea who she can trust. And her husband has pretty clearly been keeping some major secrets from her... This is one of the better Victoria Holt novels I've read. She's not a great writer, for my money: she too often tells the story rather than showing it (I never felt any real romantic tension between the main characters), and the pace can get a little plodding. But she's good at building up the suspense, and you feel the confusion of the heroine. I wasn't fond of the large age gap between Favel and Roc, or his occasionally high-handed ways, though you see that kind of thing a lot in these older gothic romances. The mystery here was predictable in one sense but not in another: I spotted the villain early on, but Holt gets points for a late twist that I only saw coming a couple of pages before the big reveal. I've seen this kind of thing in a couple of other mysteries, but this book was written earlier. Recommended for those who like retro gothic romances.
