(Old review) I honestly don't understand why this book is - by almost everyone (as it shows here on Goodreads, for example) - so praised. I read it last year, and I briefly re-read it just now, but the answer still hasn't come up. I simply don't like this book. Sure, as a historical document, The Prince (1513), written by Machiavelli, might be interesting. And it offers us a glimpse of the state of Italy (especially Florence) in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. But I cannot help but cynically remark that people act like this little booklet contains a treasure of revelation on how to live your life. It simply doesn't. As a study of statesmanship, one should read Montesquieu's d'Esprit de Lois, which offers a much more interesting (and complete) historical sketch of types of governments, the rule of law, etc. The Prince touches only on the type of government Machiavelli calls 'principate' (i.e. a republic ruled by a prince), and is rather dull and superficial. The Prince is 'just' 100 or so pages of advice that wasn't asked for. Machiavelli dedicates this book to the new Medicean ruler of Florence, zooming in on how a prince should conduct himself in order to survive. It doesn't (nor should it) take 100 pages to get Machiavelli's message across: the prince should be prudential, opportunistic and strong willed. Or, to paraphrase Machiavelli, the prince should be a fox and a lion at the same time - act agressive to achieve your goals, leave nothing to chance, and when suited play Mr. Nice Guy to deceive. As a piece of advice for modern day readers, it can not get any more base and shallow than that. This might explain the extreme popularity of the book: most people ARE rather base and shallow, and love to read pieces of worthless advice like this. Ignorance is bliss. I can only remark the following: the contents of the book are - unless you are a Medicean ruler of 1513 Florence - not all that interesting (or original, for that matter); the book isn't written well (it reads like a collection of short summaries); and its message is clearly outdated and heavily context-dependent - meaning that copying and pasting its message to life in 2017 isn't all that helpful. If you want to read on how to conduct yourself, study the works of moral philosophers like Plato or Kant. If you want to read on history of statesmen or statesmanship, study (again) Plato, Montesquieu,or de Tocqueville. If you want to read on politics in early 16th century Florence, study Machiavelli's The Prince. But please stop making all this noise about this book, it isn't all that special.
