now and then collects nearly five dozen of gil scott-heron's poems, many of which were also recorded and released on albums spanning three decades. as a musician, poet, proto-rapper, and novelist, the accomplished scott-heron's writing never strayed far from the sociopolitical ramifications of poverty, racism, violence, and empire. many of his poems actually have a greater effect on record, as the rhythm, cadence, and overall essence of his vocal delivery enriches his wordplay. imbued with passion, determination, and an uncanny knack for re-encoding political doublespeak, scott-heron's poems are often incisive and darkly humorous. while some of them may topically dated, their themes remain, sadly, all too timely. work for peace back when eisenhower was the president golf courses was where most of his time was spent so i never paid much attention to what the president said because in general, i believed the general was politically dead, but he always seemed to know how muscles were going to be flexed he kept mumbling something about a military-industrial complex the military and monetary the military and monetary the military and monetary the military and the monetary get together whenever they think its necessary they have turned our brothers and sisters into mercenaries, they are turning the planet into a cemetery. the military and the monetary use the media as intermediaries. they are determined to keep the citizens secondary they make so many decisions that seem arbitrary. we've been standing behind the 'commander-in-chief' who was under a spotlight, shaking like a leaf because the ship of state had landed on an economic reef so we knew he'd be bringing us messages of grief. the military and the monetary were 'shielded' by january and went 'storming' into february. they brought us pot-bellied generals as luminaries. two weeks before i hadn't heard of the sons of bitches and then all of a sudden they were legendary. they took the honor from the honorary they took the dignity from the dignitaries they took the secrets from the secretaries but they left the 'bitch' in 'obituary' yeah, they had some 'smart bombs' but they had some dumb ones as well they scared the hell outta cnn in that baghdad hotel. the military and the monetary the military and monetary the military and monetary get together whenever they think its necessary war in the desert sometimes sure could seem scary but they beamed out the war to all of their subsidiaries tried to make 'so damn insane' (saddam hussein) a worthy adversary keeping all of the citizens secondary scaring old folks into coronaries making us all wonder if all of this was really, truly necessary. we've got to work for peace. we've got to work for peace. if we all believed in peace we could have peace. the only thing wrong with peace is that you can't make no money from it. the military and the monetary get together whenever they think it's necessary they have turned our brothers and sisters into mercenaries we are turning parts of the planet into a cemetery. we hounded the ayatollah religiously, bombed libya and killed qadafi's son hideously. we turned our back on our allies, the panamanians watched ollie north selling guns to the iranians witnessed gorbachev slaughtering lithuanians so we better warn the amish, they may bomb the pennsylvanians. we've got to work for peace. peace ain't coming this way. we've got to work for peace. peace is not (merely) the absence of war it is the absence of the rumors of war and the threats of war and the preparation for war. peace is not (merely) the absence of war we will have all touched the power of peace within ourselves. because we will have all come to peace within ourselves. peace ain't gonna be easy. peace ain't gonna be free. we've got to work for peace.
