O the gallant fisher’s life, It is the best of any! ‘Tis full of pleasure, void of strife And ’tis beloved by many. Sometimes it’s good to go outside your comfort zone and try something completely different. I’ve never been interested in fishing, despite some close friends’ repeated invitations to come along on their trips. Turns out I’ve been a fisherman all my life and didn’t know it. Gus, the young man who is crazy about fishing in this seminal novel, is the one who opened my eyes to the deeper significance of the art. Born on the North Western coast of the US, Gus is the scion of a fishing family where the book of Izaak Walton, provider of my opening quote, is both a source of inspiration and of fiery controversy between his fly-fishing father and his bait-fishing mother. Years before I could have put it into words, I realized that my fate would lead me beside still waters, beside rough waters, beside blue, green, muddy, clear, and salt waters. From the beginning my mind and heart were so taken up with the liquid element that nearly every other thing on the earth’s bulbous face struck me as irrelevant, distracting, a waste of my time. The first part of the story is the bait at the end of the line with which the reader is lured to take a bite and sample the goods. And I for one was captivated: hook, line and sinker! I’ve rarely encountered such exuberance, such joy in the use of language as displayed by the account of young Gus coming into this world and of his growing up in this fantastically competitive and argumentative household. Zounds, Drat and Bother the Bleeding Fates! exclaims his upper class English father, nicknamed H2O by his scion and narrator, every time he is challenged in his purist approach to the art of fly fishing. In the opposite corner sits his mother, a local Portland redneck with an irreverent attitude and a knack for out-fishing her famous husband: “Glum AGIN? Cheer up, boy! Always limpin’ around with a burr in yer ass! Smile, dammit!” Later in the novel, my admiration for the humour and the language was matched by my interest in the elegance and beauty of the allegory between fishing and spiritual emancipation. What could have been a typical coming of age story of a gloomy teenager leaving the family nest and striking out on his own in the wide world, becomes under the pen of David James Duncan a major philosophical treaty about the condition of the modern man in his search for meaning. The theme is spelled out in fishing analogies all through the text, but probably the most clear resume comes in the afterword to the anniversary edition that I’ve read: A migration I see humanity dying to make is not geographical: it’s a journey from lives governed by the head to lives governed by the heart. Gus starts his journey by renouncing a college education in order to rent a solitary cabin in a wild part of Oregon, by the side of a salmon rich river, where he hopes to prove to his father and to his mother that he is the very best fisherman of all. By catching more fish than everybody else, Gus hopes to prove his worth in the eyes of his peers. He has a lot of native talent from his mother, a good training from his father, talent, determination, method: everything he needs to become the perfect scientific angler, the epitome of the Western ethos of Nature being there to be conquered, subdued by the daring pioneer spirit. If the fool had only known how to swim there wouldn’t be any of this seething in my brain – this What-is-Death / What-is-Life / Why-am-I-here / What-am-I-for stuff. What use were such questions? Hobgoblins – that’s all they were – noisy abstract swill good for nothing but scaring and depressing the hell out of everybody they occurred to ... The breaking point of this blind rush into the Guinness Book of Records for Fishing comes when the river in question, just like the young Gus mind, becomes engulfed in a deep fog. Out of this unknown space comes floating by the dead body of a fellow fisherman, prompting the arrival of the Big Questions, those hobgoblins so beloved by the Russian classic novelists. The river is asking Gus already :WHY? But what was the difference between need and greed? How many fish could a man kill without his killing becoming wanton? Which brings me to the third and final reason I am sure this novel will become one of my all time favorites: It doesn’t simply expose the problems faced by modern man, it honestly tries to find a better way forward, both for the individual redemption and for the fate of a finely balanced natural world that has experienced enough pillaging, pollution and waste. The smartest move Gus makes once those hobgoblin questions start to gnaw at his peace of mind is to go out of his shell of self-interest and manic-obsessive career planning and start connecting with the people who live nearby – making friends, giving free of his talent and of his time, offering friendship and asking for help. The change is a bit abrupt, narrative-wise, but this novel is after all an allegory, not a true biography. What’s more, Gus is a fisherman, and we all know that the second best thing these people love is to tell stories, the more incredible and far-fetched, the better. Happy / curious Gus is a lot more enchanting than gloomy / fishing obsessed Gus. The portraits of the oddball neighbors and the funny sketches that introduce them mark a return to the more effervescent pages from the debut of the novel. What’s changed is this deep undercurrent of spiritual thirst and social engagement that is driving Gus to further explore the limits of his understanding of the world. Some of the pages are still filled with funny anecdotes about fishing and living like a savage in the middle of nowhere, but there’s a lot of pain when Gus looks up at the clear-cut mountain tops, at the rivers blocked for fish by concrete dams or suffocated by suburban or industrial waste. The change of heart in young Gus is clearly reflected in his new rants about the smug ingratitude, the attitude that assumed the world and its creatures owed us everything we could catch, shoot, tear out, alter, plunder, devour ... and we owed the world nothing in return. One of the key new characters introduced in this middle part of the novel is Titus, a wannabee city fisherman with an extraordinary knack for literary references. The meeting between Gus and Titus goes something like this: “So if you’re willing to risk your life initiating me into the mysteries of fishing, the least I could do in return is introduce you to the forgotten science of philosophy. What do you say?” I shrugged. “What have I got to lose?” “Your unhappiness,” he said. Human interaction can take you a long way on the path to a healthy mind and spirit, but we as modern men are also blessed with easy access to the wisdom of past ages. We have only ourselves to blame if we close our minds to the writings of these great thinkers, preferring instead to fill them with cheap escapist thrills, competitive sports, political propaganda or reality shows. Gus, under the tutelage of his new friend, is drinking deeply from this fountain of wisdom, reminded that the word philosophy translates as a love for thinking. I soon found myself eyeing the covers of unknown books with the same sense of expectancy I felt when scrutinizing the waters of a new stream. Almost as strong an influence as Titus is Bill Bob, the geeky little brother of our hero Gus, the only one in the family completely immune to the fishing virus. If Titus is a symbol of the life of the intellect, Bill Bob is cast as the avatar of common sense and innocence. The little boy reiterates the need for listening to the heart, for a faith in a higher purpose than the immediate needs of living day to day. Bill Bob, with his multiple and divergent hobbies, is also the best illustration of a passion for all thing living or inanimate, a burning curiosity that knows no bounds. Closing the middle section of the novel is the third encounter that would shape the future life of fisherman Gus – the most elusive and the most alluring bait in every young man’s imagination: I wasn’t used to looking at such things, let alone in trees, let alone fishing, let alone slender and golden-skinned and young and blond and solitary and, um – the pole. Love comes knocking at his door, but unfortunately Gus spent most of his youth blinded by his obsession with fishing instead of honing his social skills, so this slippery eel of a girl named Eddy escapes his clutches. The third and final part of the book returns to an introspective mood. Gus, now sustained by his new friends, nevertheless turns his eyes inwards and makes a solitary journey, similar in many ways to the myth of the Hero of a Thousand Faces described by Joseph Campbell or Mircea Eliade, towards the source of all wisdom, the hidden spring of his river WHY? They were not much like the usual sacred signs – but fishing was hardly an orthodox faith ... And these things had been given as gifts – like rain, like rivers – unlooked for, unasked for: I had to follow the signs that I was given, as rivers follow valleys, as spring follows winter, as leaves turn and salmon spawn and geese fly south in October. I couldn’t trade the trail these images blazed for me for a straight and narrow way – not when water’s ways, meandering and free flowing, had always been my love. Organized religion and blind faith are some of the other things that smell fishy to me and often prompt me to give such material a wide detour, but I do believe in the need for self-examination, in the need for a higher purpose in life and in finding your own individual way to salvation. David James Duncan, through the voice of Gus, surprised me a little by turning the novel into a late argument for the existence of a Biblical sort of God, but the spiritual search among the mountain tops, deep glades, clear rivers and ocean shores, in the fall of a gentle rain or in the jump of a fish out of the waves, is a clear echo of my own journey from big city to forest or mountain trail whenever I need to recharge my batteries. What I lack in articulating my passion for nature and life is the eloquence of a Gus or Duncan, who went through the valley of shadow and brought back not a message of despair but one of beauty and hope. I awoke before dawn. The morning star was twinkling through the same opening in the cedars and the world was too wide and lovely to leave unexplored. in another place: What I realized was that a mecca isn’t worth much if it’s not a place inside you more than a place in the world. the source is everywhere I am a little envious of Gus going though his moment of revelation at such a young age and coming back down from the mountain to enjoy the fruits of his spiritual quest. But I think he deserves a good break from the author, a final message that there might be a lot of pain in the world today, but there are still beautiful people around, and beautiful rivers where the salmon are still making their yearly pilgrimage against the tides of fate in order to lay the foundation for a new generation. It’s a very fragile ecosystem that needs our care and our love. ... yet while the rain fell I didn’t fish – only watched and rested, and I was lulled and cradled, caressed, and enveloped in a cool, mothering touch that washed away the wounds of summer; and my old, unmitigated longings – even the longings for fish, for Eddy, for the Friend – were changed from gnawing, aching dissatisfactions into a kind of sad, silent music, and the hollow place those longings had carved in me became a kind of sanctuary, an emptiness I grew used to, grew satisfied to leave unfilled. >>><<<>>><<< Bohumil Hrabal wrote somewhere that “If a book has anything to say, it burns with a quiet laugh, because any book worth its salt points up and out of itself.” David James Duncan has wisely provided for us the clues for continuing the search by including in each chapter heading an epigram or two from his favorites writers, poets and sources of inspiration. Beside the often quoted Izaak Walton, I’ve bookmarked several references that tempt me strongly. A poem by W B Yeats: “The Song of Wandering Aengus” or a quote by W H Auden : ‘A culture is no better than its woods.’ or new authors to look up like Alice Likowski or Jim Harrison. Of course, the other novel written by David James Duncan has also become a priority for me.
