“Hearts in Atlantis” by Stephen King is one hell of an anthology I regret not reading sooner. It might not have the usual amount of horror found in King’s novels, but it's still an incredible story that comes together perfectly. It's broken into mini-stories, and how it all came together is pretty wild. It was nothing short of sheer brilliance. Before I start my review, I found two main trigger warnings while reading. They were… - Bullying - Rape If either of these triggers you, please do not read this novel. Right off the bat, I loved how King dropped some incredible references throughout these stories. I grew up with “Lord of the Flies,” and seeing that theme throughout “Hearts in Atlantis” was awesome. I also grew up with that legendary 80s movie “Flash Gordon,” which was a great reference to read, and “The Exorcist,” which still produces nightmares. This starts with the short story “Low Men in Yellow Coats,” which was my favorite since it helped fill even more gaps in my journey to The Dark Tower. In case you didn’t know, I am in the process of doing all sorts of pre-reading before finally reading the entire Dark Tower series. If you’d like to do something similar in your reading adventures, after extensive research and speaking to some of the biggest Constant Readers I know, here’s my exact reading journey... The Stand The Eyes of the Dragon Insomnia Hearts in Atlantis ‘Salem’s Lot The Talisman Black House Everything's Eventual (The Little Sisters of Eluria) The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three The Dark Tower III: The Waste Lands Charlie the Choo-Choo The Dark Tower IV: Wizard and Glass The Dark Tower: The Wind Through the Keyhole The Dark Tower V: Wolves of the Calla The Dark Tower VI: Song of Susannah The Dark Tower VII: The Dark Tower Going back to the start of this anthology, I enjoyed Bobby’s character the most, as he was so relatable as a kid. To see his development throughout this anthology was wonderful. Don’t worry—I would never spoil anything for anyone—but seeing some recurring characters throughout each story was a great touch by King. I also loved all the subtle graphics in the chapters, adding another immersion layer. Besides, this had some horror mystery vibes trying to figure out what was happening with these mysterious “low men” in their yellow coats. It’s a genuine page-turner, and even though I would have wanted more scary moments, it’s still a fantastic story from beginning to end. Besides Bobby, Ted was another intriguing character who left me baffled for the most part. His development was also prominent since this journey to The Dark Tower has built up many character connections with me from the books I’ve read. Being a Constant Reader for over 25 years, I love all these connections, potential tie-ins, and, hopefully, return appearances by these incredible characters in the future. I’m so excited! This is especially true since all the references to The Dark Tower, The Crimson King, and even Randall Flagg found in “Hearts in Atlantis” were great. I love learning about all these characters and what will prepare me for The Dark Tower. I would consider this “required reading” for those also traveling there. This was a fantastic read, and King once again proves why he’s a master storyteller, even without copious amounts of horror. It’s an excellent anthology with recurring characters for one hell of a connected story that, in the end, filled me with joy. It was an incredible and memorable reading experience that I’ll remember for many years. I give “Hearts in Atlantis” by Stephen King a 5/5 for being another anthology that delivered and then some. I would have loved more horror here, but there’s still enough to enjoy it. As a reminder, pay close attention to all the main characters you encounter in each story as their journey continues into the next one. I’m sure this won’t be the last time I see some of them, as they could be awaiting my arrival at The Dark Tower. Now, if you’ll excuse me, I’m done trying to find low men in yellow coats since it’s time for my next reading adventure. I already read “‘Salem’s Lot” in 2021, so I’ll skip that and search for a Talisman.
