Nervous is one of many fiction novels by Zane. I chose this book because my friends and I have been trying to read any of her books that we come across. After reading Addicted I had to read this one too, especially since I had been left out of the numerous conversations about it. I of course was the only one whom had yet to read it. The protagonist Jonquinette a young successful and beautiful Black woman. As the title entails she is very nervous, especially when it pertains to dealing with those of the opposite sex. Naturally she has no boyfirend. She tries hard to avoid men all together. The only problem is she keeps blacking out and waking up covered in the scent of a man, well several different men. Everyone, including Zane's audiance and excepting all but two characters in the novel (none of the two are Jon) are aware of what's going on. All Jon knows is that she has had these black outs since she was young but she hadn't always woken up with the smell of a man or men on her body and the more it happens, the more she starts to worry. She goes to sexual addiction meetings but feels so out of place because as far as she is concerned, she is a virgin. We know that she has a split personality that is the total opposite of Jon. Her name is Jude. Jude is the promiscuous beautiful black woman that is concerned with nothing other than having sex as much as she can before Jon "wakes up". Finally after a couple nights of running out of the meetings in tears she is confronted by a fellow member, Zoe Reynard. Zoe offers to talk to Jon if she feels comfortable and refers her to the doctor that helped her through all of her problems. Nervous about going to see a shrink and to embarrassed to go back to the meetings Jon continues on with life as if nothing is going on. Just then a handsom man named Mason moves into her apartment building there is a mutual affinity but Jon is too nervous to let anything blossom between the two. Jude of course unhappy about the situation instigates more problems for Jon. After a couple run ins with Mason her black outs occur more often and she finally decides to start seing the shrink, Dr. Marcella, and Jude stars causing even more problems for her. Dr. Marcella uncovers the dark secrets from Jon's past and lets Jon in on it. More and more twists are revealed through out the novel. The plot continues on to unveil why Jude is there. The plot also follows the turbulent relationshop between Mason and Jon. Oh and there is a HUGE plot twist in the end that you will have to just read to figure out. As Jon struggles with man vs. man and man vs. self conflicts of her past and present she looks for how to deal with them for a better future. Meanwhile, sex, nervousness, fear, love, and secrets are all reoccuring motifs and symbols throughout the novel. Jude knows something is wrong but she doesn't know what. She also knows that she cannot always go through life being deathl affraid of men her whole life or she'll miss out on one of the few good ones left, Mason. Zane writes in a very informal manner making this book an easy read. She writes in first person for all characters and also takes on a thord person point of view at times to add elemets of curiosity that later evolve into plot twists. She wastes little time with elaborate discription but the images are far from difficult to image because of the settings she chooses for her story. The book reads fast giving it the feeling of a movie. Its an attention grabber and keeper. Zane really utillizes elements of suspense and surprise to keep the readers' attentions. Each character's different personality is displayed through the context of their chapters. By reading what is written it is obvious exactly who is talking (which comes in handy for the HUGE plot twist). When a page is filled with profanity and talk about sex, without a doubt it's Jude talking. If a page reads with a calm comforting tone, without a doubt it's Dr. Marcella. All of these factors do contribute to an interesting read, but it does take away from the depth of the characters. So though it may be an interesting read and it makes you think there is nothing intellectually compelling that one could take away form this book. It's purely "for your entertainment". I would recommend it to a mature audiance that wants to be kept interested or is looking for something that will entertain and not hurt the brain. It's a fun book and a quick read. i enjoyed it. :) This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
