I’ve boxed myself into reviewing Pendergast books using food comparisons, which, fortunately, is not an overly restrictive framework (I mean, I’m only on book five, so haven’t had to start reaching for okra or polenta just yet), but has, thus far, been influenced by whatever I’ve eaten most recently that seems even remotely applicable. (Another reason I haven’t busted out okra or polenta, incidentally, because eating those things just seems ridiculous. I refuse.) Fortunately, the stars aligned well in this instance—I’ve been housing a ton of pizza lately, which seems apropos for a book set, at least in part, in Italy. Here’s the thing about pizza, though: pizza quality can vary wildly, not unlike the multiple storylines within this book (see what I did there?). See, sometimes you get John’s of Bleecker Street, some of the most sublime pie you’ve ever had. The method of the murderer (did the devil REALLY do it??), the historical backdrop in Italy, the burgeoning friendship between Pendergast and D’Agosta…these are the tastiest parts of the story, and worthy of what you’d get in that fabled West Village pizzeria. (For those of you wrinkling your faces because you’re Chicago-style fans, just sub in the word “Gino’s” for John’s, okay? I won’t judge or argue.) Other parts of the story, though, are more like your favorite local pizza joint—good, sure, but , unless you live in New York (or Chicago), you’re probably getting something that is perfectly satisfying, but not the best you’ve ever had. That’s other elements of the story: the weird preacher in the park subplot, the wacky supporting characters, and Pendergast’s entertaining but often absurd knack for getting out of impossible situations. Then, of course, there’s freezer pizza. Which, let’s face it, is barely pizza, but it’s what you eat if you NEED something pizza-like and have no other option at 3 AM. In this case, that’s the semi-icky romance between D’Agosta and Hayward, the occasionally clunky dialogue, and most aspects of the villain (who I won’t say anything about to avoid spoilers). (Incidentally, I’m ignoring things like the pizza they serve in elementary school cafeterias, which the FDA has determined is not, in fact, pizza, but is actually a corpse hand covered in mozzarella-flavored cheez food snack product. There are no circumstances under which it should be given to a growing child for whom nutrition is paramount, unless one is grooming said child to be a flesh-eating zombie, in which case it is acceptable, but less preferable than almost any other form of decaying human body parts.) I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again: Preston and Child are as technically proficient a pair of thriller writers as there is on the market, so even when they stretch in different directions (occasionally a little awkwardly) in an effort to broaden the canvas on which they can paint this series, they don’t lose sight of what they came to do, which is write an entertaining page turner that never lets up. Worth a read if you’re a fan of the series, but definitely start with the predecessors before you jump into this one. (One note on Pendergast: he continues to evolve into more of an action hero, moving beyond his Sherlockian roots to become something more akin to a highly intelligent and eccentric James Bond in this book, albeit Bond mixed with a shirtless, drawling Matthew McConaughey. It’s odd. Yet, compelling.)
