This review is of “Prairie Embrace” by Rosanne Bittner. The Story: “Prairie Embrace” begins with an introduction to the heroine of the book, Cathryn Elaine “Katie” Russell, 19. Katie and her new husband, Ezra Russell, have moved from Illinois to Nebraska to farm on former Indian reservation land. The Russell’s marriage is not a happy one, as Ezra emotionally, mentally, physically and sexually abuses Katie endlessly. The only bright spot in Katie’s horrid life is meeting Sioux-Cheyenne Indian warrior Tohave, 26, the hero of the book. Katie and Tohave become clandestine lovers and they plan to run away together. Those plans are thwarted, however, when Katie is attacked by six bandits who had an earlier run-in with Tohave. Tohave and his braves kill four of the bandits, but one who survives lies and says Tohave and his men did the act. When Tohave tries to take the bodies of the bandits to the Army, he and his men are attacked; Tohave is shot and seriously wounded. He asks that Katie be told he is dead, even though he is not. Katie later gives birth to a son. As the book comes to a close, Ezra dies after an accident, leaving Katie a widow. A soldier named Will Rogers falls in love with Katie, but she discovers that Tohave is still alive, and she goes to be with him and they have their Happily Ever After. Upside: Ms. Bittner’s books are meticulously researched, and she effortlessly weaves actual historical events in with her characters. Ms. Bittner always touches my emotions with her evocative, lyrical writing. Downside: Despite all of the above, which is typical of her writing, Ms. Bittner never made me feel a connection with her characters in “Prairie Embrace.” While I certainly empathized and sympathized with Katie for all she endured with Ezra, I didn’t find very much of a connection or chemistry between Katie and Tohave. The characters were not as fully developed. Katie and Tohave’s romance is more “slow burn” than “hot passion.” Sex: There was a little more spark to Ms. Bittner’s love scenes than she usually shows, but just a little. Violence: Frequent readers of Ms. Bittner’s work know that there is plenty of violence in her work, and she doesn’t change that here. Assault, rape, and killings are woven throughout the book. Sadly, much of the former two are directed at Katie. Bottom Line: “Prairie Embrace” is nowhere near as good as Ms. Bittner’s gold standard “Savage Destiny” series. Only her writing style compels me to give the book 4 stars. Without that, I would give it a lower rating. Show more
