Not very impressive. So far, I've liked all the Norah Hess novels I've read, but this one was an exception. At first, I thought it would be good, but then it did a downhill slide. The (so-called) H, Hunter, was a real wimp, and not too bright, either. His first wife cheats on him, he forgives her in on time at all, then she runs off with the guy she cheated with, then has the gall to return to Hunter when the guy dumps her, and to top it off, she's pregnant, with no idea whose the baby daddy. (She was about to give birth and was repentant, but still....). After she dies, he accepts the baby girl as his own (which she turns out to be), but leaves her for five years with an unscrupulous Native woman who has the hots for him, and no idea how to take care of a child. This guy is TSTL! (He didn't even name the little girl!) When he finally comes home and grows a pair, he gets rid of the vengeful, abusive woman and then hires Blaze, an outlaw's daughter off a wagon train, to care for his daughter, but because of propriety (not to mention the fact that everyone's ready to think her a tramp because she got help on the trail from two young men), she insists he marry her first, but wants it to be in name only. He agrees, reluctantly, but insists she stay away from other men. (He was the lawman who captured her father's gang, and assumes she was a camp follower. he even assumed her late grandfather was one of her lovers, talk about dumb!) She, in turn, insists he stay away from other women, not stopping to consider how ridiculous it all is. For someone desperate for a job and a place to live, she's really not in any position to make demands. Not sleeping with him is one thing, but why should she care what he does if it's not a real marriage? If anything, she'd be grateful that it'd keep him away from her. Aside from doing a great job with his daughter, whom she had to teach English, since she knew only Arapaho, (she even named the girl, for goodness sake), she's having trouble getting along with her hubby (big surprise) and at first, her cooking is a disaster. Mr. Stupid informs her she has to cook for all the ranch hands, and she answers that by beating him up. Yes, I'm serious, she started going berserk and punching him, and he just took it. another guy would have grabbed her, slung her over his shoulder, and dumped her in some nearby water to cool off, but not this wimp! He already got beaten up good by one of the brothers who helped Blaze on the wagon train, because Hunter misunderstood a situation and while he started the fight, he sure as hell couldn't finish it! Not your typical H, by a longshot. I'm guessing beneath his jeans he wears a pair of pink bloomers. (I won't give everything away, but I can't help adding that, toward the end, when Blaze needs him and he should save the day, he gets beat up again! Talk about a loser! No wonder his first wife slept with another man, she didn't have one to begin with.) The rest is a lot of silly nonsense, like when the proprietor of the local whorehouse turns out to be one of Blaze's former "stepmothers", and she goes there to care for her when she's sick, despite promising Hunter she'd stay away from the place. He finds out, accuses her of being just like her friend, and she suddenly blurts out that she's a virgin! And he asks why she didn't tell him! Well, why didn't he ask? Suddenly, after all the accusations, he believes her and is sorry. Give me a break! The rest was so irritating, I just skipped through it. Save yourself the time and don't bother at all.
