Nicole Brossard entered the ranks of the BURIED , a young member though she be, by the gracious hand of Ali. Québécoise, female, lesbian, feminist, metafictionist, experimentalist, postmodernist, formalist; however you parse it her demographic does not lead her to best-selling status. Mauve Desert is her most-read book here on goodreads. “Formalist” was the word which caught my eye. Here’s the novel :: we have three sections to the novel Mauve Desert by Nicole Brossard ; the first is a novel called Mauve Desert by Laure Angstelle about a 15 year old, Melanie, driving through the desert interspersed with chapters about a man who was present at the Los Alamos atomic tests ;; the second section finds the translator, Maude Laures, overwhelmed with this novel, having been reading it for two years and finally deciding to translate it--this second section, the largest of the three, consists of her notes toward a translation-- recreating and reimagining the places & things, the characters, the scenes, and the dimensions of the novel by Angstelle ;;; the final section is the novel, Mauve, the Horizon by Laure Angstelle translated by Maude Laures. Thus we have the novel Mauve Desert three times, with Laures the translator standing in as the figure of a reader entering a novel, the work required to translate the novel from page to a mind enthralled in the reading experience. I’m not one to speak often about an author’s prose. I don’t really know how to go about it. It seems a little like speaking of a poet’s poesy or music’s musicness; it either achieves what it sets for itself or it doesn’t; it either aspires or it expires. Nevertheless, there was something which I found cloying and a bit brittle in the sentences in this novel by Brossard. What is it exactly? I have guesses like ‘a feminine version of the muscular prose of Hemingway, as I’ve heard tell’ or something similar to the mind-dimming essayism in Musil’s unpublished notes to his meisterstuck which causes the eyes to glass over or there is something extremely quotable about each and every sentence but which when finally quoted and out of context simply falls into a dust of non-grasping. So here’s a not-quite random example from the Melanie section of Angstelle’s book :: I was fifteen and I’m talking about fear, for fear, one thinks about it only after the fact. Precise fear is beautiful. Perhaps it is possible after all to fantasize fear like a blind spot producing a craving for eternity, like a hollow imaginary moment leaving in the pit of the stomach a powerful sensation, a renewed effect of ardor. Now, I don’t really know what that means. It sort of falls apart and slides off the page; when I look at it my eyes start to glaze over encountering phrases like “a blind spot producing a craving for eternity.” Some folks really dig this kind of prose and I’m not about to say something about it being bad prose. I only want to suggest that whatever you make of the prose, you can’t hold Brossard responsible for it. It is, first, the words of a 15 year old who has a penchant for driving fast in the desert. Second, the words are found in a novel by someone else, namely Laure Angstelle. The remaining two sections of the novel are the responsibility, if I’ve accounted correctly for the changes of voice between first-second-third, of the translator Maude Laures. Nothing in Mauve Desert by Nicole Brossard is the responsibility of Nicole Brossard. These are other consciousnesses dwelling upon the page. It is this framing device--classically formalist--which appeals to me. The prose I can take or leave; I mean I’ll take it all, every sentence stacked high and altogether, bound into a whole, such binding and assembling being the writer’s (Brossard’s) task.
