Today, most people know Ken Follett as the author of mammoth works of historical fiction. I mean, we’re talking novels that would make War and Peace turn and run like Napoleon’s troops from Moscow. (See what I did there?) It’s a known fact that you can construct a home able to withstand an F5 tornado solely from copies of Pillars of the Earth , World Without End and Fall of Giants . (Note: this house will not have doors, windows, a roof, or the ability to withstand an F5 tornado). Before he started authoring 1,000-page beasts populated with dozens of characters and crammed with historical tidbits, Ken Follett was known for his thrillers, including Eye of the Needle , his breakout hit. Published in 1978, Eye of the Needle weighs in at a trim 330 pages (in trade paperback), features three main characters, and gets to its point with the precision of a Swiss watch, or at least a very well-run subway system. Eye of the Needle is filled with Follett hallmarks: paper-thin characters who exist solely to fulfill plot-derived motivations; dialogue that is mostly expository, but veers towards the excruciating when touching on matters of the heart; and, most important of all, anatomically-precise sex scenes. Set during World War II, the main character of Eye of the Needle is a German spy named Henry Faber. Faber is known as “die Nadel” – the Needle – because his weapon of choice is a stiletto, which is a knife with a long, slender blade. He is your typical Nordic superman: [A] fine figure of a man: tall, quite heavy around the neck and shoulders, not a bit fat, with long legs. And he had a strong face, with a high forehead and a long jaw and bright blue eyes… Faber is quite skilled with his stiletto, which he proves early in the book. And it makes perfect sense that Faber, who exudes lethal sexiness, would choose as his weapon what amounts to a sharp, steel penis. The plot kicks into gear quickly, when Faber learns about Operation Fortitude, a real-life counterespionage operation undertaken by the Allies on the eve of D-Day. Operation Fortitude used leaks of fake information, dummy tanks and equipment, and meaningless wireless traffic to fool the Germans into thinking that the invasion of Europe would come at Calais, instead of Normandy. Faber learns of the deception and realizes its vital importance. With dogged MI5 agents on his trail, Faber attempts to escape England and deliver the news to Hitler. Meanwhile, there is a parallel story involving David and Lucy Rose. David is a dashing young RAF officer (was there any other kind?), and Lucy is his beautiful bride. They have an awkward first sexual encounter, because apparently British people do not know how to have sex. (For proof, please read Ian McEwan’s Chesil Beach ). This is enough to get Lucy pregnant. Shortly thereafter, David gets in a car wreck, putting him in a wheelchair. Later, they move to a secluded island off the coast of Scotland. It’s called Storm Island. (Hey, honey, where should we live? How about Storm Island? Sounds nice!) It’s not giving too much away to tell you that Faber ends up on Storm Island with David and Lucy. I also hope I’m not ruining anything by revealing that Faber and Lucy develop “feelings” for each other. This won’t come as a surprise to anyone who’s read Lady Chatterley’s Lover , which is explicitly mentioned several times, and is paid homage in the love triangle between the crippled husband, lovelorn wife, and virile male interloper. (And just in case you don’t pick up on the Chatterley angle, Lucy exclaims “Now I know what Lawrence means” after receiving cunnilingus for the first time. The combination of execrable dialogue and a sex scene so detailed it’d make a doctor blush is Follett at his most enjoyable. I mean that sincerely). Whatever his shortcomings as a writer (and frankly, he’s always readable), Follett is a master storyteller. In Eye of the Needle , he is especially good at placing his fictional character into a fascinating, true-life context (especially one that might not be known to casual fans of history). It is a testament to Follett’s plotting that, despite knowing the overall outcome of the novel (the Allies successfully invaded Normandy and won World War II), you will tear through the book to see how it ends. Of course, when it does end, you will probably feel vaguely unsatisfied, and maybe a little dirty, but that’s to be expected. You don’t read a Follett thriller to be intellectually nourished. You read a Follett thriller for the twists and turns, the outbursts of violence, and the it-leaves-nothing-to-the-imagination sexual encounters.
