“We call them dumb animals, and so they are, for they cannot tell us how they feel, but they do not suffer less because they have no words.” ~ First Read- 2013 ~ ~Second Read- 2021 ~ ~First Rating- 4 stars ~ ~Second Rating- 5 stars ~ Content / Trigger Warnings- Animal Cruelty Note- I have tried to include all the content warnings that I noticed, but there is no guarantee that I haven’t missed something. -Mention of some of these in the review- “There is no religion without love, and people may talk as much as they like about their religion, but if it does not teach them to be good and kind to man and beast, it is all a sham - all a sham, James, and it won't stand when things come to be turned inside out and put down for what they” Black Beauty , a beautiful horse, has spent his youth in a loving home , surrounded by friends and cared for by his owners. But when his circumstances change, he learns that not all humans are so kind . This book, told from the perspective of a horse, is about Black Beauty's experiences in his different homes. “It is good people who make good places.” I read Black Beauty for the first time when I was a kid. I recall picking up a dusty old copy from my school library, and finding the idea of a book told from the perspective of a horse intriguing. I remember being enchanted by the story, flipping through pages with curiosity, and being very interested in what Black Beauty had to say. I was horrified by the wicked way he was treated, and my face burned with fury at every monstrosity he went through. “Do you know why this world is as bad as it is?... It is because people think only about their own business, and won't trouble themselves to stand up for the oppressed, nor bring the wrong-doers to light... My doctrine is this, that if we see cruelty or wrong that we have the power to stop, and do nothing, we make ourselves sharers in the guilt.” On my reread- around seven years later , I still felt the same way, but I also felt so much more. I noticed how despite this book being a book about animal cruelty, it was a also a display of society , as most classics are. It shows us that if are 'different' in any way, we will be belittled and mocked. We will be criticized, our ideas will be dismissed and we will be considered 'separate' from the rest, for no reason other than just existing. We will be the Black Beauties of the world, and everyone else will disregard us. They will not see our strength or our courage. They will think of us as unimportant. As weak. Or at least, that's my interpretation of it. “What right had they to make me suffer like that?” Black Beauty made me question and think a lot about animals. I've never been a huge animal lover, but I'd never thought much about the struggles animals go through before reading this book . It enlightened me on several things, and even though this book was written years ago, I believe it is relevant even today . “Master said, God had given men reason, by which they could find things out for themselves; but he had given animals knowledge which did not depend on reason, and which was more prompt and perfect in it's way, and by which they had often saved the lives of men.” Maybe if I revisit this book in a few years, my thoughts will change. Or maybe they will remain the same. But there is no denying, that Black Beauty is an impactful story, in spite of being a simple tale . Most importantly, its a reflection of how some humans treat animals. It provides an insight on how we sometimes ignore the feelings of others for our own selfish needs. It is in my opinion, a masterpiece. “This horse has got a good master, and he deserves it.” Review written on 21st January, 2022. DISCLAIMER- All opinions on books I’ve read and reviewed are my own, and are with no intention to offend anyone. If you feel offended by my reviews, let me know how I can fix it. How I Rate- 1 star- Hardly liked anything/ was disappointed 2 star- Had potential but did not deliver/ was disappointed 3 stars- Was ok but could have been better/ was average / Enjoyed a lot but something was missing 4 stars- Loved a lot but something was missing 5 stars- Loved it/ new favourite .............................. 5 stars again. Loved my reread. Review to come.
