Invitation to the Game was my first exposure to the YA / Sci Fi / Fantasy worlds of English / Canadian author Monica Hughes and I was pleasantly surprised at how much I enjoyed the story. Invitation is set in a dystopian future where a group of teenagers have just graduated from the Government School. The story is told by one of these teens, Lisse. Now that they are finished school, they are sent off on their own. Some, like Benta and Richard, are returned to their parents, Benta to work on their farm and Richard to become a psychologist at his father's business. The others, a group of eight are sent to the city, to their Designated Area (DA). This group is the focus of the story, although Benta and Richard will eventually be reunited with them. Scylla is sort of their mother figure. She gets them organized in the dark, damaged, gloomy city, finding a building they can make their own, using their talents to scrounge furniture and everything they need to make it a secure, safe place for them to live. They all have their own particular talents. Gradually, the group begins to explore their new DA, going out at night, being threatened, finding out about the city. They begin to hear about The Game, something that only a few are invited to participate in. Eventually a letter is dropped through their door slot and it contains an invitation, plus tokens for each member so they can travel to the location at the edge of the city where they can 'play' the game. They meet another group but they are either unable or unwilling to explain the game to Lisse's group. It seems to be some sort of computer simulation where they are dropped into some location where they have to find clues to the Prize. But it's all very vague and there are long gaps between sessions. They being to research how to survive in distant locations, begin exercising to get in shape as there is a great deal of walking in their 'simulated world'. The group dynamic will change and the eventually the setting of this 'world' will change as well as what they are expected to do. I don't want to ruin the story as the build up and eventual resolution are such an important part of the resolution. Hughes creates a fascinating world and wonderful characters. Each are individuals with their own personalities, weaknesses and strengths. The premise made me think of other stories, Ready Player One was my first thought, but as this story progresses, it's actually quite different. It flows nicely, has a few very nice little twists and turns and ultimately ends quite satisfactorily. I enjoyed very much. It's enjoyable for adults, I think, and for teens who want to explore Sci Fi. It was written in 1990 but still holds up 30+ years later. I will continue to explore Hughes' work. (4.5 stars)
