The first story, "The Roaring Trumpet," ends rather abruptly, with everyman hero Shea essentially being ejected from the Norse Saga like a flushed turd. Both character and concept get a makeover in "The Mathematics of Magic;" whereas Shea was initially the source of hapless comic relief, here a "bumbling old man scientist" sidekick type in the form of Doc Chalmers fills in that role, leaving Shea to become a more respectable wisecracking hero. The story itself makes Elizabethan poetry seem downright exciting, as is evident in the fact that Gary Gygax lifted creatures and magic concepts (and even something akin to "random encounters") from it for Dungeons & Dragons. This is also my favorite story as it's the one with the funniest bits, such as when Shea embarrasses the Blatant Beast into submission by reciting the words to "The Ballad of Eskimo Nell." Speaking of which, there sure are some racy bits in these stories, considering the years they were published. I was less of a fan of "The Castle of Iron," which runs a little too long, with a meandering plot, too many characters, stagnant points when one wishes the characters would get to where they were heading already, and a silly parody of "Muslim speak" that's immediately embarrassing and tiresome. In "the Roaring Trumpet" the concept of enchantment (the so-called "mathematics of magic," though math really doesn't have much to do with it) is introduced in an organic, fascinating way, and I wish future stories reflected more on literally the one thing that separates the Enchanter stories from similar genre yarns of the period. I guess there's enough bad verse already, though. Similarly undeveloped is Shea's psychologist profession, which he doesn't seem to give a shit about. Why not, then, making him a mathematician? Or a veterinarian, for all that it matters? But these are hardly set up to be reflective, deep-thinkin' literature; all the men are horn dogs and the plots are as subtle as a Bob Hope "road to..." movie. In fact, despite their faults, the Enchanter tales are still scores better than most similar stories from the period because of their irreverent sense of humor. Nobody takes anything too seriously so why should you? Also I think I'm in love with Belphebe, the skilled and somewhat stoic archer/survivalist Shea ends up marrying. Fun fact: L Ron Hubbard tried to kill off Shea haphazardly in one of his novels. My copy comes from the book nook of a Gainesville Inn taken in happier times.
