It was an ordinary day, a Friday, twenty minutes till lunchtime, five hours till quitting time and the weekend, ten months till vacation, thirty-seven years till retirement. Then the phone rang. Simon Morley is a graphic artist in New York around 1970, caught in a boring job doing advertisement drawings for moderate pay. He is just about ready for an adventure, anything to escape his predictable and unappealing current lifestyle. The mystery caller offers him the opportunity of a lifetime : to travel back in time and witness history in the making. It seems Simon has the right temperament and psychological profile to take part in a secret government project that can send a person back to a certain, well documented, moment of the past. For 'Si' Morley, this moment is New York, in the year 1882. It may be that the strongest instinct of the human race, stronger even than sex or hunger, is curiosity: the absolute need to know. It can and often does motivate a lifetime, it kills more than cats, and the prospect of satisfying it can be the most exciting of emotions. So Simon accepts the offer and goes into intensive training sessions with a select team of historians and psychologists, immersing himself completely into the target period and deploying auto-hypnosis to convince his brain that he is living in 1882 just by wishing it into existence. It sounds familiar because the same method of time travel is used in a novel by Richard Matheson I read earlier this year ("Somewhere in Time"). Finney wrote his story a few years before Matheson, and both of them may have been inspired by even earlier novels using hypnosis to alter reality. Motivation-wise, Matheson's hero is driven by passion for a woman he sees in an ancient portrait, while Simon is led by curiosity and a thirst for adventure, with the romantic elements taking much longer to develop and being in general less convincing. Both heroes travel back to about the same year of the past, one to San Diego, one to New York. Another common element between the two time travel stories is the observation that we may have gained some material benefits from the accelerated industrial development of the twentieth century, but we have lost on the social and personal accomplishments scale. According to Simon, people were happier in the past: Faces don't have that look now; when alone they're blank, and closed in. I passed people in pairs or larger groups who were talking, sometimes laughing, occasionally more or less animated; but only as part of the group. They were shut off from the street around them, alien and separate from the city they lived in, suspicious of it, and that's not how New York was in the eighties. Finney goes even further in his condemnation of the modern world, building an argument for actually 'living in the past' and rejecting his selfish and the profit oriented contemporaries. the biggest issue being an attempt to use the newly discovered method of time travel for military and political purposes instead of the original goal of gathering knowledge and observing without interference with history. It is becoming more and more certain, as science uses an almost brand-new ability to pull apart the deepest puzzles of the universe, that we need not and should not necessarily do something only because we've learned how. : We're a people who pollute the very air we breathe. And our rivers. We're destroying the Great Lakes; Erie is already gone, and now we've begun on the oceans. We filled our atmosphere with radioactive fallout that put poison into our children's bones, and we knew it. We've made bombs that can wipe out humanity in minutes, and they are aimed and ready to fire. We ended polio, and then the US Army bred new strains of germs that can cause fatal, incurable disease. We had a chance to do justice to our Negroes, and when they asked it, we refused. In Asia we burned people alive, we really did. We allow children to grow up malnourished in the United States. We allow people to make money by using our television channels to persuade our own children to smoke, knowing what it is going to do to them. This is a time when it becomes harder and harder to continue telling yourself that we are still good people. We hate each other. And we're used to it. Getting off the high horse of ethics and responsible behaviour and how much better 'les neiges d'antan' were, I have some stuff to praise and some grumbling to do about the novel: - on the plus side, the presentation is very good, using photography inserted into the text to illustrate the journey into the past. The research into the location and the period is extensive and rich in details: buildings, streets, clothes, food, cultural events, newspaper articles, parlour games, and more. - the final chapters are better structured and more spectacular that most of what went on before, for readers who are patient enough to read that far. Favorite scenes: a night time sleigh ride in the snow through Central Park, a trip down Broadway in a horse drawn tram, a devastating fire in a sprawling office building. - on the minus side, the same extensive research is fed to the reader in extra large portions that slow down the pace of the story considerably, to the point where more than half of the novel reads like a dry, non-fiction description of famous buildings in the city in 1882. - the characters and their motivations are insufficiently developed and unconvincing, driven more by the need to visit all the interesting places in the town than by plot or personality. There is an attempt to have a mystery story as a backbone to the novel and a source of suspense, but this felt flat and uninspired for me more often than not. In conclusion, some very good concepts about time travel and its implications, and excellent research, but the execution is less impressive. Finney is more ambitious and far reaching in his story than Matheson, but he is not as good a storyteller.
