Kayano Shigeru is probably the last person who could have written a book like this. The Ainu weren't even recognized as an indigenous people in Japan until 2008 , and by that point it was mostly too little, too late. There are less than a dozen fluent speakers of the Ainu language left, most of whom are in their 80s, out of only around ~20,000 (officially-counted) Ainu in Japan, and in another generation the language will probably be just a memory and all the yukar and uwepekere that Kayano's grandmother told him around the fire in their ciset will never be recited again. I was a bit surprised how much Our Land Was a Forest reminded me of the history of America's treatment of the Native Americans. The Ainu were driven out of their ancestral lands and left alone for a while until the national government decided that they wanted the Ainu's land and that it was important to "civilize" and assimilate them. As in America, that mostly consisted of giving the Ainu incredibly marginal land that was barely enough to support them and using the resultant grinding poverty as evidence that Ainu culture was inferior and the Ainu should adopt Japanese culture and practices, sending them to schools where they were minority, making them take on Japanese names, and otherwise making no effort to preserve their culture or heritage. And, well, the government's policy worked. The book is the story of Kayano growing up on the Saru River in an Ainu village, learning stories at his grandmother's knee, fishing with his father in the river, hunting the forests, and being excited over getting rice once a year, when the salmon were spawning and there were enough that they could trade them to their Japanese neighbors for extra rice. He only completed primary school (and that barely), because he had to go work to help feed his family. Eventually he got work as a forester and put aside his heritage for several years, but seeing the scholars that would visit his village and take Ainu items away for study convinced him that the Ainu needed to take an effort to preserve their heritage, and he started buying up Ainu crafts, which eventually led to the foundation of the Nibutani Ainu Cultural Museum decades later. There were a lot of awful things that happened on the way, though. Like the years-long traveling exhibition of Ainu culture that Kayano participated in, where the money was all stolen by the organizer and the performers received almost nothing (and Kayano even had extra money stolen because he extended the organizer a loan). Or Kayano's description of working as what he called a "display Ainu" at a tourist village and performing sacred ceremonies for tourists' consumption: I worked beside 'Bear Meadow' where an Ainu-style house had been built and where we presented half-hour shows of 'bear-sendings' songs and dances. What in real life took place once in five or ten years was repeated there three or four times a day. It is beyond words for me to explain to others how miserable it made us feel to sing and dance--albeit for money--in front of curious tourists from throughout Japan when we weren't even happy or excited. But in the end, at least, he comes away more hopeful. After being elected to the Biratori town council and spending time creating wooden crafts, he has enough money to live in some comfort, and the Ainu Cultural Museum is a testament to his success at protecting his heritage. Kayano was eventually elected to the Diet, its only Ainu member, and he managed to get some funding for the Ainu museum and for translation of Ainu stories into Japanese. He failed at preventing the Saru River dam from flooding his childhood home, though, and after his death in 2006 much of the translation funding dried up. And while the Diet did pass that 2008 law, it's too little, too late by this point. Well, at least they have a museum.
