A sweet read from Betty with a heroine who is a Cordon Bleu chef, not a nurse, and one of Betty's nicer heroes--no cold stares or sneers from our Rich British Doctor, Sir William Sedley! This is one of Betty’s “hero engaged to another woman” stories, a trope she used often. Sir William Sedley is a sweetheart with a young daughter (who, like her dad, is smitten with our half-Dutch heroine Florina from the start) and a bitchy, social-climbing fiancee who, to give her her due, is probably right to be enraged by and suspicious of Sir William's lovestruck new cook. (We can argue whether the hero's engagement to another woman makes the heroine the OW, but since Betty's heroines never pursue the heroes and do their best to keep their feeling under wraps, I don't think it's really fair to categorize them as such. And anyway Betty makes the grasping and unloving fiancees so awful and so wrong for the heroes that it's hard to feel any sympathy for them.) This is the second BN book from 1987 I’ve reviewed this week, and the second from that year (out of her usual 4 books/year) with a non-nurse heroine, so she was already moving away from them--she’d been out of nursing almost 20 years at this point. Sir William is a little different from Betty’s more typically remote heroes—he’s more good-natured and easy going, likes a pint at the local pub and tea in the kitchen, and while he’s prominent professionally and in social standing, seems more down to earth than many other BN heroes. He’s perfect for our sweet, sensible, kind-hearted heroine—too bad he’s engaged to the awful Wanda. And therein lies the tale. Sir William, like many a BN hero before him, has allowed himself to be caught by just the type of woman who made his first marriage (he is a widower) so miserable. Betty’s heroes, so busy and preoccupied with their work, really are clueless about the true natures of the women they become affianced to, partly because they are convenient and “suitable” socially, pretend to like the homebased lifestyles the heroes desire in a wife--and the heroes don't seem to care that much; WORK is important, everything else (before the heroine’s advent and to a large extent afterward!) is secondary. In this case, though, Sir William is mostly clueless—although becoming aware—that he couldn't have picked a worse stepmother for his daughter, Pauline, who makes no secret of her dislike of the awful Wanda and is upset that he's marrying her. Nanny, who is now the housekeeper, doesn't like her either and knows that Wanda will get rid of her and shunt Pauline off to boarding school once she's landed her man at the altar. Enter Florina to set everything at odds in her quiet, unassuming, unintended way and make the hero realize exactly what it is he really wants: her. His daughter feels the same: this is as much a love story between daughter Pauline and Florina as between Florina and Sir William! And it makes the story all the richer--Pauline is an amusing and engaging plot moppet who at times appears more worldly and (in her words) “with it” than our 27-year-old heroine, and the relationship that grows between them is close and sweet. It's pretty clear what Pauline's wants; she even names the cat and kitten they adopt "Mother and Child" ("because that's what they are," hee), and Florina is just the mama she wants—warm and kind; patient and attentive. Florina’s sweet nature flourishes in her new environment, once she escapes the typically crappy homelife that Betty inflicts on so many of her heroines. Florina has put up with a lot in her life--her father is a bitter malingerer who treats her like an unpaid servant, and she’s stayed home out of familial duty following the death of her mother and her father’s mild heart attack. To her credit, Florina decides enough is enough when the family doctor tells her that dad is quite capable of taking care of himself, so she takes a position as live-in cook to Sir William, finally escaping her unloving and constantly carping father. She’s happy in Sir William’s beautiful country home, winning the regard of all the FFRs, who soon see that she’s perfect for their employer and resolve to call her “Miss Florina” to get the message across. No one, not Sir William, not Pauline, not jealous and spiteful Wanda, and most certainly not the FFRs, see Florina as “Cook”—she is most definitely what Betty’s FFRs would call “a proper lady,” whatever her financial circumstances. There’s some OM drama when a stalkerish young man whom Florina had rejected on a visit to Holland shows up to cause trouble with Wanda’s help, but the main impediment to our MC’s romance is Wanda. Our MCs are clearly perfect for each other and mutually attracted, but honorable Sir William has to extricate himself from his commitment to Wanda before he can woo Florina. And in BN’s world, it’s the woman who has to end the engagement, although the heroes usually manage to engineer circumstances—usually in the form of an American millionaire much more suited to their erstwhile fiancees—to get them to do so. In Sir William’s case, he not only introduces Wanda to the requisite American millionaire who’s as addicted to the bright lights as Wanda is, William also reinforces how unsuited they are by making it clear to her the kind of “buried in the country” life she can expect (and detest) as his wife. That’s enough for Wanda to cry quits finally. But while he’s ordering his universe to his liking in that quietly and utterly determined way of Betty’s heroes, he needs to remove the temptation and distraction that is Florina. Circumstances have upset her anyway, Wanda has humiliated her by sneering to Sir William that his cook is in love with him (“I know,” he says quietly), and Florina’s thinking of leaving anyway, so when Sir William makes arrangements for her to take over temporarily for a Dutch colleague’s au pair, she thinks it’s a precursor to his firing her at Wanda’s behest, and although she’s sad, she agrees to go to Holland, where she decides she may stay and find work permanently and forget him to the best of her ability. Of course, that’s not his intention at all: Sir William, having disposed of Wanda finally, comes to retrieve our heroine and, free now to do so, confesses his love and intention to marry her and live happily ever after. And so, we are sure, they do.
