I buddy read this with Chelsea from the BookTube channel Voyage of a Time Wanderer for Victober 2022, and we had so much fun going back and forth as we read this. 'Aurora Floyd' has some wonderfully vivid characters not least of which is the title character. The book felt somewhat like it had two halves with the middle point being a marriage, though I won't say more than that. The first half is more character focused as we get to know the key players in the narrative. We also learn enough of Aurora's back story to know that there is a year of her life that is shrouded in mystery. The second half is more plot focused with the fall out of that mysterious year. The whole story moves at a brisk pace though and there is plenty of delightful Victorian melodrama if that's to your taste. I'm not much of a modern-day sensation follower, but give me a Victorian sensation novel, and somehow I'm hooked! I loved that my favorite character in this ended up being a person I condescended to when we first meet him. He seems like a Bertie Wooster type with far more good-humored vacuity than moral seriousness, but his character changes in some moving ways. Another fun character has the impressively stodgy name of Talbot Bulstrode. He felt very much like a Mr. Darcy type character in some ways, and I liked his evolution in the story as well. There is also another spoilery male character I loved with some quite interesting appearances (and disappearances) in the novel! I'd say there are three main female characters, one of whom Chelsea said is like Mrs. Danvers from Rebecca...enough said! She was truly awful. Aurora's cousin Lucy felt very much like one of Trollope's less engaging heroines to me, the silent sufferer who becomes an adoring husband worshipper. I thought her character had potential but it lacked dimension in the end. Aurora is a piece of work! She is the raven-haired, dark flashing-eye type heroine who I come across constantly in books but have never met in real life. She feels a little like Lizzie Eustace from Trollope's The Eustace Diamonds at times, but I like Aurora better because she does really want to do what is right and genuinely loves her father, her cousin, etc. She's a little too wildly passionate to ever be a favorite character for me, but her story is great fun to read. Some of the mystery elements were a bit strange in that I found them easy to guess and yet the actual "reveal" for each was withheld for what felt like a longer-than-necessary time. Overall, this was such a fun Victober read and perfect for this misty, chilly time of year.
