I inexplicably felt relieved to finish reading this wonderful book since it has long challenged me since around those late 1960's in my college years in Bangkok (there were only six state universities then). Our English teacher, Mr Tony Kidd, was teaching us a foundation English course (I can't recall exactly if I was in year 1 or 2) and one morning at weekends I asked him for one or two English books (not simplified ones) so that I could improve my reading skills and he kindly recommended this title and To Kill a Mockingbird (Popular Library 1962) by Harper Lee. I willingly bought its reasonably-priced new copy and tried reading its first story but, surprisingly, I couldn't proceed beyond that; the best I could do was that whenever I tried to read a few pages, my eventual slumber crept in so I put it back on the shelf. One of such looming hardships that impeded my ongoing reading toward fluency with accurate understanding was that, I recall, his ways of writing dialogues by abbreviating them as spoken English with its grammar unfamiliar to me; however, looking at the bright side, I thought it was how he tried to transliterate them to be as close as those spoken in rural England, for example: ''Oo did it?' I yelled. 'Nobody, silly. Your eyes got bunged up, that's all.' (p. 17) 'Please, miss, I got to stay 'ome tomorrow, to 'elp with the washing - the pigs - me dad's sick.' 'I dunno, miss; you never learned us that.' 'I 'ad me book stole, miss. Carry Burdock pinched it.' 'Please, miss, I got a gurt' eadache.' (p. 56) 'Let's go an''élp Farmer Wells,' said a fat boy. 'You can - I ain't,' said a thin one. 'If you don''t, I'll give you thee a clip in the yer'ole.' 'Gurt great bully.' 'I ain't.' 'You be.' (p. 139) As a guide, we can read its synopsis by visiting this site: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cider_w... . First published in 1959, this 13-story memoir describes the author's early life after World War I in a remote Cotswold village called Slad, Gloucestershire in England. His family was large totaling eight people; his Mother Annie (née Light), his eldest brother Jack, himself, his younger brother Tony, and his half-brother Harold (the first-born Reggie lived with his grandmother) and three half-sisters Marjorie, Dorothy, and Phyllis from their widower father. Please note the capital M as we can see in this memorable writing when he always mentions her fondly (rarely found in other memoirs I read), for example: "... , because Mother had said so." (p. 19), "..., my Mother disappeared to visit my father." (p. 20), "Our Mother returned from far away with excited tales of its madness, ..." (p. 25), etc. To continue . . .
