Okay I loved this plot line. Emily Todd is a small town librarian. After winning an award for her volunteer work, her new reporter fiancé stands her up. In a angry and sad fury she accidentally hits a man with her car on her ride home. But this isn’t just any man. He claims his name to be Michael and he also claims that he’s actually Emily’s guardian Angel who was been sent to earth to help her. While Emily is sure Michael had lost his mind because of the car crash, miraculous things begin to happen whenever he’s around. And she can’t explain that fact that seems to know just about everything about her, including who she was in past lives. Problems arise when they discover that the earthly body Michael chose to use, is actually a hit man wanted by the FBI, who supposedly died. On top of that someone clearly wants Emily dead and she has no idea who or why. Working together they have to figure out how to solve their problems, and figure out just why Michael was sent to earth. Jude. I love this plot. A guardian Angel sent down to earth that has magical powers and basically worships the ground she walks on?? Fantastic. Loved the idea that Michael fell in love with Emily in every one of her lifetimes. For centuries he watched her and ended up falling in love with her, despite that being very much against heaven’s rules. It was a good book, I liked the small town setting, and I liked Emily. The plot started to get a bit ruffled towards the end, when they were figuring out who wanted her dead, especially with the ghost captain storyline. The whole thing with the news stories and the kidnapping felt a little under developed. In my opinion the ending was too short. I was shocked to read “the end” right after Emily was shot. There was two epilogues but I would have liked more tbh. In the end the archangel allows Michael to join Emily on earth and live out every lifetime with her. And the reason Michael was sent to earth was actually because his live for Emily was affecting how he protected her, and he needed to decide between heaven or Emily. He chose Emily. It was sweet but I I didn’t love how they had to erase their memory that Michael was a guardian Angel. I mean they didn’t have to start over thank god, they remembered their story the same just without the fact that he was an Angel. Which in retrospect makes sense but idk I didn’t love that. But I mean Michael is a literal dream. They way that I want to live Emily’s life, a librarian living in a ghost captains mansion, with my gorgeous guardian Angel and a treasure chest full of jewels??? Yea sign me up. A good Jude read, I needed it. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
