A Wayfaring Stranger Kentucky. 1830s to early 1840s. Boone, age 17, saw his drunken father coming at him again. He had had enough beatings over the years. He picked up a piece of firewood and wacked him hard across the head with it. His father lay unconscious on the ground. Boone was not sure if he was dead or alive, but he wasn’t going to wait around to find out. He ran into the house and began packing. He even took his Indian scalp, maybe for good luck. Then he grabbed his father’s good rifle. Telling his mother goodbye, he began walking, staying out of sight of anyone who could later identify him, for he believed that if his father, if alive, would come after him, if not, either way, the law would. “I am a poor wayfaring stranger A traveling through this world below…” Hard times had hit. Seeing a man in the woods, he ducked out of sight. The lawman had seen him and took note to remember what he looked like because he was suspicious of anyone who did not wish to be seen. Boone met with trouble. Along the way Boone met and made friends with a man named Jim. They became very close. Jim even helped Boone get out of trouble a few times. They traveled together and joined some Creole fur traders as by boat on the river. For Boone, the past was getting further behind. Meeting up with more trouble, Boone and Jim went on alone. Next, they met a Blackfoot man named Poor Devil. Poor Devil had just walked into their camp with an offering, a slain antelope. Now, he was to travel with them. They went the big Rendezvous, a gathering of the mountain men, the selling of their furs, the partying, the sharing of clap, all that good stuff. The men they met were vulgar and one wanted to kill Poor Devil. Another wanted a city woman with her perfume instead of the Indian women that he had been sleeping with that smelled like grease and smoke from the campfires. I thought of how it must be to sleep with any one of the men, how they must smell like maggot- laden garbage from never bathing. This gave new meaning to the sex life of mountain men for it can’t be all that romantic. Of course, they were not looking for romance. I believe I read somewhere that perfume was invented to cover up body odor. So, with perfume, you have two stinks instead of one. Moving on. Boone spotted a buffalo, took up his rifle, aimed and fired. The buffalo looked like he was stunned, then fell to the ground. I closed my eyes and put the book down while fighting back tears. for I was now thinking of the scene in the book I had read, “Butcher’s Crossing.” How the white men had killed the buffalo herds just for their hides. The buffalo did not know what was happening. As they fell to the ground, other buffalos began surrounding the fallen to see what was wrong. I left the book lying for over a day, and then, like “Butcher’s Crossing.” I felt that I could weave my way around scenes like this one. They came upon an Indian village. The Blackfeet were all dead. Smallpox. The heartless white man had left his mark on purpose. And in every village that they came upon, there were no survivors. “There is no sickness, no toil, or danger in that bright land to which I go. I’m going there to see my Father and all my loved ones who’ve gone on.” Shortly thereafter, Boone and Jim came upon an old man, a Blackfoot that had survived. He was just sitting on the ground. They approached him carefully, and after gaining his trust, they helped him as best they could. (I thought of him often after they left him there.) Boone asked after a certain woman, a Blackfoot that he loved. The old man told him where he might find her if she were still alive. Leaving the old man, Jim and Boone went searching for her. I thought that this was a bad idea but didn’t know why outside of the fact that they were running out of good ideas. And I was right; it was a horrible idea. “…I know dark clouds will gather 'round me I know my way is hard and steep…” (A Wayfaring Stranger. Origen unknown) Note: Beautifully written. A ten-star read. His book “The Way West” won the Pulitzer. I am a fan.
