"Weedy Rough" was the first of seventeen Douglas C. Jones novels that I have read, most of them more than once. I would have read more, but that is all that he wrote. Years ago when I picked up this book at my local library I had no idea who he was; I just liked the title. Little did I know then that it was chronologically, if not in the order of publication, the conclusion of a long series of books about the Hasford-Pay family that began with Elkhorn Tavern and The Barefoot Brigade . Over the years I did a lot of backtracking. In Winding Stair , set in the 1890's, the reader became acquainted with young Eben Pay, a wet behind the ears assistant prosecutor in Judge Isaac Parker's court, who also rode with marshal Oscar Schiller and his Osage tracker, Joe Mountain, in a manhunt for a gang of murderous cutthroats in the Indian Territory. Eben not only found adventure in the Territory, but also found a wife, a member of the Cherokee tribe. They married and eventually had a son, whom they named Barton. Fast forward to the years after World War I and Barton and his family have moved to the town of Weedy Rough in the northwestern corner of Arkansas. Barton soon becomes one of the small town's (with a name like Weedy Rough, it would have to be a small town) leading citizens. But there's one hitch: his wife has never come to terms with her husband's Indian blood, nor that of her son. Duny Gene. Duny Gene comes to age during the '20's engaging in mischief and sometimes actions of a more serious nature. There is concern that he is being led astray by a roughneck named Hoadie Renkin (with a name like that he would have to be a roughneck). To tell what eventually develops would spoil a good story for anyone who has not read the book. But I will mention as a teaser, however, that before the story ends Eben Pay, Duny Gene's grandfather, does make an appearance. By the way, the town of Weedy Rough is based on the real town of Winslow, which is located about half-way between Fayetteville and Fort Smith. You can rest assured that Jones' descriptions of the town and its environs are on target since he was born there in 1924. I don't know how small it was then, but today it has a population of less than four hundred people.
