Ill be honest, I struggled thru this book, and although I found some parts interesting and odd in their uniqueness, it was not enough to push my mind to finish. For personal reasons that follow this book became a downward spiral of repetitive-trivial-artistic elitist-hogwash, and the more I pushed myself forward, the more frustrating it became. There is no point to it, and that is the point. Let me give you my personal interpretation of the writing and narrative of this book: This book reads as an art summary of the complexities of an onion wrapped in aluminum foil, resting on a scale that offsets the weight of a border collie trained to ring a bicycle bell if he see the color red on a spinning wheel that is in itself measuring the rotational axis of the earth, and if he rings the bell in time with that wheel the sound aligns with the sonic vibrations of the earth and causes the steel box in which the collie and the onion scale are enclosed to become translucent, allowing you to see that the collie isn't actually alive, but dead and not actually a collie, but a ferret with a fedora. But dont forget about the onion, the real secret is the onion, because without the onion none of this would work, and this onion was owned by King Henry IV, as it was the first thing he ever grew in his garden, and he had it cased in enamel and placed in a glass case besides his bed until death. (I'll again be honest, this is a poor (but close) approximation of the writing but it basically how this book reads to me.. ) So did you get all that? No? I mean I did get it, it was about an onion, but I have no idea why any of it would be important, and apparently that is part of the allure of this book. The intricacies of meaninglessness. That and you really need to enjoy run on sentences, because they never stop running. This book is part artistic sleight-of-hand and part scurvy ridden lunatics fever dream. Ok seriously, the book has a unarguable interesting narrative style (that I am unable to really capture), and the description of the intricacies of some of the story's machinations are unbelievable in their detail or downright unsettling. But all the interesting bits of this book combined do not make this good or bearable. It uses the same narrative framework of: "interesting machination --->pages of description of the machincations physical parts ----> more pages of descriptions of the machinations spiritual parts---->moving on--->never discuss machination or relevancy or importance of machincation again". This framework is used over, and over, and over, ad nauseum with each new interesting creation, and never resolves to give any of them a passing thought on why. This method caught me off guard and was interesting at the beginning, but by the time I realized there would be no payoff, no plot, no reason to continue on with the same monotonous descriptions I felt I had to set the book down and move on. I don't want to eat any more onion layers thanks.
