Once again, Copleston absolutely delivers in his History of Philosophy series. As in the first volume, he exposes the major philosophical figures in a clear, erudite, serious, and charitable way. Yet, this time around, the focus in centered on medieval philosophy up until Duns Scotus, rather than the Greek and hellenism philosophy of the first volume. Upon reading my last review of him, it became apparent how much I praised him. Still, this time around, the author managed to surpass himself. I attribute this partially due to the subject matter, which is probably his specialty since he was a jesuit priest. Additionally, I attribute this increase in quality to my better familiarity and preparedness on the subject, as I read extensively from Aquinas before tackling this book. Lastly, there are now many passages that explore the historical impacts and context of the thinkers highlighted, which I think raises up the authors to not merely thinkers but thinkers within a tradition and time period. As in the last time, he is very erudite, linking up different doctrines, in a very clear, although difficult, manner. There is little to no handholding, and there are still many untranslated passages, but this time in latin rather than Greek. However, as I said, I came much more prepared this time. Hence, this aspects weren't as much of an issue as they were before. I actually appreciated his lean and precise commentary, despite its challenges. The chapters on Aquinas, the problem of universals, and Augustine were specially well written, but the chapters on some of the less known thinkers, such as Alexander of Hales, or the ones which highlight many thinkers within a single tradition, such as The School of Chartres felt a little excessive in length and depth. My single criticism in the work lies in the exposition of Anselm. When dealing with the ontological argument, Copleston is too charitable. I think he could have been a little harsher to what to me is the worst argument I've ever seen. Of course, writing isn't at all impartial, ever. Yet, in this chapter his defense of Anselm is a little too incisive to my tastes. All in all, an excellent book on the history of Philosophy that is sure to give a throughout comprehension of the medieval period. Despite being very heavy on metaphysics, to the point that previous study is mandatory, I feel like this series warrants the commitment necessary to fully appreciate it. Specially since, to me, it stands as one of the greatest academic accomplishments in systematic synthesis of the 20th century.
