John Wyndham has firmly managed to cement himself as a new favourite author for me after reading this as my second book by him (the first was Day of the Triffids). I think the way Wyndham writes, with inspiration drawn from a cosy British living in the 50s, and the fears brought about from the wartime before, mixed with a great blend of SF elements, just really works for me as a reader, and I find I can really enjoy his stories. This is the story of David, a young boy who has a troubled upbringing in a rural farming community. He's brought into a culture where 'Deviation' is seen as Devil-work and anything that 'Deviates' in any way must be exterminated. This extends through all the crops that the farmers grow, right through to the children they birth. Any abnormality will mean death or desertion of children/burning of crops. Nothing is allowed to go against the True Image, and David's father is one of the most staunch in the community about enforcing this rule. However, despite this rigid upbringing, David doesn't fully cooperate, and sometimes when he meets others who have a deviation he ends up helping them rather than turning them in. This may be due to the fact that David has his own sort of Deviation, something the adults of his community can't see, and it's something he has to keep hidden. His friends and sister, Rosalind, Petra, Rachel, Michael etc. are also going to be in trouble if he can't keep his secrets hidden... I really enjoyed the twists of this story. It's not got anything too outlandish by today's standards, but there are certainly moments in the plot where it does surprise the reader and you find yourself drawn into the story. This is actually a fairly short book (my copy just 200 pages) but once you're over halfway it will whizz by and I ended up reading the majority of the book in one sitting. I would thoroughly recommend trying Wyndham's work if you like twee British stories, but want a bit of sci-fi in there too. A very strong book (4.5*s from me) and I cannot wait to pick up and read more of Wyndham's work very soon.
