Crash was a very 1990s book, if you were young in Britain and into a certain strain of indie culture. I bought my first copy nearly 25 years ago, probably just before the film was out, and didn't get round to reading that, nor the replacement I bought around 10 years ago. Nearing the end of 2019, I figured I didn't want to carry the novel over into yet another decade unread - and these days it seems ubiquitous in libraries (in an edition embellished with essays by Zadie Smith and non-fiction writer Travis Elborough, and far more Americanisms than seems appropriate to an author who eschewed US influences ). Plus, I felt I might be getting a bit old for shock fiction like this - though Ballard was himself in his early 40s when he wrote it - and it's really out of tune with the current cultural climate. So it was high time - overdue - to get it out of the way. Years ago, before we were on Goodreads, several friends and I concluded that 1994 was, for us, the best year ever for music. Two of our top albums from that year have short quotes from Crash hidden among their lyrics, the Manic Street Preachers' The Holy Bible (a nihilistic record rather in keeping with the spirit of Ballard), and The Divine Comedy's Promenade (ostentatiously aesthetic, playful, lushly orchestral and rather not). One could also arguably hear its echoes in 'Joyriders' on Pulp's His N Hers (though to be fair, actual joyriders were massive in the news); in some of the darker lyrics on Parklife (band interviews said they'd been inspired by Martin Amis' London Fields , which I was deeply smug to have, coincidentally, read shortly before the album was out - but Amis' sleazeworlds and self-insertions are a lot like, and surely themselves inspired by, Ballard). And Suede's entire 90s discography was about seedy alienation in the dull satellite towns of south-east England. I can't remember when Crash was featured in Will Self's Cult Book slot on Mark Radcliffe's 10pm Radio 1 show, whether it was before or after these albums. (Will Self probably can't remember either, what with the amount of drugs he was on.) But that was just one more thing that made this then-twenty-year-old book so present for the Britpop generation, as if it had been a hyped new publication. And all this was before the 1996 film (how *sad* it would have been to have only heard of it for the first time then! thought certain teenagers and students), and 1997, when edgier media people pointed out the similarities between scenes in Crash and Princess Diana's death. The turnaround in the literary world's attitudes to themes like those found in Crash , sex narrated by men, violence and kinks, between the mid 90s and the late 2010s seems far more drastic than any shifts between the early 70s and the mid 90s. (By the 90s a few things from the 70s were starting to be straightened out - young groupies had become considerably less acceptable - but it was, in a lot of ways, still the world of the 1960s sexual revolution and its mores. And there was hardly anything less cool than being offended.) Now, those of us late Gen X-ers who took all that on board have found everything is shifting already, before we became anything like what we thought was old. This wasn't supposed to happen this soon. (It must have been similar for late Silent Generation people in the 60s, the ones who were basically normie but also attentive to culture - whilst those inclined to fashionable sorts of weirdness, like Ballard, were more at home in the Boomers' social revolution.) I wasn't sure how I'd react to Crash now; I half-wished I could stick it in a time machine with a note to myself around the time I read American Psycho , saying, "Read this ASAP!" I would have the minimum of reactions to it (and it would also do away with any apprehension about being seen to have read it, or even perhaps rate it highly, in 2019, by people likely to judge negatively, people whom I also like and want to stay on good terms with. It would just be another book tagged "1997-99" with no rating, added to GR back in 2012.) Whilst I did feel some echoes of somatic empathy in the first couple of chapters of Crash - and worried marginally that the book might exhaust me with that - the way Ballard writes chimes so closely with something in my own mind, that I rapidly found myself back in the same state of detachment with which, many years ago, I used to read history and watch wars and famines on the news - not feeling anything really, they were simply things that happened, like the weather - and read other transgressive novels. I don't think I knew until this month that Ballard had studied medicine. (He dropped out before graduation.) This must be why his writing, despite its alienated, savage themes, feels so strangely like home, to me who grew up reading the medical journals that were lying around the house. Medical study must also be why his descriptions, especially of the placement and posture of the body, are so accurate. Unlike with most authors' work, I never had to make any effort to imagine how even the most elaborate scene was physically arranged - it was obvious straight off the page. I often look back on books, films and other content I consumed when young as having influenced me. And with works I meant to read or watch then, but didn't get round to, I think about how I might have been different if I had got to them earlier. Crash , though, is singular and strange, because I don't think it would have made any difference. If I *had* read it in the 90s and was re-reading it now, I would have wondered if it had contributed to the person who once had a tendency to glorify beautiful men who cut themselves (instead, at nearly 30, I traced that back to a meshing of Catholic Jesus, via Joan Windham 's saint stories and Madonna, and images of Richey Edwards - himself a big fan of the novel - and stopped it because the relationships were messy and stressful for everyone concerned); I'd have thought the novel likely the seed of the meditative and mesmerising beauty I found in watching the gyratory system beside an office where I once worked; and about how reading this long text about other people's perversions I didn't share, but which was often highly compelling, had been echoed in all the time spent, especially in my late twenties, reading postings on kink social networks on which, I eventually accepted, 90% of people were too hardcore for me anyway. I suspect Crash was so influential on other culture I consumed that I absorbed its ethos by osmosis. Even its setting was almost part of me, a time and place when my parents were normie passers-by on some of the same roads, the early 1970s in that commuterland where West and South West London, Middlesex and Surrey converge? (Or is it set earlier? Is it "London Airport" in this HarperCollins edition because it's set before the name changed to Heathrow in 1966, or because it uses a text edited for the US market?) Reginald Perrin -land, an area I also know mostly from the interior of a car, as a small child safely looking out of the back window, some years after most of Crash's characters would have killed themselves off in "accidents". Having been moved out of the area when I was still a kid, I went back in my twenties to have a look round. It felt so insulated and sterile, the archetype of affluent suburbia, going on for miles in a way it can only stretch from a very big city. It seemed no wonder that stereotypes developed like suburban key parties or sky-clad wiccans gathering in semi-detacheds, and that a story of extreme kinks like Crash (the car crash disrupts or destroys the manufactured bubble whilst still being created by and part of it) would be set there. The feel of the place is about as far from extreme or natural or "real" as one can get and still have gardens and free movement; it was obvious that, for some, it would provoke a thirst for the different and intense, consciously or unconsciously. Crash may have been a 90s book for a few of us, but it was also, of course, of its own time, the early 1970s (and late 1960s). Critical awareness of consumerism, and the seductions and perils of manufactured objects and the new mass affluence, was a strand in in 1960s literature, for example in Georges Perec's Things and Simone de Beauvoir's Les Belles Images . Unapologetically transgressive literary fiction, no longer subject to bans in countries like Britain and the US, was getting more notice in the press, and was fashionable in some circles. I read Crash just after Gore Vidal's Myra Breckinridge (1968); these two novels, both with first-person narrators to bring the shocking action as close as possible, share preoccupations with sexual fluidity (whilst not naming or defining it) and extreme kinks, with TV advertising (Myra believes it is the great new art form; Ballard's narrator works in it), and their characters are obsessed with visible and glamorous technologies - the cinema and the car respectively - which arose in the late 19th to early 20th centuries and which became central to Western mass affluence in the mid-20th century. Like many 20th century transgressive works, Crash looks, from the viewpoint of 2019 intersectionality, like a weird combination of the still radical and the emphatically hegemonic, (especially patriarchal). One could say that it's about a group of polymorphously perverse, pansexual friends and acquaintances with scars, disabilities and trauma histories exploring their kinks together. Because they do, and there is something still radical in showing some of these people (especially Gabrielle) as active agents of their own sexualities, *with* sexualities and what's more, kinks, daring to connect medical experiences of pain with fetishes, in a way that calls to mind figures like performance artist Bob Flanagan . It is noticeable how, as described by Ballard's eponymous narrator, the women are all actively desiring subjects with agency he respects; he also defines them continually via their occupations, both relatively unusual in literary fiction of this age by men. His wife Catherine is described once as 'passive' but she almost never actually seems it. They seem of the same ilk as women in kink communities who are active participants of their own volition, and bring to mind the oft-cited statistic that it's more frequently women than men who instigate poly relationships. But if someone young and radical picked up the novel because of these points, they would likely be disappointed by the male perspective throughout the novel - and disgusted by, among other things, some of the vocabulary used in describing characters disabled by injuries, by the way Vaughan talks about women (a chauvinist contrast with the narrator), by the way the two men treat prostitutes (basically as products and services), by Seagrave's casual child abuse, and by characters' non-consensually drawing others into their dangerous kinks when they instigate crashes. I may be opposed to cars and their use in a lot of circumstances, but didn't think I disliked them enough to be able to analyse some aspects of Crash usefully. As a child I memorised car makes, models and shapes when walking past them and could recognise any halfway common car model on British roads. I enjoyed driving, I was just ill too often to do a decent course of lessons and take my test, and neurological problems are definitely not something you should try and push through to drive. I was a fan of Top Gear in my teens and twenties (votes Green + doesn't own a car + likes Top Gear was a combination I found more than once in the 00s to lead to men who shared my politics and sense of humour). And I'd always understood the allure of speeding, since I was a kid on a bike or who went rogue on a skiing holiday to go as fast as I possibly could. Despite never having owned a car, I was still too much within the standard modern car culture to really look at this novel from the outside. The GR friend whose high rating for Crash most surprised me (though I probably shouldn't be surprised given how many other times friends, on and off GR, have turned out to be Ballard fans), when I asked her about it, replied with an extremely perceptive comment which led to an epiphany. "the weird nexus of violence and emotional attachment associated with cars". But exactly! If society were seen entirely from outside - you know, as if humans were narrated like a wildlife documentary - the characters' fetishes would seem a fairly logical extension of the strange relationship people have with cars - continuing to use them regardless of all the associated dangers and some of them enjoying some of the danger - and their visbility and ubiquity. Likewise, quoting from the same post, "apocalyptic danger in the mundane" sums up cars and countless other overused products of industrialism that have incrementally contributed to massive environmental problems, which eventually - though only much later - come back to bite the people who benefited from them. "Crash - Ballard" has been a feature of my lists of unread books for such a long time (the wording echoes the game Crash Bandicoot , but started as a deliberate differentiation from the Paul Haggis film, which, for years, was what most people, especially online and especially Americans, meant when they just said the title Crash ) and it is dreamlike that I've actually, finally read it. (December 2019)
