This second volume starts on a bit of a rocky road. The first 100 pages are almost entirely a recap of volume one. After that, ironically we land on an LBJ who's stuck in his career and not doing much worth noting. So much of Means of Ascent is not about what's happening, but what is not happening. The irony of this of course is that it is all taking place during World War II and the high tide of FDR's presidency. For LBJ the peak of American success is his own fallow period. This theme of a personal low point in epic times reaches its omega point with Johnson's WWII heroics that seemingly did and did not happen. But as soon as the table is set, Caro unveils dizzying new heights for both his complementary talents. The majority of the book is dedicated to LBJ's 1948 election to the Senate. The election his entire career, the likely the entire future history of the US government's role in Civil Rights hinged on, and it was brought to fruition by double-dealing, lies, and fraud. Caro's first talent is his industrious, uncompromising pursuit of the truth through research. In his own words, Caro has said he never wants to write a book with the line “The truth may never be known” on an aspect of his subject’s life. In particular, he was talking about the contested 1948 election that sent Johnson to the Senate. Caro masterfully lays out a case that Johnson did actually steal his senate seat, with a well-ordered, almost day-by-day explication of events. And in this sea of ballot boxes and court minutes, the narrative is his most thrilling work to date. His second talent is his well-tempered romanticism. It’s not a talent usually ascribed to Caro. Caro has relied on the chapter-sized mini-biographies of side characters since The Power Broker. But for Means of Ascent, this skill rises to the point of the near eclipse of Johnson with his chronicle of Coke Stevenson. Caro paints in vivid color a man known by many as Mr Texas, and Caro uses that moniker to condense the romantic ideal of Texas into a single man. We feel the mist of the bubbling spring that inspired Coke to build his ranch. The warmth of the fire he read by on the trails as a boy. The wind of the plains carrying the sound of the sledgehammer in Coke’s hands as he worked and reworked his fenceposts. Coke’s communion with nature is in stark contrast with Johnson’s natural state; glad-handing in a hotel room. The battle between Stevenson and Johnson is the battle between the past and the future, poetry and prose, honesty and subterfuge. In the end the future wins with the power of deceit. That's something that is not just true of this election but might just be one of those truths that’s good for all time.
