Ah...the good old days as a little nipper - rolling around in hay, tickling girls and getting kicked in the shins, licking jam off a spoon and declaring war on a swarm of wasps, trying to catch tiny fish in the local stream with a hair net, and getting tipsy on my father's homebrewed ale before getting a right good rollicking. Reading Cider with Rosie bought back so many memories of my own childhood, I almost forgot about Laurie Lee's. Filled with elaborate metaphors that conjure up wonderful images of life in the English Gloucestershire countryside post WW1, Lee uses a poetical descriptive prose in describing his early life just as huge change and upheaval took place in society. He offers us his intimate sharing of the people, events, and places that helped shape his days. Evoking nostalgia plays heavy throughout, that was easy for me to relate to as his home village wasn't a million miles away from where I grew up, and I felt a connection with the areas he describes. There were some nods to the writing of Welshman Dylan Thomas, and although the memoir was pleasant, with some poignant moments, I just found Lee's basis a little too sweet and sickly for my liking, like being covered in honey and having a big soppy Labrador lick it off. For some reason I read this after "As I Walked Out One Midsummer Morning", which is the follow up to this. For me, that was a far superior read, looking at time he spent crossing Spain one year with little in the way of possessions. Cider With Rosie, considering he wrote this in his fifties, clearly shows he had a good mind, as at times you feel it's Laurie the child doing the writing, the youth and enlightenment to life's sharp realities brings a mixture of emotions, and truly showcases a by-gone era that captured the heart and soul of growing up in this specific period in time. A decent read (but he has written better), that was let down by the most pointless introduction, featuring too many quotes from the yet read book, and the print wasn't great either. Looked like a photocopy of a photocopy.
