This is quite a remarkable book. A lot of foundational texts can feel quaint and dated, even as they layout important ideas that many others take up and expound upon in future generations. Not so with "An Actor Prepares", which manages to be a thorough omnibus of everything you need to know about acting, even if you never get around to reading anything else. When I first began teaching theater, I sucked down everyone who was pointed out to me as important in the field. I gathered great knowledge and insight from Viola Spolin, David Ball, Michael Shurtleff, Uta Hagen. I've been able to hear the lectures of more contemporary and geographically local experts such as Karen Baker and Kelly Russell. And I've discovered a great deal of experiential wisdom through the trial and error of directing many plays over the years. For what, in hindsight were silly rationales, I avoided reading Stanislavski, mostly because I assumed his seminal trilogy of books on acting, which began being published in 1936, would be outdated at best, and a burdensome slog at worst. After all, if you've read one book on acting, you've read them all. Oh, how naïve I was. The first volume of the trilogy, "An Actor Prepares", kind of shook me to core. Far from being outdated, it oddly felt more relevant than most of the books on theater I read before and after. Not only that, it amazingly addressed just about every single major theme I've ever heard from every speaker on theater, or read in any book on the subject. Its literally all in there. Everything Spolin has to say about freeing yourself to play on stage was said by Stalislavski first. Everything David Ball has to say about finding motivations and chains of event by back-tracking from the end of the play back to the beginning, Stanislavski said first. Everything I learned from Karen Baker about finding novel approaches to text and the deliberate varying of tactics of interpretation, Stanislavski said first. Reading this book was like going down a checklist of everything I've ever learned. Now, if this were just a checklist, it probably wouldn't have made such an impact on me. People like Spolin and Anita Jesse can be a bit tedious to read since their book are basically that: lists of activities. They are useful activities, to be sure, described in details pertaining to how to carry out such activities, and their relevance to an overall acting theory. But Stanislavski did something with this book that genuinely took me by surprise: he attempts to write his book as narrative fiction. Weird. The main character is Kostya, a naïve theater student studying under the seasoned director Torstov. You get the sense that both characters represent Stanislavski himself: Kostya being the author when he was a young actor, Torstov after he has grown and earned years of experience. The book plays out as Kostya attends the various lessons, interacts with his fellow actors, and they all respond to and reflect on the seemingly outside-the-box instruction of their instructor. Now, there is a strong sense of contrivance to most of the lessons and Torstov's postulating. Every example he gives is perfect, the reactions of his students' to his instructions and advice are neatly helpful to whatever point he is trying to make. But if you've ever read any text on any kind of theory, whether it be on teaching or acting (my two fields), you know that books of the like often assume ideal circumstances that don't actually exist in real life. It is the general ideas that you are supposed to learn from, not any literal application. But somehow, by setting these lessons in a sort of fictional (sort of autobiographical) setting, I was able to experience the lessons more directly than if they had just been presented in a more academic, list-like form. The narrative approach was quite unexpected, but to me at least, resoundingly effective. The final thing I'll say is that this book was startlingly accessible. As I watched the author lay out various techniques and strategies, I kept thinking how easy this book could be digested by quite young theater students. Many of my former students, now in high school, could easily take a lot away from reading this, but I would even feel comfortable putting this in the hands of some of my more mature middle school students. There are a few places where Stanislavski starts to get a little opaque with some technical jargon, but overall, it reads very smoothly. I'm rather eager now to read the next two volumes of the series.
