History Replacing Creativity With the Lightnings is inspired by the Aubrey-Maturin series, but the author failed to meet the brief. That’s fortunate because the source material was a slice-of-life novel that lacked the basics of storytelling. Here, an invasion forces Leary and Mundy to work together, and classic Age of Sail tropes such as officer parties, diplomatic negotiations, and enlisted shore leave combine with aerial shock troops, orbital defences and antimatter missiles. One could imagine the same protagonists raiding the Spanish in the Caribbean, though the author avoids gender stereotypes. The intellectual Mundy is a capable duelist who racks up quite the body count, while the instinctive Leary is a deadly strategist who prefers to outthink his opponents. I find it refreshing to take Age of Sail culture and transplant it into space. It works perfectly with speed-of-light communication restrictions. There’s more than a limitation on the spread of knowledge, but also classism. Sophisticated, advanced centres of civilization influence their jealous provincial frontier counterparts. One would desire fashion trends, mannerisms, and even currency from other star nations. The wholesale reuse of Age of Sail culture allows With the Lightnings to accurately represent social classes in a way few modern authors can conceive. Similarly, the Navy reflects a real-world organization with its inbred politics and bureaucratic interests, as it’s the British Royal Navy in space. There's one area that the author shouldn't have adopted from Aubrey-Maturin: the terrible pacing. The first act is terrifyingly mundane, with almost no foreshadowing or clear goals. Once the invasion begins, the opposite is true: Leary and Mundy overcome so many problems that one expects the novel to end, and yet there’s a third of the page count remaining. Even the epilogue overstays its welcome! Still, With the Lightnings has found an underserved niche of those looking for a character drama anchored to military service without instantly devolving into a career-climbing power fantasy, and the author has an underappreciated skill at making the future respect the past. Recommended.
