Very much a world-building entry in the series; I do kinda like that about the early books, how they really feed into a larger story and don't feel as much like one-shots as the later books do. This one is Mary Anne's take on the newly-forming Schafer-Spier family, and the ending very clearly sets up for a sequel, so I'm guessing the next book is from Dawn's perspective. Mary Anne is sad about leaving her old house behind, and very much reluctant about Dawn's idea to share a room, especially since Dawn's room has a haunted passage. But then Dawn's enthusiasm over becoming sisters eventually changes her mind. I think it's pretty obvious that they'll end up hating their shared room. Like one of the things they get excited about at the end of this book is cramming all of their clothes into a single closet, and like, I give it two days. But also, the B plot of this book is about tension between the Arnold twins, and the solution turns out to be...drum roll...moving out of their shared bedroom into separate rooms! Which is such a blaring bit of foreshadowing that I almost feel like Mary Anne and Dawn's decision to share a room feels more for plot than actual realism. Then again, I can imagine being 13 and super excited at the notion of staying up all night with my BFF/new stepsister, so I get it. This book also sets up the potential tension between the sisters based on their new relationships with their now-stepparents. Dawn is clearly hurt that her mom seems to prefer Mary Anne's birthday gift to hers. (I mean, Dawn's gift was a planner and Mary Anne's was a ring with sentimental value, so...) And Mary Anne is totally oblivious, so that drama will clearly play out in the next book. A lot of my response to this book does include speculation about the next book, and I think that's because this one is very much clearly part of a duology. And merging two families with teen kids is a pretty big deal, and especially since these teens are both main characters in the series, so I'm glad the series gave the story this much room to breathe. I do kinda side-eye Richard here for deciding to break the engagement news to Mary Anne and Dawn (1) at Sharon's birthday party and (2) without discussing it with Sharon first. Sharon did seem a bit miffed at it, so maybe that's also setting up for some kind of tension between the couple in the sequel, especially since Richard seemed hurt (stupidly so, IMHO) that Sharon didn't want to try his veal at their wedding dinner. (So stupid, since I believe Sharon's vegetarian like Dawn is, so like, WTF Richard?) But like, if I were Sharon, I wouldn't love that he didn't ask me first and also that he kinda hijacked my birthday celebration for this other news. Especially since he framed it to the kids as planning a surprise for my birthday. Ugh. Like, news this big should be shared together, and with what Richard did, it felt so much more like his news rather than theirs. And also if I were Mary Anne or Dawn, I would've been unhappy with how he handled it. Like, clearly it worked out and both girls were thrilled, but what if they weren't? There would've been pressure to pretend to be happy so as not to ruin Sharon's birthday. And speaking of children, WTF Sharon for not including Jeff in this news? So it isn't her fault because Richard kinda just did it on his own, but then WTF Richard for not considering that Sharon would want both her kids to learn the news at the same time? I mean, the book does show Richard kinda sucks at emotional stuff. It did kinda bite him in the butt when Mary Anne got pissed that Dawn knew about the move before she did. So that was good. But still. Still, all well and good for the book itself. The characters are definitely flawed, but that's all part of being human, and I like that this book delves into these flaws and will (presumably) show the new family's way of dealing with them in the next one.
