3.5 Stars. (Review contains slight spoilers for books 1 and 2 of the series). Honestly, I didn't enjoy this as much as book 1 & 2. It was different to the others because instead of heavily relying on the surgeon (and the apprentice), it focused on Rizzoli & Isles solving a few cases and dealing with personal issues. I did find it weird that Rizzoli didn't really think of the Surgeon at all. He went from dominating the first two books, to disappearing and I know it might be because she doesn't see him as a threat anymore but I just found it odd. I did miss the Surgeon's perspective and I missed that dynamic they had because that is probably one of the best aspects of the series. So instead of getting the Surgeon's POV, we got Maura Isles' POV alongside Rizzoli's. Unfortunately I didn't really like her. I found her intriguing in book 1 & 2, but it turns out getting access to her internal monologue wasn't what I thought it would be. She's quite similar to Rizzoli but she lacks the likeability and I didn't find her interesting. I kind of wish that it was just Rizzoli's POV in this book because reading Isles' POV just made me like the book less. I thought the story was interesting enough but I thought the story was hijacked by each woman's love/personal life. I did think that the second half of the book was better because that is when everything started to connect and really make sense. I did wish that the crime aspect was more prominent and more developed. It was quite predictable which was unfortunate but I thought Gerritsen had a really good idea. I also didn't find the writing as enjoyable (not sure if that had to do with me not enjoying Isles' POV or if it just wasn't as good). I read this book because I wanted something that was quite addictive but it didn't fully deliver. I still think this is a good series and I will keep reading on. Hopefully I just grow to like Isles as a character. I know it sounds like I'm sort of bashing this book but I did give it 3.5 stars, which isn't bad and I did enjoy it. I guess I was just a little disappointed because I know how good Gerritsen can write and this just wasn't up there for me. I would recommend this series. -------------------------------------- "There would be comfort in it, she thought. The ease of knowing, at each dawn, how the day will go. No surprises, no turmoil."
