Having recently returned from Morocco, I picked this up and had a hard time putting it down. I had never before been to a predominantly Muslim country and what I encountered was more different than I could have imagined. I was with a group of faculty from U.S. colleges and universities, and we attended a series of lectures and site visits. I was struck when one of the speakers described the importance of not rocking the boat. If someone didn't agree with a certain practice or religious ideal, he said, they should discreetly do their own thing in the privacy of their own home rather than publicly question the issue at hand. You can't get much further away from the independent, individualistic values of the West. The practice of censorship also looms large. If anyone criticizes the King (especially in print, as journalists have done), he is in danger of investigation and prison. Moroccans speak very highly of their king -- who owns royal palaces throughout a nation where poverty and illiteracy are widespread -- but you wonder whether or not their words are genuine. To speak against the King, or against Islam, is asking for it. Perhaps the most frustrating element was the inability to cut through the official "party line" on everything from gender inequality to human rights abuses. Time and again people, even academics, were unwilling to admit and explore problems facing the country. Instead, they reassured us that Morocco is a progressive, hospitable place. While that may be true, there are a host of issues that deserve attention and honest dialogue. Having grown up elsewhere, it's hard for me to understand and operate within this framework. I came back with so many questions and a thirst for more information about not only Morocco, but the whole of the Arab and Muslim world, its history, its relations with other nations, its direction for the future. I found Lamb's book to be an excellent place to start. It's a bit dated (first published in the 80s, and then re-released with updates in 2002), but it provides an engaging historical narrative that helps put what I encountered into perspective. I found myself nodding many times to observations that he made, as I witnessed them, too. It's certainly not a be-all, end-all treatise on the Arab world, but it's a good place to get a grounding before moving on to more in-depth, scholarly examinations. As a citizen of the world, everyone ought to read this. And trust me, it's not dry and it's not boring. It's well-written, engaging, and chock full of interesting facts and personal encounters with people across the Arab world.
