“A specter is haunting Europe”... Preamble : …so begins 40 readable pages that somehow always raises new questions and insights with every re-reading. --As always, I try to distinguish methodologies from their contextual implementation at a specific moment in time (29-year-old Marx and 27-year-old Engels writing this political pamphlet to rally support for the 1848 revolutions). Indeed, Marx/Engels later write how they did not update the manifesto and kept it as a historical record . ...Eventually I'll update this review to reflect on how a newcomer would experience it. The Missing/Contentious : 1) While I find the historical materialist stages of development to be a useful analytical framework to try out in your toolkit, some of the rhetoric in Part I do seem Eurocentric in its conception of modernity/progress: The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians’ intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. [...] United action [of the proletariat of the world], of the leading civilized countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat. I’m eager to synthesize this with later developments in: a) Actual socialist revolutions of the 20th century's decolonization process of the Global South/periphery, especially Vijay Prashad's work at the Tricontinental Institute: - The Darker Nations: A People's History of the Third World - Red Star Over the Third World -playlist: https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLS... b) More on the “Asiatic mode of production” as well as that of the "Near East" (ex. ...And Forgive Them Their Debts ), and recent radical anthropology/archaeology (ex. The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity : despite the provocative rhetoric used in this book, I still see much room for synthesis) 2) The emphasis on the revolutionary nature of the bourgeoisie still follows too closely to the paradigm of classical Liberal economics, which seems to set up Marx’s premature projections for Western capitalist countries and their proletarian revolutions. This is most problematic when considering: a) Imperialism : where Western capitalism resorted to directly destroying competitive (even superior) productive capacities (with the obvious examples of India and China) not to mention genocide and slavery. -intro: The Divide: A Brief Guide to Global Inequality and its Solutions -Lenin's Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism -masterpiece: Capital and Imperialism: Theory, History, and the Present - The Agrarian Question in the Neoliberal Era: Primitive Accumulation and the Peasantry - The Veins of the South Are Still Open: Debates Around the Imperialism of Our Time - Late Victorian Holocausts: El Niño Famines and the Making of the Third World b) Classical political economy ’ goal of freeing the market from economic rent (“rentier” class relying on unearned income, i.e. feudal landlords with land rents, bankers with usurious debt/interest payments, monopolists with extortionist fees esp. for utilities) has been reversed by Neoclassical (i.e. mainstream) economics, which explicitly avoids analyzing economic rent. ...Marx's unfinished Capital project (which he spent so much of the rest of his life developing) seems to both build on the Classical school (Smith/Ricardo etc.) and transition beyond (paradigm shift): -ex. Classical/Marxist Michael Hudson distinguishes Finance Capitalism vs. Industrial Capitalism: Killing the Host: How Financial Parasites and Debt Bondage Destroy the Global Economy and https://youtu.be/mH8FWrbzxEs -ex. Classical/Marxist Anwar Shaikh brings a synthesis of Classical + Marx with the central focus on analyzing/critiquing capitalism's war-like competition: Capitalism: Competition, Conflict, Crises -ex. Marxist geographer David Harvey emphasizes Marx's critique of capitalism's value system (exchange-value triumphing over use-value): A Companion to Marx's Capital . This is particular useful for uprooting our ecological crises: Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . 3) Marx’s fascinating dissection of capitalism’s irrationalities/contradictions/ crises are not explained in the Manifesto (only a couple sentences on the crisis of overproduction). -Marx's Wage Labour and Capital pamphlet for his (in)famous Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1 tome. -modern intros: - Talking to My Daughter About the Economy: or, How Capitalism Works—and How It Fails - World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction The Good : Part I – Bourgeois and Proletarians : --Touches on core concepts in early Marxism’s political economy, starting with “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.” --While I raised some concerns over a few of the Manifesto’s conclusions, the methodology of analyzing/synthesizing social relations, institutions, history, political economy, and technology led to some prophetic insights: 1) Historical materialism, capitalism, growth and overproduction : --I like to describe "liberalism" as "cosmopolitan capitalism" , and then use the following quote to bring clarity to that sense people have of technology/economics speeding up with humans/communities losing control and becoming cogs in the machine, from 1818 Frankenstein to 1936 Modern Times (Charlie Chaplin film) to 1999 The Matrix [emphasis added]: Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch [i.e. capitalism, with its singular endless profit-seeking, competition’s “creative destruction”, boom/bust volatility] from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned , and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses, his real condition of life, and his relations with his kind. -- "The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere.” -- “For many a decade past the history of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern conditions of production, against the property relations that are the conditions for the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule.” -- “In these [commercial] crises there breaks out a social epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would have seemed an absurdity – the epidemic of over-production .” -- "The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises? On the one hand by enforced destruction of a mass of productive forces ; on the other, by the conquest of new markets, and by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones . That is to say, by paving the way for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.” 2) Capitalism, wage labour, division of labour and automation : -- "The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honoured and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paid wage-labourers. ” -- "Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and, consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of the machine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and most easily acquired knack, that is required of him. ” ...Keep in mind, this is something that Adam Smith (a moral philosopher, after all) recognized with his own focus on capitalism's increasing division of labour, i.e. while the factory output may improve, this logic increasingly destroys the human capabilities in the wage labourer individual. Part II – Proletarians and Communists : --Distinguishes “Communists” and briefly addresses common objections (not enough to convince staunch opposition, but a start): 1) Property rights (basically: personal property vs. means of production : --On the "means of production", it is crucial to understand capitalist theft through privatization, i.e. Enclosures of the Commons, colonialism: --Marx debunks Smith's so-called "primitive accumulation" (initial accumulation from hard-working capitalists saving up, classic) by detailing the real-world history of violent appropriation, i.e. theft (another crucial point is how the big-bad state cannot be separated from some utopic "free market" capitalism, since the state created and protects capitalist property rights/markets) in the last part of Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1 . --Colonialism/imperialism as the core of global capitalism: Capital and Imperialism: Theory, History, and the Present --Capitalism and gender: Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation --Marx's Capital Vol. 1 focuses on capitalist production of "real commodities", as well as the contradictions of capitalism's labour market (as well as mentions of the money). We should synthesize this with the other Karl (Polanyi) on the 3 peculiar markets of capitalism ( labour/land/money ), which feature "fictitious commodities" since humans/nature/purchasing power are not "produced" (with a cost of production) just for selling/buying on the market: -Intro: Talking to My Daughter About the Economy: or, How Capitalism Works—and How It Fails -Fraser synthesizing Marx/Polanyi ( see comments ) -Source: The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time 2) Work, laziness, family, country/nationality, etc. 3) Finishes with a list of 10 measures for “advanced countries” to adopt; 2 concerns I have: i) How to defend against counter-revolutionary violence ? Was this easier to assume away because the assumption was for the “most advanced” countries to lead the socialist revolutions, thus avoiding imperialist interventions? ii) How to prevent State hierarchy, i.e. how will the withering away of the State occur? Turns out Lenin addresses this in The State and Revolution , but we need to combine theory with real-world history. Part III – Socialist and Communist Literature, Part IV – Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties : --Brief critiques of the other strains of socialism (reactionary, bourgeois, utopian). I found Engels provided helpful context distinguishing “scientific socialism” in: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific
