Personal Response: I personally think this book started off creepy. Towards the end of the book it got much more in depth and understanding. I think it got easier to read towards the middle of the book. I´m not much for love stories but this book grabbed my attention. I honestly liked this book from start to end but there could have been a little more action taking place too. Summary: Cameron Wolfe life is a pretty quiet teenager. He has two older brothers and a sister. Steve is a star soccer player. Rube is a charming guy that hits on new girls every week. Sarah is a quiet intelligent woman. Cameron wishes he could come close to one of them. He usually isn't even noticed by any girl that dates Ruben until Octavia came up. She always seemed like part of the Wolfe family. Once Cameron heard his brother broke up with Octavia Cameron took the advantage that both Rube and Octavia gave him. Cameron and Octavia were in love for the longest time until Rube found out and that's when the first real conflict broke out between Cameron and Rube. Octavia didn't like Cameron getting hurt so she left Cameron. Sarah helped Cameron see who he really was and showed him he's his own person and not Rube´s shadow or Steve’s shadow. Recommendations: I recommend this book to anybody who is over the age of 13. I recommend this book to that age group because there are some inappropriate thoughts in Getting the Girl . Readers shouldn’t stop reading because of the inappropriate thoughts and actions taking place, because it does clear up and it gets better. A movie that may relate to the romance in this book is Where the Red Fern Grows Part Two . I give this book a three star rating. Characterization: Cameron Wolfe is the main character in Getting the Girl .Cameron has messy hair and is obsessed with girls and becoming who his brothers are. Cameron is quiet and isn’t like his brothers. Cameron wants somebody to love him for who he is and he wants to treat her right. Rube is Cameron’s brother and Rube gets a new girlfriend every week. Rube is selfish, charming and he is a fighter too. Once Rube finds out that Cameron is going out with one of his exgirlfriends; he gets jealous and fights Cameron.
