I’m a big fan of Sebastian Faulks, but this one just didn’t do it for me. I enjoyed his stories about WWI so much more. I think in this one it was too much love affair and too little Cold War. Still, he’s a beautiful writer, as will be seen from the quotes I pulled to post below. Quotes that caught my eye Among the row of new Cadillacs, their tail-fins glinting like a rumour of sharks…. (3) …maybe not exactly happy, not in the facile way the word itself suggested, but who in these circumstances could not at least be touched from time to time by the ridiculous joy of existing? (8) “By refusing to move they’re preventing customers being served.” “But they are the customers.” (9) The closest he had come to political action was to go with his brother Louis one night in Chicago, at the age of sixteen, to a meeting of the Young People’s Socialist League in the basement on California Avenue, because Louis had promised him they would meet hot girls in low heels and leather jackets. (80-81) The speeches and the broadcasts that encouraged volunteers at the start of 1942 appealed to ideas of freedom and tyranny, to homeland and to the right to live in peace. They did talk of courage and the idea of ‘sacrifice’, so that those who enlisted were aware that they might not return, what they did not mention was that the purpose of being a soldier was to kill other soldiers, and that, for most men, each killing would have an individual flavor. (80) The closest he had come to political action was to go with his brother Louis one night in Chicago, at the age of sixteen, to a meeting of the Young People’s Socialist League in a basement on California Avenue, because Louis had promised him they would meet hot girls in low heels and leather jackets. (80-81) Yet despite what he said, Frank felt uneasy; he felt the hatred which pressed into his skin like the airless heat. (112) But the case of Emmett Till looks like an exception…. He quoted from the comments of the foreign press to show how the case had caused American’s stock to fall in the eyes of the free world, and, more shamingly, the unfree world. The war against the Russians was apparently being lost in space and in the development of arms; the United States was now in danger of squandering its only unassailable advantage: the moral superiority conferred by constitutional rights. Ten days later his editor received a visit from two agents of the FBI, who were compiling reports which would, unofficially, be handed over to the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee’s investigation six employees of the New York Times alleged to be Communists; even the music and the dance3 reviewers of the Times were on an FBI Security Index that permitted them to be deported to detention camps if an ‘internal security emergency’ occurred. (118) “Does she know enough about suburban adultery?” said Edward. “I’m sure I could find out, Eddie.” (123-24) Her husband’s hobbies are drinking liquor, taking barbiturates and Benzedrine tablets, smoking cigarettes and misquoting poetry. She wrote this book so she could pursue a platonic but passionate adulterous love affair in New York City with a newspaperman she barely knows, who is mostly out of town. (124) …matters that had seemed provisional or capable of endless procrastination had acquired the dull imminence of fact: death happened, death was coming and she herself was going to die, inexplicably, unsatisfactorily, like her mother, like everyone else, with burial, extinction, no questions answered and no ends tied off. (125) Some men are born relaxed, some achieve relaxation through Yoga or Zen and some find relaxation thrust upon them via suits of Folkweave Tweed. The gentleman in the picture had certainly achieved a self-assured air; so much so, Mary noticed, that next to his folk weave tweed suit he was clutching a nine-inch upright model of a US Navy Polaris missile. (127) There was no fight number for the press plane, no check-in; you walked across the airfield apron, left your bag beneath the open hold if you wanted it stowed, then climbed aboard, found a seat and, when the attendant had shut the cabin door, you took off. There were seat belts, but no one wore them because they prevented you from turning round and sharing drinks and notes with the reporters in the row behind. (128) There was a murmur of anticipation as the small aircraft reached the steepest angle of its climb. The curtain at the front parted, Senator Kennedy emerged and sat down on a wooden tray; he joined his hands round his feet and tobogganed down the aisle into the restraining arms of his junior press secretary at the rear of the plane. (128) Forgive me my sins, his wild gaze seemed to say, forget my reckless love of women, overlook my wealth and East Coast homes, because at heart I am like you. (129) Frank noticed the stitching in his clothes, his manicured hands and the easy manner that came from years of parties in Hyannisport and Martha’s Vineyar4d, of dating debutantes and making furtive love also to their mothers; of yacht clubs and dinner parties, cigars and tennis; of law school and oak-panelled rooms and charge accounts on which you bought shirts by the dozen. Frank found they raised in him an instinctive distrust – a reaction he could no more control than the reflex of a struck knee. (129) She tried not to hurry as she went through the turnstile but to keep some dignity; the fact that Franck had called to say he was back in New York did not mean to say she had to lose all sense of her own freedom of action. (131) He sometimes pictured the workings of his mind as the jeweled movement of a Swiss watch, trembling with expensive fibrillation, into which he had poured sand. Yet what had he or the world lost by this wantonness? There was no sign that a careful husbanding of the machinery would have produced anything that would have helped to give value or meaning to his or any other existence. (135) The thing about being forty, she thought, was that while you had the feelings of a twenty-five year old, at least you had some dignity. (145) She could squeeze the minutes; with seconds of such intensity, she could knead them into days. (147) …overcoming her unease with American coins, she bought a paraffined-paper cup from a vending machine for a penny and filled it from a drinking fountain…. (148) We’re pouring money in to help the French. They’ve got some crazy plan to lure the Vietminh out of the bush and blow them away once and for all. (151) The French government had long since stopped paying for its army, which was now funded by the United States; American planes and material followed the dollars, and naturally they needed mechanics to service them. The point at which engineers became troops was a matter of intense concern, since it would then become an American war, something not even Dulles wanted. (153) …supporters of the nationalist Vietminh were Marxist in their belief, the State Department argument ran; therefore the French must not be defeated. (153) Dulles turned the full force of his persuasions on to Winston Churchill, a man with some record in conflict, but received in return only a lecture on colonialism and the loss of India. (153) Nowhere could a war zone have been more torpid, Frank thought, as he walked down the dusty streets with their Second Empire facades and backyard chicken runs. America was there and not there in this humid and beautiful backwater; the wishes of the Dulles brothers, the tense edicts of Langley and ‘Foggy Bottom, the phrases such as ‘line of dominoes’ were discounted and absorbed by the air in which they were uttered, with the smoke of opium and the steam of noodle soup from the open-backed kitchens. (154) He drank quickly, to quell his misgivings and to catch up with Charlie. He started to grow used to the strange nature of his situation; the guilt began to ebb. It reminded him of what he had told Roxanne about killing a man. After a while it feels like everything you do: it feels like nothing at all. (156) …there was something profoundly strange about this clearing in the jungle where the flower of St Cyr officers, their heads full of European gunnery tactics, had brought a collection of troops to provoke a people they hardly knew in the colony that had been returned to them after the disgrace of Vichy only because the Americans and British had not use for it. this giant folly of pride, greed and quixotic ambition was about to receive, as far as Charlie could see, a cataclysmic judgement. (162) Behind a floral curtain on a wire, she discovered a fridge with a levered handle like those on the door of a butcher’s cold room. It was admirably cold inside, but empty except for a swollen ice-tray dusted with frost crystals of an age to grace a mammoth’s tomb. (189) She had once felt that what she loved and valued was made eternal or innumerable by her passion for it, but in the last few months – belatedly, perhaps – she had come to recognize that the instances of bliss were numbered as unforgivingly as the streets of the city, and that the edge of the island, once only a dream of explorers, was now in plain view. (215) If you say that only what lasts is worthwhile, then nothing is valuable, because everything passes. Isn’t it enough that something should have existed, just once? Don’t you think it continues to exist in some world where the pettiness of time is not so important? (216) Something like that, but not just a convenient solution. An explanation, a way of properly ordering value. An eternity that is more than just time without ending. A place where time runs in a different way. (216) She felt that she could not secure the bliss that should be hers because of some verbal shortcoming, the unwillingness of what she passionately felt to made itself available to words. It was hard to bear. (217) …the walnut sideboard held its usual load of unread newspapers, orphaned keys and post too dull or intimidating to be opened. (218) I feel suddenly very Republican. Nixon’s not such a bad man, is he? (260) They mounted the steps to the doors of the Ukraina. It was a building of gross imperial intent, in which considerations of design or beauty had been sacrificed to a display of skyscraping power, constructed by the slave labour of defeated Germans to the glory of the Soviet Union, one of seven Stalin monuments that lowered over the city. (286) Hell might be this reeking grey corridor, with its straight lines that converged to a never-realized vanishing point. (303)
