I read this book by accident, or at least without any intent: it literally fell into my lap a few months back when it appeared mysteriously on my Kindle. There is no record that I bought it or that anyone bought it for me, it showed up on only one of our three Kindle devices (the oldest one), and is not listed in our Kindle library on Amazon. I dipped into it and was immediately hooked by the writing. Given its mysterious antecedents, the fact that it turned out to be such a great fit for me could be viewed as proof of the benevolence of the universe (proof which lately has been woefully scarce). The main characters, Alice, Corvus, and Annabelle -- three motherless girls who are not quite friends, but not quite not-friends either -- wander through a strange Southwestern desert landscape of odd events, peculiar people, and animals wild and domestic. Things happen, and yet there's a kind of timelessness to the narrative, a free-floating trippiness, a dreamlike feeling of inertia that seems to grip most of the characters. Countering this is the creative, energetic, almost profligate use of language: the author juggles words the way a circus performer juggles knives or flaming torches. (One reviewer has complained that all the characters in this novel talk as if they're in a novel, not like real people; this is true, but as far as I'm concerned it works brilliantly.) For example, as the book opens Alice has a job babysitting two neighbor kids: [Alice]did not find the children at all interesting. They cried frequently, indulged themselves in boring, interminable narratives, were sentimental and cruel, and when frustrated would bite. They had a pet rabbit that Alice feared for. She made them stop giving it baths all the time and tried to interest them in giving themselves baths, although in this she was not successful. She assisted them with special projects for school. It was never too early for investigative reporting. They should not be dissuaded by their teacher's discomfort; to discomfort teachers was one's duty. They were not too young to be informed about the evils of farm subsidies, monoculture, and overproduction...[T]hey should know how things come into being, like ponies, say, and how they're taken out of being and made into handbags and coats. Or this, after the children's mother has refused to pay her and she's meditating what to do next: She'd like to be one of those birds, those warblers that fly from Maine to Venzuela without water, food, or rest. The moment came when they wanted to be twenty-five hundred miles from the place they were and didn't know how else to do it... She was never going to seek gainful employment again, that was for certain. She'd remain outside the public sector. She'd be an anarchist, she'd travel with jaguars. She was going to train herself to be totally irrational. She'd fall in love with a totally inappropriate person. She'd really work on it, but abandon would be involved as well. She'd have different names, aka Snake, aka Snow -- no, that was juvenile. She wanted to be extraordinary, to possess a savage glitter... I would say that this book has a kind of savage glitter.
