So let's say you are an elderly Scottish woman. While you are returning from a day of christmas shopping in the city you happen to glance out the train window and see something quite unsettling in a neighboring train: A MURDER No one else is around and when you report this terrible, unsettling crime you are met with severe skepticism. What is one to do? You've just seen a woman killed, you have no idea what the murderer looks like, and you are afraid you one will believe the rambling of a silly old Scottish woman. Well, if you are Mrs. McGillicuddy (which I think we can all agree is an AMAZING name) you confide your fears to your good friend Miss Jane "I have caught so many more murderers than you" Marple. This dame knows how to get things done. Witness never saw the murderer? Not a problem. No body was ever found? Hardly an inconvenience. No idea which train it was that the murder took place on? She has people for that Too old to actually go sleuthing about? She'll just use her inherent awesomeness to convince an equally awesome woman to go undercover and prove my brilliant theory was right. she'll just chill on the background and let the youngfolks run about while carefully processing all the clues and catch YET ANOTHER murderer because she is that awesome (certainly more awesome than any of us will ever be. I haven't even caught one murderer). But in all seriousness Christie constructed both a very neat murder mystery and some pretty fascinating characters to go along with it. She weaves a story of an overbearing patriarch, ungrateful and rather wretched children (well not all, most the majority of them), some mysterious letters, and a body whose origins are unknown. Like most of her mysteries I had no idea who the killer was and the solution to the murder was elegant and followed logically from all the information the reader has been exposed to. Interestingly there was actually very little Miss Marple in this story. She shows up in the beginning, but, recognizing how old and frail she has become, enlists the aid of one Lucy Eyelesbarrow to do the footwork of tracking down Miss Marple's hunches. The chapters tell the story from different characters' perspectives and provides a wide view of the mystery for the reader. The plot is brisk but well paced and Christie does a wonderful job giving all of the characters depth and purpose. All in all a smashing mystery that was engaging and rewarding. It should be noted I consumed this book in audio form. The narrator, Emilia Fox (who could not be more of a British thespian, seriously, look at her family tree) , did a stupendous job with the voices. It was very clear from her tone, pacing, and accent what character was speaking at a given time and her voice in no way distracted from the story she was narrating. I would definitely listen to another Christie audio book if she was the one doing the narration.
