I'll admit up front that I sometimes complain about books that don't have enough going on. Most novels require a fair amount of plot, I think, and some are very lacking. I wouldn't make that complaint about a Thirkell novel, however. In her novels not much happens, slowly, with humor and insight and great delight. Take this book, for instance. The locals are upset about the proposed development of a certain plot of land, so they plan to protest. First they need to hold a meeting to organize the meeting where they will discuss the problem. Half way through the book they are just holding the first get-together. What happens at it? Absolutely nothing. Did I find myself grumbling about not enough going on? Absolutely not. I'm having too much fun with clueless husbands who natter on about how they can never get a word in edgewise, the local dairy cow rivalry, and generally wondering exactly who is falling for whom and how it will all work out. It's not easy to lampoon people's frailties without coming across as sour or judgmental, but Thirkell succeeds. And I get a kick out of books where the men fall hopelessly in love but the women are often more interested in livestock, or dogs, or gardening. (It's refreshing after so many modern books where the girls act like they can't live without a man.) Also in this book the author shows her ability to portray life's sadness and shortcomings without melodrama. Her books are full of characters who are in love, but they still manage to let down or hurt each other. Thirkell clearly realized that marriage isn't all happiness and love isn't without sadness, disappointment or pain. I think the Middleton's relationship shows this really well, but it's not the only one that does. There's some heartache mixed in with the happiness. I like this approach so much more than writers who beat you over the head with life's sorrows and ignore the joys. This may be one of the best Barchester novels, and would be a good one for a first-time reader to try. There's a lovely balance of description and plot, humor and pathos. Thirkell was a genius. :) Which one is this? Daphne is caught between two men, gets engaged, then ends up with the right one. Lilian also finds love again. Denis gets started on his career. Catherine Middleton has affection but not understanding love in her marriage.) NB - Tastes vary, of course, but one thing I love about Thirkell is her apparent affection for her characters. I envision her living among them, seeing their shortcomings but, realizing she has those too, genuinely enjoying her neighbors. She may smile at them, but she's never mean-spirited.
