The prayer for the dying, in Catholic ritual, is associated with the Sacrament of the Sick (Extreme Unction), and it goes back to Chapter 5 of the Epistle of Saint James – “Is any sick among you? Let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him” (James 5:14-15). Accordingly, A Prayer for the Dying is suitable as a title for a suspense novel that is deeply infused with Catholic sensibilities regarding themes of guilt and redemption. The novel’s English-born author, Jack Higgins (not his real name), was raised by his Irish mother in Belfast – and therefore it makes sense that the Northern Ireland conflict, a central aspect of this novel, would come to be of interest for him. A prolific author of thrillers that bring together politics and espionage, Higgins is probably best known for The Eagle Has Landed (1975), a brisk, best-selling page-turner about a Nazi commando plot to try to change the course of the Second World War by kidnapping British Prime Minister Winston Churchill. In a telling indicator of how strongly Higgins’s Northern Ireland upbringing influenced him, The Eagle Has Landed includes as a focal character an Irish Republican Army agent working with the Nazi commandos. A Prayer for the Dying was published years before The Eagle Has Landed , in 1972, a particularly difficult period of the Northern Ireland conflict that is usually referred to as “the Troubles.” It was the year of “Bloody Sunday,” the incident in which British Army paratroopers fatally shot thirteen unarmed demonstrators in Derry/Londonderry, and therefore it was a time in which Northern Ireland was very much on the minds of people around the world. The protagonist of A Prayer for the Dying is one Martin Fallon, an IRA hitman who was the lead character of a previous Higgins novel, Cry of the Hunter (1960). As the novel begins, Fallon has left his Irish homeland and taken refuge in England, conscience-stricken as the result of civilian casualties that resulted from a bungled IRA attack on a British Army convoy. On the run from British military and intelligence operatives, ordinary police officers, and his former IRA comrades, Fallon is sought out by a British gangster, Jack Meehan, who hides his criminal enterprises behind his “legitimate” business as a mortician – a business that, with a crematorium on premises, makes the disposal of bodies an easy thing. Meehan’s offer to Fallon is a simple one – money, a passport, and a boat passage to America, in return for Fallon carrying out one last hit on a mob rival of Meehan’s. Fallon, after some arm-twisting, agrees; but when he commits the murder in a church cemetery, he is seen by the parish priest, Father Michael da Costa. A compassionate priest who serves as a kind guardian for his blind niece Anna, Father da Costa has some pretty tough history of his own, as a former partisan in Nazi-occupied Yugoslavia during the Second World War and a survivor of North Korean torture during the Korean War. Anyone who has seen the Alfred Hitchcock film I Confess (1953) can anticipate Fallon’s next move: he goes to Father Da Costa and confesses his crime, placing his act of murder under the seal of the confessional. Father Da Costa’s anger at this stratagem by the ex-IRA man is understandable, but he is a true priest, an educator in the sinful ways of the fallen human soul. And he rocks Fallon’s stated confidence in being able to walk away from this murder, board his boat, and start over in America: [Fallon said,] “Don’t worry, I’ll put something in the poor box on the way out. I can afford it.” He flicked his cigarette out into space. “I’ll be going now.” He turned, and Father da Costa grabbed him by the sleeve, pulling him round. “You’re making a mistake, Fallon. I think you’ll find that God won’t let you have it your way.” Fallon said coldly, “Don’t be stupid, Father.” “In fact, He’s already taken a hand,” Father da Costa continued. “Do you think I was there in that cemetery at that particular moment by accident?” He shook his head. “Oh, no, Fallon. You took one life, but God made you responsible for another – mine.” Fallon’s face was very pale now. And as Father da Costa’s niece Anna was listening to this conversation from a nearby place of shelter, it turns out that Fallon is now responsible for two lives. The gangster Meehan, a man capable of any form or degree of cruelty, knows that Father da Costa and Anna know something , and he is not the kind who likes to leave potential witnesses. And Meehan’s younger brother Billy is a sexual sadist casting his malignant gaze towards Anna. It sounds melodramatic, and it is – but there are elements of A Prayer for the Dying that give it a certain dignity nonetheless. And most of all, Fallon’s growing remorse for the life he has lived holds the book together. Over the course of the novel, one learns more about the botched IRA operation that made him leave the organization. And under Father da Costa’s prompting, Fallon can’t help recognizing that he carried out his last his killing strictly for money and an escape from the law; he can’t claim that it was all in the line of duty, for old Éire and the glorious cause of a united Ireland. The depth of his sorrow shows through when a young sex worker named Jenny Fox tries to seduce Fallon, on Billy Meehan’s orders. He frowned slightly, and then a brief, sad smile touched his mouth. He kissed her gently on the lips and shook his head. “Not me, girl dear, not me in the whole wide world. You need a man…I’m just a corpse walking.” Fallon ends up protecting both Jenny Fox and Anna da Costa from Billy Meehan’s sadism, causing Father da Costa to remark, “You see, my friend, good deeds in spite of yourself. You are a lost man,” and reminding Fallon that the chain of events that he set in motion through the shooting of the gangster is still in motion: “I’m leaving on Sunday night,” Fallon told him. “They’ve arranged passage for me on a ship out of Hull.” “And you think that will finish it?” Father da Costa shook his head. “You’re a fool, Fallon. Jack Meehan will never feel safe while I am still in the land of the living. Trust, honour, truth, the sanctity of the given word. None of these exist for him personally, so why should he believe that they have a meaning for someone else?” And with that, even as Jack Meehan moves forward with his plans to get Father da Costa and his niece Anna permanently out of the way, Martin Fallon assigns himself one more mission – one that he fully intends to be his last, and one that involves no escape via the harbour of Hull. Thriller authors sometimes have an unfortunate habit of throwing in so many can-you-top-this flourishes that the reader finally says, “Oh, come on! ” I must say that A Prayer for the Dying has its share of moments where either the events being depicted, or the prose through which the events are conveyed, or both, made me say, “Oh, come on! ” Or maybe it was, “Oh, bloody hell!” I can’t quite remember. And yet the dynamic between Fallon and Father da Costa keeps the reader's interest, in spite of the book’s many imperfections. Father da Costa sees something in Fallon worth saving, and Fallon intends, in his own way, to save Father da Costa and Anna. A Prayer for the Dying keeps one turning the pages, and in the process gets one thinking about the many ways in which people express sorrow for what they have done, and try to find some measure of redemption.
