Colors are the deeds and sufferings of light. --Goethe A Review via three secondary colors and their introductory paragraphs. Orange “Orange is a bold, forritsome color. It sells, it smiles, it sings, it simpers, combining the aura of Hollywood musicals, the leisure of sunshiny Florida-- Moon Over Miami in Technicolor--and South American festivals. Orange is ‘hot,’ gives back light, and sits at the center of one’s ch’i (cosmic or vital energy). It is an active, warm, advancing earthy color, indicative of and supposedly preferred by social types with an agreeable, good-natured, and gregarious personality, glad-handing and salesman-hearty, yammering and bumptious and irrepressible, although it carries the added connotations, predominantly in its mode of near-phosphorescence, of fickleness, vacillation, lack of steadiness, and, many even insist, a lack of warmth. But, surely, it is nothing if not unshy and bottomlessly flippant and even pagan, a color that takes place, in the parlance of twenties journalism, in full view of the spectators.” Purple “Purple is the magisterium. It is a color combining blue (spirituality and nobility) and red (courage and virility), and symbolizes, among other things, wit, intelligence, knowledge, religious devotion, sanctity, humility, temperance, sobriety--amethysts (from a- plus methyein , to be drunk) were once worn as an anti-alcoholic--penitence, and sorrow. It can seem, on the one hand, sad as a sunless twilight, in which, as a hue, it invariably predominates, or startlingly strong on the other, for it encompasses dusk (‘When purple-colored curtains mark the end of the day,’ sang the Platters) and dawn (‘Iris had dipt the woof,’ writes John Milton of the celestial robe of the archangel Michael, the colors of the goddess of dawn), as well as old age, venerableness, love of truth, and revered memories. It is an elite, at times histrionically pious, severe color, a hue, like blue, that, absorbing light, is passive, retreating, and cold. There is nevertheless a dignity to the color that is as formal and fastidious and as fine as the Faubourg St. Germain. Mountain ranges are purple (‘purple mountain’s majesties’), and so are molehills. In psychology, vanity is purple, as is hauteur--Shelley refers to ‘purple pride’--and of decadence, as well. Purple ranks eighth as a child’s color preference, an adult’s sixth, stands for foundation in the Hebrew Kabbala, and possesses of all other colors the highest frequency in the visible spectrum. Law wears a purple doctoral hood, and lilac is worn for dentistry. Virtue and faith in Egypt are purple. It is the color traditionally worn when reciting the Odyssey to signify, with respect, the sea wanderings of Odysseus.” Green “Green is power, nature’s fuse, the color of more force and guises than are countable, a messenger announcing itself, paradoxically, as the hue of both renewal and reproduction or infirmity and illness. It is at once the preternaturally ambiguous color of life and death, the vernal sign of vitality, and the livid tinge of corruption, a ‘dialectical lyric’ (to borrow a term from Kierkegaard), responding with the kind of answers that perhaps depend less on itself than on the questions we ask of it. Many people still insist that green is a primary color. Why not? M. Voltaire has a character from Micromegas , a visiting inhabitant from Sirius, assert that on that planet, they have thirty-nine primary colors! The color green is compounded of blue and yellow, heaven connecting with earth, a color combining the cold blue light of intellect--it slows down the pulse--with the deep emotional warmth of the yellow sun to produce the wisdom of equality, hope, and resurrection. As the color of Venus and Mercury, devoted lovers, green is peace, vegetation, gladness, and rebirth. It is associated with the number five and is the fairy color, the primal wash, the heraldic tint of envy, of nausea and of hope, of solid gems and eerie mists, of sea cabbage, eelgrass, salt thatch, subaqueous plants, algae, and sea lettuce bearding the rocky shore. ‘Green derives from blue and surpasses it,’ says an old Chinese proverb, referring to the student who, learning from a teacher, grows to surpass him. Did you know that ‘greenth’ is a legitimate word, although rare, meaning verdure? To ‘green’ is even a verb, in Scotland, meaning to yearn. So many hues and shades and tints of green exist in the natural world, so multifarious are its guises, it is impossible ever fully to know them. It is in its numinous energies as infederated as Burma and as various and unpredictable as nature herself. It is ironic, furthermore, that the color green cannot even claim primacy in nature, at least according to Robert Frost in his poem ‘Nothing Gold Can Stay.‘ ‘Nature’s first green is gold,’ he writes, ‘The hardest to hold.’ (Shakespeare always thought green and gold went together.)”
