I have mixed feelings about the fourth book in the Joanna Brady series. Since the book is older, (and I suspect few people will be looking at this review), I am just going to touch briefly on my thoughts. On a positive note, I found the plot in this novel to be much more involved than earlier ones in the series. There are also several subplots that occur in addition to the main one and Jance does a good job tying them altogether to make an interesting story. The reader also gets more detailed knowledge about Joanna's struggle to balance work and family life and why she feels it is so important to succeed as Sheriff. Finally, Jance provides the reader with a more in-depth look at some of the supporting characters' personal lives which is fantastic. Up to this point in the series, it seems the character focus has been primarily on Joanna and her daughter Jenny. It was nice to get a better understanding about Joanna's friends Marianne and Jeff, as well as a peek at what is behind the tumultuous relationship she has with Chief Deputy Richard Voland. On the flip side, there was one thing that REALLY bothered me. Jance portrays her protagonist as moderately progressive. In addition, the character is always defending the rights of others and viewed as always taking the moral high road. So I was shocked when the main character uses quite a derogatory term more than once to refer to a group of immigrants involved in a motor vehicle crash. This language was so out of character that I thought I must have misread it. I feel I must give an example from this book as to why I found this problematic. In the beginning pages of this book, Joanna explains how she became so close to her best friend Marianne. Basically, in their middle school years, someone at school calls Marianne a "half-breed" and Joanna was so upset by the "casual indifference" that the comment was delivered with that she immediately takes to her defense and they become life-long friends. So why then would Joanna feel it is okay to use derogatory slang, especially in the workplace? With that said, I will continue reading the series. I am hoping that the remarks were nothing more than an oversight by Jance and that they will not be present in the future.
