Schlesinger is a good prose stylist, and there's interesting biographical detail of political leaders throughout, but I found it hard to get into this book and was often frustrated by it. Much of the book is about the controversy of the Bank of the United States, but I never felt like Schlesinger gave us the proper context to understand the real debates here. It's clear Schlesinger thought Jackson and the "hard money" crowd were in the right, but I'm still not 100% sure why. This episode, like much of the book, is discussed in terms of personalities and politics rather than in terms of substance. Maybe I'm grafting my own worldview on too much, but it almost seemed like the Politico view of history (all what one person said to/about another person, and about political positioning) rather than history that also explores the ultimate merit (or lack thereof) of actual policies. It's also hard to swallow how long the book takes to acknowledge the central role of slavery in so many of the sectional and other debates of the era ... and even when the book turns to discuss slavery, it acts as if slavery only arose as a political issue the day the Wilmot Proviso forbidding slavery in any territory acquired during the Mexican War was proposed. That's just wrong. The book also avoids wrestling with other aspects of Jackson, completely ignoring his treatment of Native Americans and lionizing his commitment to democracy (and the little guy) without really even acknowledging the exclusion of many men and all women from the political process that continued to occur. I know it's always dicey to look at the past through the present's morality, but it's also silly in my view to completely ignore what we've learned -- you end up greatly praising John C. Calhoun while only mentioning in asides and downplaying the lengths to which fervent defense of (and promotion of) slavery drove his career. With all that said, Schlesinger is insightful on the linkages and contradictions between Jeffersonian and Jacksonian visions and realities, and he is exhaustive in his tracing of personality conflicts. But ultimately, as read in the 21st Century, there is just too much lacking in this book.
