Read for the Earthsea readalong I'm hosting, #LeGuinAlong! More info here Well this was a bit of an odd one. I both did and didn't enjoy it. This book definitely has the classic fantasy feel to it, with its lengthy descriptions and epic journeying. But I have to admit, the only thing motivating me to pick it back up again was my host role in the readalong. It took me two weeks or so to read a book only 170 page long, not because of anything outright bad , but it just seemed to miss the mark. While I usually love in-depth world building, the extent of it in this book felt a little off balance. Every time Ged arrived on a new island - which was numerous times in most chapters - at least a page would be spent explaining said island, info-dumping a whole host of names and facts on you that actually aren't relevant at all. If it was woven more subtly into the text as the story continued, I probably would have loved it. I love seeing a world so thoroughly built. But instead, the plot would come to a shuddering halt every time, and it just threw the pacing off entirely. It didn't help that in comparison, any action or development scenes appeared skipped over. We spend the first five chapters being told Ged is learning magic, but see nothing of it. Instead, the various buildings of the School on Roke are described and followed with a simple "and this is where Ged went to learn next" before skipping to him having acquired this new knowledge. It felt...unbalanced. That being said, I did enjoy reading it. It felt like one of those books you can't rush, one you had to take your time with and appreciate every word. It felt like an epic story despite being so short. I found the magic system an interesting one, the idea of names and power being one that's lived throughout history. Small ties like that only helped it feel like a long, legendary story. With only a small cast of characters, there wasn't too much to get your teeth into. Ged is, quite frankly, insufferable to start, with all the ego and arrogance you can expect from someone who has been told he's naturally powerful. But it was interesting seeing him learn humility - granted, he still manages to bulldoze into every situation with choices that make you want to facepalm. But with no dithering on decisions, he kept the action going probably as quick as it could have been (considering the writing style). There weren't many side characters, though the "antagonists" all proved interesting dynamics simply because when you take away Ged's perspective, it's not actually all that simple. I have to admit that though she played a small role in the book, Yarrow quickly became one of my favourite characters for all her inquisitiveness in an overwhelmingly masculine society... and also maybe because of the teeny pet dragon. So, all in all, bit of a mixed review. All I can say is I both enjoyed and disliked this book at once, and the liveshow for it should be an interesting one (happening on my channel Saturday 2nd May, 8pm UK). I'm excited to see where the next book goes, especially after the hints we received about that plot line in this one...
