Reader thoughts: Although I liked the book, I had many small issues with it. Or, rather, I didn't like the book, but I found several, er, gems in it. I'm not sure which it is. So, the problems first. There were small plot holes. 1, There was a conversation in which it was determined that it made more sense to talk about how many generations ago something happened rather than how many years ago something happened. The two creatures (one "human" and the other an insect), decided that "years" wasn't as useful because everyone's generations are different. Some might live sixty years, and another six hundred. So, clearly, saying "three generations ago" in a conversation is better. What? How in the world does that make sense? Years is an accurate measure of time no matter the size of your generations. Bah! 2, Ahvren is around two months before trying to help his sister get out of the arranged marriage. Now her wedding is in seven days. Then he waits another 2 or 3 days before doing the one thing she asked him to do. She asked him to talk to the emperor's son and convince him to not marry her. Ahvren failed anyway . . . why not have him try sooner? (Actually, I don't understand why there was a need for the 2 month delay between chapter 1--his arrival--and the rest of the book. It threw off the pacing and annoyed me. Why not just have it all happen in the same week?) 3, There were three days left until his sister's wedding. The next morning, Ahvren is worried because there are only three days left until his sister's wedding. ? 4, The technology didn't fit. They have truth drugs and spaceships, but they don't have handheld communicators. They have electronic credit as money, but they have a limited number of devices per city that can access the internet. Oh, and the internet is a vocal question/answer station. They had special gravity trains, but they didn't seem to have sensors and cameras (except the prison at the end). I didn't care for the last fourth of the book. The momentum was gone. I didn't care about Sabri, and I didn't feel like Ahvren did either. The society around him completely changed. I mean, it went from docile and pacifist to "only what's profitable" to suddenly "we'll help you break your sister out of prison even though she killed someone." It felt like it went a different direction, and I didn't care for it. Besides, Ahvren should have seen the end coming. Especially since his sister said he was clever. Obviously the bad guy was a Vivitare. They're the only ones who do any fighting anymore anyway! And he knew it was someone in his house but not a servant. He ruled out his dad. He could not think of his sister (who had the most motive of anyone to kill her loathed, future husband), just because she's a woman. How dumb. I picked her pages and pages ago. I disliked the lie at the very end. This is unfair, because it was the first clever thing Ahvren had done. Still, he claimed he was sleeping with Dara (his best friend's crush), and that was his alibi for why he couldn't possibly have been breaking his sister out of prison. Yes, this worked because Dara was in on the plot, and if she were a non-virgin Roi could marry her . . . but it's a terrible excuse. I hate when characters casually discuss sex outside of marriage. Besides, Ahvren lied . He shouldn't have been able to. Let's move to the aspects of the book I really liked. Ahvren's inability to lie because of a strange sort of PTSD. Now, this compulsion to blurt out the truth could have been stronger (see the one guy in Extras ), and it could have been more consistent, but I liked it. It made Ahvren an unusual character, and it added a light tension to all his conversations. He's practically unable to keep a secret. However, this problem of his didn't get him into trouble as much as I hoped/expected it to. So, that's a bit of a waste. I loved the T'chin/T'Chin culture. I figured it out waaaay before Ahvren, but I think readers were supposed to. I liked how Ahvren slowly started to use T'Chin ways of thinking as the book progressed. He used "unprofitable" several times toward the end as a reason for not doing something. He started to use "unfit" in a different sense, and talk of some of his people's barbaric ideas with sarcasm. The fit vs unfit society idea was neat. Yes, it's weird that that sterilize any male that doesn't pass a swordsmanship test by their 20th birthday, but it was a neat idea, unique. I can't decide if not making women pass a test was demeaning, forgiving, or both. Writer thoughts: Actually, this might be better labeled as Marketer's Thoughts . Anyway, the cover is awful. Seriously awful. It has a guy with a sword in a desert. While, yes, Ahvren carries a sword, this speaks "fantasy," not "spaceships and sci-fi and detective investigation." The desert says "uncivilized wilderness" setting rather than "giant spaceport city that happens to have sandstorms" setting. The blurb is also awful, the one on this book, anyway. It uses "T'Chin confederacy" and "Vivitare" and "Ahvren" in the first twenty words. For me, this is a big turn off. If I'm confused by the second sentence in a blurb, I don't read further! Next, you can hardly tell it's a sci-fi book from the blurb. There are two mentions of "planet," but everything else is "assassinate the emperor" and all about how Ahvren doesn't trust the peace and stuff about "this wholly imaginative world." These words, especially combined with the cover, seem more "fantasy and political intrigue" than "sci-fi detective and culture story." Basically, this book was mishandled.
