Review for the abridged penguin classics translated and edited by Royall Tyler -- 4 stars This is basically a very long story about magnificent Genji dealing with his countless women and court intrigues. This is a fantastic abridged version, the version I'll recommend to anyone who's curious about this story. Royall Tyler picked the best parts from the first 17 books, some are unabridged, others are slightly abridged, and then some of them are skipped altogether. He also simplified the naming of the various characters. You see, in the original it was rude to mention people's names, so the work refers to them by their job titles or in relation to other people. And since some character's titles change through their careers and the same titles are inhabited by different people it can be quite a frustrating and confusing reading experience. What we get as a result is a smoother and clearer story where you can enjoy the rich Japanese medieval court world with its arts, customs and poetry. And also this time I appreciated how modern this story felt. When I read Beowulf or Homer I never feel that real people live in those pages. Perhaps that’s why contemporary retellings are so attractive. But this ancient work of literature is full of real humans, warm-blooded, messy, jealous humans that gives this book a timelessness. Such a fascinating experience, because remember, this book is a contemporary of the aforementioned Beowulf. So yeah, read this version and if after finishing it you'll crave another 800 pages of Genji, only then pick up the unabridged text. Review for the unabridged penguin deluxe edition translated and edited by Royall Tyler -- 2 stars I've read almost 400 pages of this beast. And there's 750 pages left... And this book became a chore and I'm not having any fun with it. It's time to through in a towel. You know what this book is in a nutshell? It is an OG chick lit. It was written by a court lady for the purpose of entertaining of other court ladies in a deeply patriarchal worlds where women were hidden from men behind doors and curtains. And composed poems and played music for men's entertainment. It is a story about sexy gorgeous heavily perfumed Genji trying to have consensual or more often non-consensual sex with every woman he fancies. This is a bodice ripper, or kimono ripper I suppose? Every chapter is for a new woman. It goes like this: Genji meets some beautiful lady, becomes passionate, rapes her or sometimes seduces, then he writes letters with poems to her and weeps because of his feeling. Lather, rinse, repeat. I know that astrologer prophesied Genji having 3 kids in his life with 2 of them becoming emperor and empress but i have a suspicion that half of Japanese kids at that time were illegitimate kids of his. Here's an example: The first thing Genji does after his wife dies in labor is going home and marrying and having sex with a young girl he abducted a few years earlier(she was 9) from her father(His Highness) because she reminded Genji of his lover and her aunt (Lady Fujitsubo), who is a primary consort of his father, the Emperor, and she became a consort because Lady Fujitsubo reminded the Emperor of his favorite dead lover and Genji's mother. The problem is that there's nothing else to the story, no adventures, political intrigues. Which is understandable because these women never went outside by themselves and it was forbidden for women in that time to learn about history or politics. This is the quote: Genji marshaled all the arguments he could, but I should not have repeated any of them. (Footnote: Because matters of history and government are not for a woman to discuss.) So I guess I could've pushed through but I'm feeling my mortality and there's too many books I want to read in this life. Goodbye my sweet Genji.
