I've been in a reading slump for a while, and picking up this beloved childhood book helped lift my spirits. Sara Crewe is one of my all-time favorite characters from literature. She's clever, compassionate and very brave. I have always liked this early description of Sara, when her father takes her to a boarding school in London: "I am not in the least anxious about her education," Captain Crewe said, with his gay laugh, as he held Sara's hand and patted it. "The difficulty will be to keep her from learning too fast and too much. She is always sitting with her little nose burrowing into books. She doesn't read them, Miss Minchin; she gobbles them up as if she were a little wolf instead of a little girl. She is always starving for new books to gobble, and she wants grown-up books — great, big, fat ones — French and German as well as English — history and biography and poets, and all sorts of things." Aside from not being able to read French or German, reading this passage as an adult made me nostalgic for the book hunger of my younger self, back when there seemed to be endless hours in which to read big, interesting books. Here is another description I love, when Sara is first getting to observe her new classmates: [Miss St. John] became redder than ever — so red, indeed, that she almost looked as if tears were coming into her poor, dull, childish eyes; and Sara saw her and was so sorry for her that she began rather to like her and want to be her friend. It was a way of hers to want to spring into any fray in which someone was made uncomfortable or unhappy. "If Sara had been a boy and lived a few centuries ago," her father used to say, "she would have gone about the country with her sword drawn, rescuing and defending every one in distress. She always wants to fight when she sees people in trouble." Sidebar: I had heard a piece of trivia that the book A Little Princess was part of the inspiration for the character of Buffy the Vampire Slayer. If that anecdote is true, I could see it linked to the passage above. Later in the novel, after Sara had suffered some heartbreak and setbacks, and she has to keep soldiering on in very difficult situations for an 11-year-old, we get this description of how tough she can be: "I never answer when I can help it. When people are insulting you, there is nothing so good for them as not to say a word — just to look at them and think . Miss Minchin turns pale with rage when I do it. Miss Amelia looks frightened, and so do the girls. When you will not fly into a passion people know you are stronger than they are, because you are strong enough to hold in your rage, and they are not, and they say stupid things they wish they hadn't said afterward. There's nothing so strong as rage, except what makes you hold it in — that's stronger. It's a good thing not to answer your enemies. I scarcely ever do." I enjoyed rereading this beloved book so much I think I might revisit another Burnett favorite, The Secret Garden.
