I like some of Chopin's short stories so it was kind of disappointing to get to the Awakening and find that there really isn't that much to it. Beyond anything, I'm confused by it, because when I think of feminist texts, this just doesn't seem to do the trick. This is completely up to interpretation and debate, of course, but Edna Pontellier just doesn't scream "feminist hero" to me. Feminism (at least in my mind) should be embracing one's identity as a woman and seeking equality with men. Here, we get Edna, who, if she didn't want to get married and be tied down by kids, shouldn't have gotten married and had kids. Even still, the Pontelliers have someone to take care of their kids for them, and they have a cook, so it's not even like Edna is really so overcome with domestic roles. There's like one day a week when she has to stay home to help her husband out, and she just quits everything to paint in her attic. I don't get it; if roles were reversed and Leonce dropped everything to pursue his hobbies, there would be a problem, so why don't we have a problem when Edna does it? Furthermore, is being discontent in a marriage an excuse to have an affair? Then the book ends and Edna literally quits. everything. I get that there's a problem in general with women being treated as possessions or as inferior in this books' society, but I don't think Chopin does a very good job tackling the issue. Edna wants Leonce to treat her better but she doesn't actually talk to him like a real person; she's just petty all the time. And that brings me to my second issue with the book, which is that, if this book wasn't a social commentary, it would be utterly unimpressive. I do admire some of the symbolism with birds and some of Chopin's writing style, but none of the characters are likeable and they aren't developed that much. With the exception of Edna going from hopeful to hopeless, nobody changes. Maybe Chopin did that intentionally to show the futility of society, but if she was going to write static characters, the least she could do was make some of them sympathetic. I don't feel anything towards anyone in this book, and that just doesn't make for good story-telling. So it's no wonder that the plot is pretty much at a stand-still for the entire duration of the novella. Not a whole lot happens. To close, I'll paraphrase a close friend of mine, who suggested that maybe the reason so many critics disliked The Awakening had less to do with the social criticism, and more to do with the fact that it's also not a very good book.
