this is my first time reading this book also, this is the first book that came out in the 1990s! the main plot is that sharon schafer and richard spier decide to get married. they want to have a small wedding, and the spiers will be moving into the schafer's house, which upsets mary anne. the subplot is that the arnold twins who we thought were getting along after the resolution in Mallory and the Trouble With Twins are fighting nonstop. mary anne suggests that they stop sharing a bedroom, and that solves all their problems. still, mary anne decides that sharing dawn's bedroom will be a good idea because she is a moron. the book ends in a cliffhanger: after the wedding, sharon throws the bouquet, and mary anne and dawn both try to catch it (WHO WILL CATCH IT OMG). highlights: -marilyn arnold's imaginary friend gozzie kunka, who is very worldly and speaks with a foreign accent. -marilyn and carolyn do the masking tape room divider thing that you always see in media about siblings sharing rooms and fighting about it. there's nothing I love more in bsc books than an overdone trope. (not sarcastic). -sharon on the new store at the mall, zingy's: "no way, young lady. this place is pure punk." I like picturing dawn and mary anne wearing 77 punk fashion to a wedding. as though these laura ashley fans would have wanted dresses from that store in the first place! haha -a cliffhanger! this is notable, because there has never been a cliffhanger before in this series (and I don't think there ever will be again, but I could be wrong). lowlights: -ann is out-of-touch alert: mary anne and dawn try to find dresses to wear to the wedding at talbots. I'm sorry, are mary anne and dawn 70-year-old women who like shapeless clothing? because those are the only people who try to find dresses at talbots. -in the dear reader (letter to the reader that ann put in the mid-90s rereleases of the books) ann talks about writing stories that work and don't work. she says she considered sending mallory to boarding school but that wouldn't work because she's a popular character, so everyone would miss her. BUT THEN SHE DOES SEND MALLORY TO BOARDING SCHOOL! ( The All-New Mallory Pike ). -richard is bummed that sharon won't try his veal at their post-wedding dinner. of course she doesn't want to eat veal, you creep! she barely eats meat as it is, and even a ton of people who eat meat think veal is inhumane. claudia outfit: - "At our last meeting she was wearing layers--a shocking-pink tunic over a white shirt with pink and yellow umbrellas printed on it. Over the tunic was a wide, low-slung yellow belt with a pink plastic buckle. The shirt, but not the tunic, was tucked into a pair of black knickers, and below the knickers were yellow stockings. Then there's her hair...she had divided it into five braids and had woven pink and yellow ribbons into the braids." mary anne's kid kit: -puzzle -crayons and paper -kaleidoscope -modeling clay -mary anne's game of school stacey's kid kit: -mrs. piggle wiggle books -paper and stickers -pastels snacks in claudia's room: -m&ms in a box labeled WODCUT SUPPLISE under her bed -crackers under her desk
