(1.5 stars) Only the most stalwart of Updike fans (and for the most part I consider myself one) would find much of value in "Toward the End of Time". Its half-baked musings on mortality, our place in the cosmos, and post-apocalyptic life is a really tough (and, often, creepy) tour of Updike's brain. A good chunk of Updike's near-50 books invoke similar themes, with a schlubby, misogynistic, nearly unlikable protagonist/anti-hero coping with issues of aging, occupational success/failure and a hyperactive libido. Rabbit Angstrom, from Updike's twice-Pulitzer-acknowledged Rabbit series, is the template from which Updike has cut each of his successive grumpy-grousers. Where Rabbit was though, in his days of conception, a marginally sympathetic character, Updike's successive creations just slightly tweak the Rabbit character; their similarity can only lead the reader to think they're semi-autobiographical caricatures of Updike's own life. This is particularly problematic with Ben Turnbull, protagonist of "Toward the End of Time", and arguably Updike's creepiest concoction. The premise of this seemed somewhat promising: Ben Turnbull is a 67 year-old retired investment advisor in the year 2020, ten years after the Sino-American conflict which destroyed a huge chunk of the US (a plot point that is woefully underexplained, and seems only to set up a hare-brained sexual fantasy). He had five kids with his first wife (and ten grandkids), and is married to a woman he thinks is trying to kill him. He (predictably) grouses about his sex life, and regularly pays for a prostitute. Despite his rather mundane life, he has no problems throwing around nearly every phylum and genus of every shred of flora and biota on his ocean-front Massachusetts property, and has no problems dropping any and every 50-cent adjective the English language has ever invented ("chthonous"? "opisthognothous"? "steatopygous"? Really, John...you expect us to believe Ben isn't you?!?!). He evidently suffers from dementia or Altzheimer's, too, because he'll (a propos of nothing) break into first-person flights of fancy, being present around the days of Jesus' crucifixion, there when Egyptian tombs robbed of their booty, present as a Nazi guard in a concentration camp, and HOLY CRAP did Ben just fantasize about auto-fellating himself? and GOOD GAWD he didn't just try to have sex with that 13-year-old?? There are smatterings of caustic wit present that remind us that, indeed, John Updike was one great American writer. The aftertaste of some of the skeezy images he leaves us with in this novel, though, are best left in the unread pile, and call for a re-read of the Rabbit series to floss this pseudo-intellectual hoo-ha from the memory banks.
