This book is my first purchase of a book about the history of Black women. Yes I purchased the paperback book back in the 1980s and never touched it for nearly 40 years. I purchased the kindle version back in 2023. Since late 2012, I have eschewed physical books for the ability to enlarge the fonts. In this particular case that was a good thing because Giddings has updated the book in the 40 years since the first publication. This was one of the first books (I was aware of) to tackle history from the point of view and as a main subject of Black women. It is packed full of historical content and analysis. It's actually quite brilliant especially her historical accounts from emancipation through the early 1930s prior to "The Great Migration". Giddings provides in context diary entries, historical documents etc from Black women and detailing the extent to what women in general and Black women in particular have endured to see progress. Giddings details the fight against the patriarchy (my words not hers) chronicalling not just how Black women were treated by whites but also among black people. There are detailed accounts of freed slaves attempting to re-enslave their wives (Black men establishing themselves legally as master) etc. Diary entries to these accounts. Black Women organizations growing alongside white women organizations and as expected they worked together on women's issues but the women's issues associated with being Black and female were dismissed etc. Giddings doesn't make these statements as a part of her analysis, she provides the journal entries and court transcripts and lets the reader draw their own conclusions. It was an excellent view of history presented in a way that I personally hadn't encountered. Meaning journal entries, meeting minutes and letters that are damning that I hadn't seen in other books. It did take me a while to read though it. Some of the details are very dense and it takes time to absorb fully. My perception was that once the book approached more modern times, it did not have the same sense of thoroughness. It's almost like Giddings was reluctant to tackle the era that her readers may have lived through. I would have loved to have seen her thorough take on the civil rights movement and further. Giddings is still alive and in her early 80s. I can only guess that in modern times the amount of material required to go through to present things the way that she has for the earlier times is daunting. Anyways, a very thorough undertaking. I wish Giddings was more well known and respected as an historian. She is doing amazing work! 4+ Stars Read on kindle
