I loved this novel. Just like his earlier Vietnam memoir, this one strikes the perfect balance of rawness and studied reflection. And just like that book, this is unrelenting, dark, and offers a uniformly bleak assessment of the human condition, seen through the eyes of a jaded Vietnam veteran and journalist turned mercenary military adviser in the border region between Ethiopia and Sudan. East Africa itself is one of the starring characters, with beautiful descriptions of its landscapes and the awful emptiness of the Eastern Desert. These are based on Caputo's travels in the region as a reporter, and serve well to reflect the wildness and emptiness that is so evident in his human characters. His writing has echoes of Conrad, exploring themes of human wickedness, condemnation and redemption, and the impact on our character of being removed from civilisation. There are a lot of similarities to Heart of Darkness, and this novel is in some ways a retelling of that story. Caputo's exploration of and reflection on human wickedness is personified in the character of Jeremy Nordstrand. Nordstrand sees himself as one of the elect, a pure and unsullied man among weak and corrupted lesser beings. His character gives a fascinating and unsettling insight into human evil as his stated aim is to discover himself, explore his limits and be himself completely without any interference. That is pretty much a definition of human sinfulness. He goes on to offer some insight into his mindset with his interpretation of Gordon's famous last stand at Khartoum, "The ultimate power is to be yourself so totally that other people don't even exist for you. I keep thinking of how Gordon must have felt when he ignored his orders to evacuate, knowing he was condemning himself and everyone else to death, He did it on his own authority, without a thought about public opinion, or the history books, or duty, or obligations, or those little vermin in London who'd ordered him to run out. He must have felt totally self-fulfilled and self-possessed in that moment. He must have felt like a god." As if that isn't narcissistic and self-centred enough, Nordstrand is even more blunt when he later comments that since we can't be like God in creating life, we can only be like God in taking it. As narrator, Gage comments that these ideas can only seem harmless in the rarefied air of the academy, but now they are going to be translated into action by a determined and ardent believer. As Gage continues to build up a picture of what Nordstrand is like and what drives him, he says, "The picture would not have been so disturbing if it had not been so familiar. I realised that it was a picture of myself, not as I was, but as I could have been. Many of Nordstrand's lusts, his rages, and hatreds, were not unknown to me. The demons who dwelled in him dwelled in me, as they do in all men: the attraction to violence, the need to be free from all restrictions, the impulse to follow one's desires wherever they may lead and without regard for others." Later, he records his realisation that "No catharsis would ever purge the murderous poisons within him. His appetite was limitless. I had feared him, had respected his strength, had admired the power of his convictions; but now all I felt toward him was an immeasurable disgust. He had come to Africa seeking a forbidden liberty, the freedom of the man in isolation, and the price of that freedom was an enslavement to his miscreant impulses. And so I had a moment of enlightenment....I saw him for what he was: neither madman nor monster, but the embodiment of all that was wrong with me, all that is wrong with our crippled natures." What's interesting is that being in such a remote place, away from society's restraining influences, hasn't changed Nordstrand in the slightest. Rather, his circumstances have merely allowed him to express his true nature and character. The irony is that despite all his strength, resolve and sense of purpose, Jeremy Nordstrand is not a god after all, but a mere man. As such, he is ultimately felled, and not by someone stronger or smarter than him, but by something as banal as disease. This comes straight out of Proverbs or Ecclesiastes, as I found myself thinking "Vanity, vanity, all is vanity," and reflecting that man's glory is like the grass of the field: here today, in the fire tomorrow, never lasting. So it is with Nordstrand, as he lies unburied in the desert; forgotten, weak and utterly insignificant. "Seeking a fixed beacon to guide on, I gazed up to look for the Southern Cross among stars so numerous they spread as a white dust across the sky. I found the constellation, and the sight of it comforted me. It was familiar. I had lived under it most of my adult life - in Indochina and in parts of the Middle East and North Africa. I had seen thousands die, cities fall, and governments collapse beneath it, but the constellation always appeared at its appointed place in the heavens, its cold white crucifix offering no consolation save the proof that all of man's wars, his great conquests and tragic defeats, had not the slightest effect on the order of the universe." In the end, Gage sees that everything that is wrong with Nordstrand is wrong with all of us, as the seeds that have burst into full, murderous bloom in him lie within every human heart. This novel is a wonderfully written snapshot of human folly and wickedness, and of how fleeting and weak we really are despite all our pretensions to greatness. What's doubly impressive is that is Caputo's first novel, and I'm looking forward to reading more and discovering how his style and thinking mature. Great read.
