I really wanted to love this book, but it was too slow and repetitive at times and could have been told more concisely, like maybe at least 100 pages shorter! This was Belfer's 1999 debut novel and could have used tighter editing. The City of Light refers to Buffalo, NY (circa 1901) and the Niagara Power Plant that was using hydroelectric power to provide electricity for the city. It had staunch supporters but also detractors (preservationists). It is the site of the first environmental battle in the U.S. I knew little of the history of this area and that was one of the most interesting aspects of the book for me. Belfer weaves a number of storylines besides the impact of the Niagara Power Plant into the novel, issues of civil rights, gender roles, mysterious deaths of a couple of power plant workers and the ill-fated Pan-American Exposition. But I would say it is primarily a story of the power brokers although it is told through the POV of a singular woman -Louisa Barrett, the headmistress of the respected Macaulay school for the daughters of the wealthy or influential families of Buffalo. It gives her access to those in power that most women were denied but at a cost. And when I rise in the gray shadows of dawn, a cooling breeze coming through the open window, my hair flowing around me, my nightdress loose, my body warm beneath it, I gaze in the mirror and see myself for what I am: a woman of feeling, desire, even beauty. The step by step I create the person I must be: The warm, free body becomes corseted and covered with a high-collared navy-blue dress; the flowing hair is twisted into a tight bun; sturdy shoes take the place of bare feet. What do I hide? My joy, my memories, my dreams of those I've loved ... Louisa thinks she has been in control of her life since being hired by the Macaulay school as a teacher, but she will find out that it is far from the truth. This line about the advent of electricity and what it could mean for the world, reminds me of what we grapple with today. Well, cliche that it is, the future does have a way of catching up with us. The technology pushes us along. Makes the impossible, possible.
