2.5 Stars Now and again I read a Dean Koontz novel. They're good for that five or ten minute read before turning out the light at night or while killing time waiting. Not heavy reading and Koontz basically writes from a template making a change here or there.I find that I can skim through sections that are not catching my interest and not miss out on anything. I speculate that he might have a ghost writer now, but who knows? Maybe he's just a spectacular workaholic. Anyway Night Chills is one of his earlier works from the mid-seventies. Though he had at least a couple dozen books under his belt by the time this one was published. Compared to the more current works by Koontz Night Chills has a more of an edge to it. There are a couple rape sequences that are very uncomfortable to read and the two main protagonists have an active sex life that Koontz describes in detail. However it was the seventies and many authors were doing the same thing. Basically soft porn, but porn was sort of mainstream at the time and nobody can accuse Koontz of not being mainstream. So the novel concerns mind control and a small isolated town set in Northern Maine (Hi Steve!) where the villains are testing their nefarious scheme to RULE THE WORLD (cue: Nefarious Laughter). Naturally one of the evil men is a scientific genius, but also a sadistic sex fiend who is an idiot when it comes to being a Big Bad. Things quickly spiral out of control and our little intrepid band of heroes grab their guns (The NRA has got to love Koontz. His heroes always pack artillery.), stop the evil plan, save the world and kill the bad guys. Whoops did I just give away the ending? Really? If you read Dean Koontz none of this should come as a surprise. Night Chills is more of an action novel then a horror story. There are aspects of horror, but there is never that overwhelming sense of dread and doom that marks true horror (in my opinion). It's an action movie with good guys and bad guys and sequences that scream out for a full orchestra score.You can predict what is coming, but you keep watching because..............why not? It's entertaining (mostly) and goes well with popcorn. His works translate well to the screen for that very reason. So heading somewhere for your summer vacation and you're not sure if War and Peace is just the thing for reading while swatting mosquitoes or trying to tan/burn? Well grab a copy of Night Chills and six or seven other Dean Koontz novels. If you find that you are getting bored with one of the novels try a mash-up. Read a chapter of one then a chapter from another. Great fun. Enjoy your summer.
