In the third of the Brother Cadfael mysteries, one Gervase Bonel leaves his estate to the Abbey in exchange for him and his wife being looked after for life, in the process disinheriting his stepson. Not long after moving in, Bonel is killed by poison in a special dish sent out for him by the Abbey and the poison is an oil for joint pain prepared by Brother Cadfael. The most of obvious suspect is Bonel’s stepson, fifteen-year-old Edwin Gurney who turns out to be the son of Cadfael’s old sweetheart Richildis (now married to Bonel), and Cadfael is convinced by his own methods that the boy is innocent. There are plenty of disgruntled people in Bonel’s household for though never bending the law, he was not above doing things for his own profit but none seems to have a strong enough motive. To add to Cadfael’s difficulties, Hugh Beringar is away and the case is in the hands of the less sympathetic (and rather condescending) sheriff Gilbert Prestcote. And then Cadfael finds himself confined to the Abbey for his unbecoming conduct in having talked to the widow Bonel at night. Meanwhile the Abbey is the midst of its own troubles with Abbot Heribert set to be replaced and Prior Robert taking over before he has even been named successor. While Cadfael is confined to the Abbey’s precincts for a bit, he is helped by Brother Mark, his young apprentice who is quite glad to go “detecting”, and even forego prayers in the process. This mystery felt surprisingly “gentle” and slow considering the urgency of solving the murder and clearing Edwin of the charge, the uncooperative sheriff other impediments he faces from the Abbey, the politically charged atmosphere at the Abbey, and Cadfael’s own concern in the matter of his concoction (its key ingredient being monk’s hood) having been used in the murder, and of course, the matter involving Richildis. I enjoyed the setting as always, which gives one glimpses into life at the Abbey and its surroundings and a great “feel” of the period. The little excursion that Cadfael makes into Wales was also very enjoyable, particularly the time he spends outdoors with the sheep under the night sky-felt lovely and peaceful. This was again a winter story ending at Christmas but despite the snow the whole atmosphere never felt as chilly and awful as in the Virgin in the Ice . An enjoyable instalment in the series. p.s. The ending was great fun (the comic touch in one scene particularly)!
