Boone Caudill was a man, a very bland man. Luckily he had some friends I could stand. Boone was tortured and volatile which could have had the makings for a great character. I was excited to see where it would go but the trip up the Missouri River was at times more arduous for me than it was for them. I wanted to glide downstream to civilization even if I could be robbed, beaten, and thrown in jail by a backward system. I can understand why people love this so I couldn't bring myself to give it less than 3 stars. I know it was a groundbreaking book and it paved the way for authors like Wallace Stenger and Larry McMurtry. If I hadn't recently fallen head over heels for Lonesome Dove and Angle of Repose , maybe I would have liked this better. Lonesome Dove excelled at the fast pace driving narrative and character development whereas Angle of Repose had gorgeous prose and contemplative brilliance. The Big Sky couldn't match those, but where it mostly fell short for me was in the character development. The novel's strengths were its landscape descriptions and the contemplative passages that were in the voice of Dick Summers and Jim Deakins. If either of them were the central character instead of Boone Caudill, I'd probably have liked this a lot more. There is one point where Dick Summers beautifully describes the first time he saw Jackson's Hole and the Grand Teton and then compares it to the current time: "It was all in the way a man thought, though the way a young man thought. When the blood was strong and the heat high a body felt the earth was newborn like himself; but when he got some years on him he knew different; down deep in his bones he understood that everything was old, old as time, maybe - so old he wondered what folks had been on it before the Indians themselves, following up the waters and pitching their lodges on who had gone before. It made a man feel old himself to know that younger ones coming along would believe the world was new, just as he had done, just as Boone and Jim were doing, though not so strong any more." I've always felt old, in terms of civilization, and those who have walked before. I love hearing stories about how people overcame obstacles, worked hard, and managed great things with little resources. I should have loved this, but there were too many parts that either bored me or felt inauthentic, especially when it came to Teal Eye. Then the ending made me so mad, that I refused to read the last 44 pages. It wasn't passionate anger of beloved character being wronged, it was the disgusted-type anger that thinks "come on. this is how you're going to spice up this book?!" I had respected the book up to that point. I'm reading The Way West next month. I believe it focuses on Dick Summers who was my favorite of the three main men. That leaves me hopeful that I will like the second installment much better. I also haven't been in the best of moods lately so that could have contributed to not being able to bond with this book.
