I really enjoyed this collection of memoir-essays by Andre Dubus II. Titled "Meditations from a Moveable Chair," the essays were all written after the author started using a wheelchair, but not all of the essays are about his disability, or his life as a disabled person. Some of the essays focus on other people, or events unrelated to the car accident that damaged his body so greatly. Some essays focus on his childhood, and different moments from his adult life as an able-bodied man. I loved reading this book. I especially loved reading it so soon after finishing one of his collections of short stories: "Selected Stories." Andre Dubus II is a marvelous writer, and his memoir-essays give a fascinating illumination and depth to his fiction. This book was also a balm for my soul. I love the prose of his son, Andre Dubus III, and I loved seeing Andre Dubus III appear in these personal essays. I loved seeing all of the family members in these pages. I also just loved having Andre Dubus II alive again. Even more than reading his fiction, when I read these essays, I feel like he lives again, while I sit absorbing these words. As a white, neurotypical, able-bodied, cis, hetero, middle-class American male, Andre Dubus II had a life that changed quite dramatically when he became a disabled man. The beauty of these essays is how humbly and brutally honest he is, at all times. In some of the essays about his childhood and young adulthood, the reader can see his privilege shining through. Sometimes the author draws attention to his unacknowledged entitlements, and other times, the reader can do that without the text making anything explicit. Andre Dubus II was a very sensitive man. His sudden change from being an able-bodied man to being a disabled man intensified those sensitivities, increased his humility, and increased his comfort with weakness. He also gained a greater acceptance of having a lack of control over life. He was forced to become intimately aware of all the many and constant ways disabled people are dehumanized and disregarded in American society, and some of the essays in "Meditations from a Moveable Chair" discuss that disregard in powerful ways. Highly recommended. Especially if you are already a fan of the author's fiction.
