First BSC book I ever read! I still remember being about seven or eight, and my mother bringing this home from her school's library (she taught high school at the time). It was the beginning of a great love affair, and my second obsession in life. Looking back, this was an interesting book to be introduced to the series through. It's part two of Mary Anne and the Great Romance, and the book where the Schafer-Spier family first comes together. I think because this was the first BSC book I read, I am very critical of the cover and the contents. In the cover of this book, Mary Anne looks taller than Dawn, even though the book states that Mary Anne is short. Also, the book never describes Jeff being in the room the two girls share, but on the cover he's sitting on the bed. (Unless they have their backs turned to each other in Jeff's room?) Things I remember from reading as a kid: I learned the word dish means gossip. I think my seven year old self may have dreamed of the day when I would be thirteen, and say things like, "We sat around and dished about the wedding." To this day I have never had an opportunity to use it. I just can't pull it off. I thought the Pikes were so annoying that I couldn't believe anyone would want to be their friends. I think because Mallory has a crabby moment with Claudia in the book that I thought she was the resident crabby character of the series. It took me a long to realize that she is considered to be patient and level-headed. I made my mother read the cursive entries to me since I didn't feel confident reading cursive. Claudia's entry made her say, "Oh, this girl has a learning disability." Again, it was years before I realized that the series does not acknowledge Claudia's learning disability, just excuses her trouble in school as "not trying hard enough." I hated Mary Anne for a long time (to this day she is still my least favorite baby sitter) because she was so horrible to Dawn to in this book. She calls her fat, gloats over taking a sitting job from Dawn and forces her to listen to her story about the job, and then she condescends to her because poor sad little Dawn doesn't have a boyfriend, or a date to the school dance. Even as a seven or eight year old, I thought Mary Anne was a massive bitch. I LOVED Dawn's trick on Mary Anne, especially since Mary Anne was so mean to Dawn throughout the book. I thought Dawn was so clever for coming up with such an elaborate trick, and pulling it off without being caught. However. . . Things I've considered since reading it as an adult: I HATE Dawn's mean trick on Mary Anne, and I can't understand why she doesn't get caught. I would think the parents would give Dawn a stern talking to, even if she denies knowledge, because duh, who else would make Mary Anne a crazy, screaming mess over a ghost? Even if no one mentions it in this book, how did this prank and its consequences never come up in the rest of the series? Also, why doesn't Dawn just say to Mary Anne, "I thought it would be awesome to share a room with my best friend, but as a sister you suck, so move out of my room, now." Or, "Hey, it's not working, it's my fault that I forced you to move into my room, so I'll apologize by helping you move your stuff to the guest room." Dawn wonders why her mother, and Mary Anne's father didn't anticipate certain problems about merging families BEFORE they got married. It's because they refused to live together before marriage, thus helping their children transition to new family traditions before making it seem so permanent. As an adult, who would never dream of living with a man before marrying him, I feel bad for Dawn and Mary Anne that their parents are stuck in a Victorian England mindset, and therefore make life harder for their children. I still think Mary Anne was a massive bitch to Dawn, and she totally deserved all her problems with Logan and Cokie down the road, Karma, baby.
