America's founders owned slaves. On a large scale. Their fortunes were built upon human bondage and misery. This is the nasty worm festering in the apple of America’s founding mythology. It’s an extremely uncomfortable subject, one that many Americans would prefer to ignore altogether. The idea that men we have come to view as great and noble could on the one hand stake their lives and honor on the cause of freedom and liberty for "all men,” and on the other exclude an entire race that they held in bondage for their own profit is a huge contradiction that does not easily fit into the ideal American mythos that we have learned to revere. Yet it is vital that we face it, own it as part of our history, and begin to understand the meaning and consequences of this stain on the American ideal. In An Imperfect God Henry Wiencek examines this question by focusing on the foremost founder - George Washington. In Washington, he detects a clear evolution of thought. He shows us Washington the young man who seemingly accepted the institution without question; the mature man who began to question it on moral and ethical grounds, and the old man who found it morally repugnant, and against the wishes of his family, emancipated all of his slaves in his will, making him unique among the slave owning founders. Wiencek recreates the world that Washington was born into, showing us the context of his thought and action. He explains the social system of the great landed plantation owners, whose wealth and prestige were built upon human slavery. He is unsparing in his depiction of an institution that often led to shared blood ties between masters and slaves, so that many masters held in bondage their own children, grandchildren, brothers and sisters, and reveals that some of the slaves held at Mt. Vernon were blood relatives of Martha Washington. And he makes it clear, not from the judgment of our own times, but from Washington's and other founder's own words that they were aware of the great moral evil of this vile institution. He shows us the great change in attitude that Washington experienced over the course of his lifetime, from a young man so hardened to the evils of the institution that he helped to run a lottery that raffled off Black children to pay a friend's debts, to the old man who, after many missed opportunities, wrote a remarkable will ten months before his death to free and care for all of his slaves, repudiating in death the evil system he was never willing to directly confront during his life. Wiencek writes respectfully of Washington. He doesn’t reduce him to a one dimensional, evil caricature, but refuses to ignore his failure to act in the face of institutionalized evil of which he was well aware and from which he profited. The failure of Washington and the other founders to eradicate slavery in their new land of liberty led directly to the terrible Civil War (an event which both Washington and Jefferson anticipated), and the continuing consequences of their failure still haunt us today. As such, An Imperfect God is a cautionary tale for our contemplation.
