This is the one where the H is English and the h is half-Dutch. Way to think outside-but-pressed-right-up-against-the-box, TGB! (credit to TBBT) Florina is small and thin with ginger hair and a trained Cordon Bleu cook. She's been working at a hotel in nearby Wilton until she hears of an opening for a cook at a private home nearby. Florina's father is a whiny hypochondriac who treats Florina like a drudge. So Florina goes to work for Sir William Sedley. It is a delightful job and soon she decides to live in. Sir William has a young daughter, Pauline, who is adorable and precocious. Pauline becomes very fond of Florina and Florina, in turn, teaches her how to cook. Sir William is an eminent pediatrician. He is in favor of Pauline learning the housewifely arts. However, he is engaged to marry the gorgeous but snooty Wanda Fortesque, who has never had even a nodding acquaintance with a dust cloth. Sir William is very kind to Florina and treats her, as he does all his servants, more as a friend. Wanda, however, dislikes all of Sir William’s household help and makes open threats to dismiss them all when she and William are married. Florina becomes good friends with Miss Frobisher, the elderly Nanny. Nanny becomes aware that Florina is in love with Sir William and is also convinced that Sir William is far from indifferent to Florina. However, there is the matter of his engagement. He deliberately exposes Wanda to the rougher side of the country life. She insists that they live in London and that he sell the house. He refuses. She wants to send Pauline to boarding school. He refuses. Craftily, he has introduced Wanda to a rich American. Wanda decides to break off the engagement and marry the rich American. Having worked things out to his satisfaction, Sir William makes his declaration and proposal to Florina. It's obvious they will be happy ever after. This was really delightful. I've left out a lot of details, including Florina’s trip to Holland to the wedding of a cousin and the acquaintance of a Leo. The scenes of country life, the delicious meals Florina cooks, and all the fun activities with Pauline make this book something special. Five stars! *note: I've upgraded from 4 to 5 stars on my latest reread. I really couldn't find anything to dislike.* The beginning of William’s Declaration: "The likelihood of my not marrying Wanda once I had met you became a foregone conclusion." "You mean Wanda doesn't want to marry you? She jilted you?" "Yes, with a little help from circumstances." She cast a quick look at him; he looked smug. "What did you do?" "Oh, nothing really – a long country walk, rather a muddy one, I'm afraid – and the nettles at this time of year. Nanny and Mrs. Deakin cooked dinner, and I refused to sell Wheel House and live forever and ever in London." 7/20/17 - Rereading my review, I just realized I didn't mention the Lemonade Incident - how remiss of me. In one scene, Wanda is being particularly nasty to Florina, who picks up the pitcher of lemonade and pours it over Wanda's tinted hair! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
