I don't normally review kids books on Goodreads but every so often one comes along for good or bad that deserves mention. This book....I just don't know where it should go?!?!?!?!? First off, it's not much of a book as there's hardly any reading... I guess it would be considered a picture book? I don't know? I got it for my 5 year old kid and I had to make up the story to which he started to get behind. No problem, I'm one of those Geek dads that can spin a yarn with my overly active imagination. But....the very first page has the only sentence, "We're going to Grandma's and then to church, take good care of the baby, Carl." ...And with that sentence we start our trip into Hell! As I read that sentence my kid looked at me with a puzzled look on his face and I just sort of looked back at him and forced a tiny reassuring smile! Now if Carl would've been an older sibling or a grandparent that sentence would've been fine....but Carl is the family dog...not just any dog...but a big ol' Rottweiler!!!! Holy crap, did that just happen? The parents literally just abandon the baby to the dog! Somebody call Child Protective Services! So Carl somehow puts the baby on his back, by the way...I don't know if the baby is a boy or a girl? It just hit me...maybe it's both? We live in a bit of a complicated world nowadays and it could be...not that there's anything wrong with that! First it's wearing pink footies and then blue footies. Let's just call the baby "Pat"...yeah, that's a good dual-purpose name....Pat! So Pat is on Carl's back going down the stairs because y'know...that's not dangerous or anything! Then Pat starts playing with ribbons and wrapping stuff up and Carl decides to bring it some Christmas lights...in his mouth. Once again...no prob...totally safe, right? We won't even get into the whole Pat playing with fragile Christmas ornaments because honestly it's not like baby Pat can actually drop one of them and get cut or anything right....that would be ridiculous! Then Carl brings Pat another set of pajama's and a little hat because that'll keep a baby warm in -20 degree weather right? Sure enough they venture out into the cold and make a trip to town where no one questions what's happening as they're too scared of this big ol' dog! Somehow Carl wins a Christmas basket, which he promptly gives to one of those Salvation Army Bellringing Santa's. Too bad cause it looked like there was some good stuff in that basket: coffee, chocolate, rhubarb, cassava, nutmeg, and a can of Raid....all good stuff for a baby! That selfless little Pat actually gives away his/her hat to the Salvation Army Santa. Now the Salvation Army Santa is a real jerk because he should be like, "No, little baby, keep your hat or you'll freeze to death out here in the cold!" But instead he takes Pat's hat and then just smiles. I have a whole theory about that Santa actually being a serial killer sort of like John Wayne Gacey...but that's a different story. So Pat and Carl cruise around town and go check out some Christmas Carolers. A nice lady decides to give Pat her scarf, but instead of wrapping Pat up with it y'know...maybe around his/her neck for warmth...the lady literally just tosses it casually on Pat's head where it can easily fall off. I have a whole theory about that Caroler being a rich snob who's unfaithful to her husband and has a bad drinking habit...but that's a different story. Alright, lets continue. Pat and Carl cruise around and look inside people's windows and they see 2 kids staring into a fireplace longingly waiting for Santa. These 2 kids have been abandoned by their parents too and poor Carl and Pat have a chance to get a support group going here and all they have to do is go knock on the door and say, "We feel your pain too!" But instead they just decide to deal with their loneliness together... Off they go running and slipping and sliding in the snow and whoops...there goes Pat's scarf! Oh well, Pat was better off without it right?! At this point ol' Carl is getting tired of a 15 lb baby on his bag with a soiled diaper so he decides to head home. There's a dog that follows him home...don't know the dog's name but it looks like a Skip! On the next page we see Pat, Carl, and Skip warming themselves in front of the fire and although Pat has a desire to crawl right up to the fire and see if it's hot or not, common sense gets the better of him/her. Funny thing is now there's a big fat orange cat...reminds me of my parents cat Keke...so we'll go with that. There's also a pair of mice hanging out trying desperately to win over the affection of Keke so they won't get devoured! It's a tough life being a mouse! Keke and the two mice just sort of showed up unannounced and crashed the whole party and take advantage of the nice warm fireplace. Chances are all these animals tracked in a ton of mud and left behind a ton of fleas! It must've been a wild party because soon everyone is passed out! There's dog paws in the air, cat whiskers flattened out, a drooling baby sprawled on the floor, and a couple of mice tails curled up from too much eggnog. But ol' Carl hears a noise and just heads outside because the door was left open the entire time! Sure enough jolly ol' Santa shows up with his sleigh and reindeer with a bag of gifts. Now this is the part that puzzles me cause Santa walks in the front door while his sleigh is parked out front and then after giving gifts to Pat and all the animals he shoots up the chimney!?!?! Guess Santa is getting a bit forgetful. It was adorable to see all the animals given gifts: cheese for the mice, a bone for Skip, a fish for Keke, and a new hat for Pat! Yah, that's right....talk about getting short changed...Pat got a frikkin' hat! No baby wants a frikkin' hat! How about some toys or something? Even a pacifier is better than a hat! After that Carl puts Pat on his back and takes him upstairs. They don't show what happens after that...they just show Carl sleeping on the floor with a new dog collar. Did Carl get tired of Pat and devour him? Did Pat die of hypothermia or Pneumonia? Did the party animals asleep in the den wake up and trash the rest of the house? Did Santa actually get stuck in the chimney and slowly starve to death? This ending is like one of the greatest cliffhangers I've ever seen. It's worse than waiting 5 years for Back to the Future 2 after seeing part 1. The very last picture of the book is an ominous paw print in the snow as the author clearly wants us to know that Carl is out there watching and waiting for us! As for the family....they never returned! I'm assuming they were gunned down in an alley by a mugger or something and Pat will grow up to be a billionare and use his/her fortune to fight crime as a superhero...that is if Carl doesn't get to him/her first!
