It’s been a long time since I’ve really enjoyed a romance and the characters. The downside is this one takes failure to communicate to epic measures, but I just kept putting that aside….again and again. When Sophie first appears my eyes crossed as she’s dressed to scandalize and bent on being provocative in Regency England . Ho hum, another special Regency snowflake. Great. That was put to bed pretty quickly as Sophie ended up being a three dimensional, extremely intelligent heroine that hides behind a flirtatious manner that verges on scandalous. She does it for a couple of reasons, fear of a bad marriage and to forget the nightmare her parents’ marriage is and she likes it. Patrick, the man she loves and twin to the idiot H from Potent Pleasures , is in love with Sophie but either won’t admit it or doesn't get it. He’s an infatuated alpha that apparently is incapable of understanding simple, declarative sentences. He’s currently peeved as she has rejected his proposal. Sophie is engaged to a hearty oaf and Patrick’s friend. She prefers Braddon because when not if he cheats it won’t break her heart whereas if she were married to Patrick it would. Her parents have a lot to answer for even though they both love her. Bottom line Sophie and Patrick end up married, and the miscommunications are thick on the ground. Despite Sophie POINT BLANK telling Patrick that she ended her engagement with Braddon he still thinks she prefers Braddon despite the epic sex and sizzling chemistry between them. I’m not going to get into all the ways that Sophie and Patrick mess up a good thing, but it’s in part due to some very bad marital advice from Sophie’s mother with the best of intentions and in part because a romance has to have some problems. I’m waffling and off my Goodreads review game, but in a nutshell I found the two main characters individually and collectively charming if not exasperating at times. I teared up a little a couple of times, wanted to throw my computer more than once and reach through the screen and shake the H and h, but overall loved it.
