Jan 2025: Re-read 4 (?). Buddy read with the lovely and very insightful Sarah . Our discussions really brought new perspectives on this story, that I should know so well by now, thank you! One early realisation is how much of an accomplishment this book really is. I was aware of Heller's meticulous method, but I've never really realised that he lived with this story for more than a decade, and as it's written very much in a (very convincing) 'stream of consciousness', it means he spent all that time getting in and out of Bob Slocum's head, something I would not wish upon anyone! I still maintain that considering Slocum's severe alienation (from family and colleagues and basically everyone around him) and existential angst you can sympathise with him (from certain aspects. Starting out at least). Sarah may disagree with me, read her review here . I know I at some point stated that "there is not a superfluous word in there", but especially reading it with someone, I realised this is not true - specifically the "It's not true"-part is way too long and just adds on examples of Slocum's complete lack of empathy, selfishness and distorted view of other people and this section bogs the narrative down somewhat. Even with it, the book stays in my very top ever and I'm sure it will hold up for a future re-read (potentially, or even likely in my 60s). Update May 2019: I just wanted to say a big ‘thank you’ to all that for reasons unbeknownst to me ‘liked’ my old review now in mid-2019. As I’m noting that point in time, I’m absolutely flustered about the significance. Actually, and I’m a bit sad to tell you younger people, it’s not ‘like’ everyone before us said - it is exactly like they said. Time slips away. Looking back now, I can’t seem to fit all the happenings that I remember in quite the few years that was - evidently - my adolescence and young adulthood. On the other hand, I cannot seem to make sense of where the years post 2000 have gone either. And not to forget! these have been the best of my life. Anyway, what I really wanted to say that I have passed the milestone mentioned in my review (50) and, as my fellow 50+ know - but that some of you others - facing it soon, dreading it in the future or simply unable to believe that you one day will be that ancient - don’t: it’s no different. Absolutely nothing happened to me - had I not marked my calendar or paid attention to it I never would have known. Come to think of it, this was pretty much my conclusion after turning 30 and 40 too... Sorry about the deviation, thanks again, pulling this review up before my eyes made me realise I should queue it up for another re-read! ————— I overheard two men talking on the subway some time ago; apparently they had been using and abusing drugs and alcohol quite a lot in their time (but were looking surprisingly 'ordinary' in contrast to their topic for conversation). One of the guys said "I'm going to be 60 soon, just imagine" and the other responded: "Well, age is but a number, you are not older than you feel". The first speaker was silent for a while and then replied: "Well, you know, I feel pretty old." And this is how I always feel coming up close to a birthday nowadays, getting awfully close to, not 60, but 50 still. And the reason I got thinking about this at all was that I thought I should write a little something more about this book, which I claim to be one of my favourites ever. When reading it this time around, what struck me was the incredulity of me adoring this book at age 20something. What in the world did I see in it then? I will never know - but I do know that 20something Thomas did have great taste, because this is a fantastic book. I realized pretty early on that the method that Heller uses is that he pulls us in and lets us identify readily with the protagonist - little things of recognition: "I'm also like that, I shy away from confrontation in those circumstances", "I find it hard to indulge people like those", "I don't like those social events either" - and then he slowly pulls the rug out from under us, or opens a door we did not know was there and had we known, would have preferred closed. I have never felt only sadness at the death of a friend or relative or the departure to a faraway place of someone I like, or even perhaps love. Always there has been simultaneously a marked undercurrent of relief, a release, a secret, unabashed sigh of "Well, at least that's over with now, isn't it?" I wonder how I would feel about the death of a child.) Bob Slocum is something so rare as an egotist and narcissist that frequently doubts himself and his choices. He is certainly incapable of real empathy, but other than that, he does not really fit the description. He's very unlikable and I hope he does not really exist. Foremost, I hope he's not... me. Green is more important to me than God. So, for that matter, is Kagle and the man who handles my dry cleaning, and a transistor radio that is playing too loud is a larger catastrophe to me than the next Mexican earthquake. The instances in which I do sympathize with him is when he feels lost and disconnected from the world; I don't know what happened to Tom (he could have been killed, for all I know or care); he left me his handwriting, and I still sit at a desk, in my office at the company or in my study at home, and use it. I don't know what finally became of Marie Jencks. I never even found out what happened to me. His memories are equal parts sweetly nostalgic and filled with remorse of what could have been. Also, as we come to learn, they are not to be trusted. Interaction with others is terribly cumbersome for Slocum - and this is where I find myself reassuringly different from him; I do mean what I say and I would never ever say or claim to hate another person. The way that he states it ("Sometimes I do") is just shocking to me. "I'm not. I'm sorry I said that. I don't know. I don't know why. I didn't mean to say that." "Yes, you did. Or you wouldn't have said that, either. People say what they mean." "So do you. She thinks you hate her." "I don't. Sometimes I do. When she gets me mad." Another instance is that he simultaneously shields himself from human interaction - I should have guessed from her educational curriculum at Duke that she was a little bit nuts and would probably kill herself sooner or later. I am able to spot propensities like that in people now (and I keep my distance). A friend in need is no friend of mine. while at the same time caring very much about what people around him may think (in his own twisted reasoning): "She's my daughter. I can't say 'I love you' to my own daughter." "Why not?" "It sounds like incest." All of this and more impacts on the reader so hard, I believe, so the final horrible act is surely shocking, but not as unexpected as it should be. Which makes it even harder to stomach. I did say I was going to try to be coherent. So is he us? Nameless I came and nameless I go. I am not Bob Slocum just because my parents decided to call me that. If there is such a person, I don't know who he is. I don't even feel my name is mine, let alone my handwriting. I don't even know who I'm not. Sometimes he's the existentialist philosopher and sometimes he sounds more like the perfectly ordinary mid-life crisis man: The years are too short, the days are too long. This is one of the blessed instances I do not identify with this horrible man. Sometimes he really resorts to slapstick (just had to get this one in here) - It wasn't so bad living in my old man's scrotum, as far as I can recall. It was warm and humid, and there was lots of companionship. I had a ball. but most of the time he's preoccupied with arranging what's best for himself and trying to keep up a civil interaction with the people around him (the dialogs with people at his workplace are shifting between awkward and horrible, his interaction with his family is painful in his failure to keep an open mind and/or see someone else's side once in a while). I would have a hard time to name one book my "favorite", but I will say that this one is in the top. read it at your own peril. - - - - - Re-read in April 2017, this book remains one of the best I know. I will try to put some of my thoughts on it in somewhat coherent order soon. - - - - - Original review:My favorite author - and this is the book that is the main reason for that. Heller's amazingly honest and unflinching portrait of Bob Slocum is one of the most convincing insights into a characters mind and persona. And it is not an easy ride - Slocum is not someone you sympathize with or like, but he is not a villain either, but instead very humanly complex. A book that really stays with you.
