Cleckley's book is out of print, so I read a pdf version of a scanned copy made available at http://cassiopaea.org/2011/02/10/the-... ... this online essay is informative if you can handle/ignore the New Age Twilight Zone stuff at the end. Cleckley provides detailed case histories of psychopaths ... incredible reading if you are interested in stories of dysfunctional people/families. Medical discussions in Cleckley's book are fascinating from an historical viewpoint ... obviously info is dated. Consider a spectrum of anxiety, with the psychoneurotic at one endpoint and the psychopath at the other: "People who suffer from personality disorders which cause them to be anxious, restless, unhappy, and obsessed with thoughts they themselves recognize as absurd but who are, in the lay sense, altogether sane have for years been classed as psychoneurotic. They recognize reason in general, often admit that their symptoms arise from emotional conflicts, and are free from delusions and hallucinations. "....They are often resistant to reasoning but more in the sense of a person with strong prejudices than of one with delusions or with intellectual dilapidation. Sometimes they feel strong fears that they may carry out acts which they dread and which would indeed be tragic or criminal, but they recognize the nature of these acts and do not carry them out. Other acts, all patently senseless but relatively harmless, they do carry out, recognizing the absurdity of feeling that they must do so but becoming anxious if they resist the impulse. "In general, psychoneurotic people recognize objective reality and try to adapt themselves like most others to the ways of society." Kindle location 4788-4802 "On the contrary, those called psychopaths are very sharply characterized by the lack of anxiety (remorse, uneasy anticipation, apprehensive scrupulousness, the sense of being under stress or strain) and, less than the average person, show what is widely regarded as basic in the neurotic.... ".... the interpretation of the psychopath's behavior as symptomatic 'acting out' against his surroundings, in contrast with the development of anxiety or headache or obsession is, it seems to me, an interesting formulation.... I do not believe that psychopaths should be identified with the psychoneurotic group, for this would imply that they possess full social and legal competency, that they are capable of handling adequately their own affairs, and that they are earnestly seeking relief from unpleasant symptoms. "There are disorders in which the two diverse types of reaction (developing subjectively unpleasant symptoms versus callously carrying out socially destructive acts) seem to exist in the same symptom. The so-called pyromaniac (and kleptomaniac) often seems motivated by forces similar to the classic obsessive-compulsive patient .... ".... The distinction emphasized by Fenichel between ego-syntonic and ego-alien motivations (compulsive acts of caution versus so-called 'compulsive' antisocial acts) is a fundamental point and brings out a distinction not merely of degree but of quality....." Kindle 4809-4833 And the bottom line is that psychopaths are BORED: "If, as we maintain, the big rewards of love, of the hard job well done, of faith kept despite sacrifices, do not enter significantly in the equation, it is not difficult to see that the psychopath is likely to be bored..... "Apparently blocked from fulfillment at deep levels, the psychopath is not unnaturally pushed toward some sort of divertissement. Even weak impulses, petty and fleeting gratifications, are sufficient to produce in him injudicious, distasteful, and even outlandish misbehavior. Major positive attractions are not present to compete successfully with whims, and the major negative deterrents (hot, persistent shame, profound regret) do not loom ahead to influence him." Kindle location 7204-7217 Herge, the Tintin cartoonist, and musings on deceitful facial expressions ...
