This was a fantastic book. Like most Australians I 'know of' the expedition of Burke and Wills, the amazing explorers who were the first to cross and map the interior of Australia all the way to the gulf. Like many modern Australians I had hints that these guys were not quite the amazing heroes 1860's Victoria painted them, because early colonists were starved for heroes and tended to get carried away, but I thought they still did something pretty noteworthy. How wrong I was; I knew nothing. In this book the author takes us, with brutal honesty through the less well known facts about the expedition. With brief sketches of the political situation and the rivalry between Victoria and South Australia which helped fuel the 'Race' between the Victorian expedition led by the inexperience,d unqualified Burke, and the very experienced Stuart from South Australia. This book is beautifully researched and (for me) perfectly written, I can't even quite explain why I enjoyed the actual writing style as much as I did, but with historical or factual books I normally need to take breaks from them, to absorb the details. This book I mostly didn't want to put down. The writing also managed to capture that ineffable element of traveling in the interiors of Australia, I was impressed. It is hard to explain to someone who has not, just how vast, empty, lonely and downright dangerous the interior can be. It has mercurial weather and even these days, with roads and cars and maps it can be unbelievably remote. The way it can get into some peoples soul and lodge there, while leaving others completely unmoved, is also mentioned. For people who have never heard of, or read much about this expedition I suspect this book will be a revelation, as it was for me - also it is rather like watching a train wreck happen in slow motion, more than a bit disturbing but utterly fascinating at the same time. For people who know more about the events, and genuinely respect Burke and Wills, this book will probably be enraging as it starkly condemns Burke's lack of planning and leadership. While they did cross the desert to the gulf, the waste and the many deaths make it feel like a fail and the response of the Victorians , well I will just let you read it yourself, because it is incredible and Sarah Murgatroyd tells it way better than I can. As someone interested in art, the images captured by the poor maligned and mistreated artist of the expedition Ludwig Becker, are fascinating and entrancing, they perfectly capture the sense of the interior of Australia and the plates in the book, both colour and black and white enhance the story. The final chapter of the expedition, which revolve around the DIG tree of the title are a little breath taking. One KNOWS what the out come was! It is history after all, but the events still kept me on the edge of my seat as they unfolded. Very glad I read it, recommend it especially to anyone interested in Australian Colonial history or traveling in outback Australia: Very good capture of the Australian deserts, now dammit, I want to drop everything and go on another long road trip, maybe in the tracks of Burke and Wills, only without the mismanagement and the dying.
