"Dimly she saw in her mind a picture of men killing and being killed. White men killed the black and black men killed the white. White men killed the black men because they could, and the black men killed the white men to keep from being killed. And killing was blood." "But, Lawd, Ah don wanna be this way! It don mean nothin! Yuh die ef yuh fight! Yuh die ef yuh don fight! Either way yuh die n it don mean nothin…" A young boy and friends go to the forbidden “whites only” creek to swim, only to find events rapidly spiral out of control. A man tries to get his sick and pregnant wife to a hospital during a flood, with disastrous and violent consequences. A woman is raped by a white traveling salesman, leaving her and her husband to deal with emotional wreckage and bitterness it leaves behind. A preacher must decide whether to march in protest of his congregation dying from hunger because of white officials, or to preserve the peace and his influence with them. A mother must choose between saving her son’s life by betraying his communist friends or staying silent and ensuring his death. The common thread that ties these startling stories together, beyond the obvious and terrifying violence of its white characters, is that almost all of the black characters in these stories were doing very little wrong when violence reached their doors. These stories terror is derived particularly from the sense that no matter where you are (swimming in a lake), what you do (saving the drowning wife of a man who just tried to kill you), or what you say (almost all interactions between white and black characters begin and end with yes ma’am or no ma’am), if you are black, white rage and degradation will find you. One is almost tempted to chalk up the horrible things these characters are forced to endure as being in the wrong place at the wrong time. The truth however is that in the 1950s (to say nothing of 2021) there was no right place to be if you were black. Every time was the wrong time and every place held the potential to be your last. Richard Yarborough writes in the foreword to these stories that even more important than the stories themselves is Wright’s short autobiographical essay called “The Ethics of Jim Crow”, in which he details brief incidents of mutilations, murder, humiliations, and cruelty that he experienced or witnessed at the hands of white people. It is by itself a devastatingly brutal piece of writing, but as a precursor to these stories, Yarborough wants to remind the reader that while these characters may have been fictionalized, but their plights and traumas were pulled straight from an everyday hell black men and women were forced to live through on a daily basis. The only parallel I can draw for the raw and vicious stories told here is in Langston Hughes collection “The Ways of White Folk”. Both are dripping in injustice and outrage. Both contain characters simply trying to make it through days without interacting with seemingly unbalanced, callous and murderous white people. And much like in Hughes’s story of a black soldier back from the war who is blindsided and viciously assaulted without warning (as are we the reader), Wright’s stories blindside us. They punch us. They kick us. They spit in our faces and refuse to tell us that things will be ok. They weren’t then and they are most assuredly not now. Many may pick up this book and want to look away from these pages. Others will read on and convince themselves that as horrible as these events may be, these white characters are works of fiction. That they are aberrations that don’t represent what white people were or are today. So yes we tell ourselves, it is ok to look away. And yet we cannot. Wright and these devastating stories he gave to a cruel and violent world, simply will not allow it.
