The Death of King Arthur is the final work in the Lancelot-Grail cycle, also known as the Prose Lancelot. Like the prior writings, its authorship was originally attributed to Walter Map, but today it is known he was dead before these works were written. As with many of the works in Arthurian lore, its real author is unknown. Although shorter than most Arthurian legends, The Death of King Arthur is a sort of magnum opus, a titan of a work that sees a shift from the fantastical toward the psychological, from the heroic to the tragic, from the glory days of chivalry and adventure, to days of woe and sorrow. Its depictions of drama and the relationships among knights is realistic, the stakes are the highest they have ever been. Once the seeds of tragedy have been planted, very quickly the entire world of the book is taken over by loss, death, horror, misfortune. Percival and Galahad are dead, the quest for the holy grail has been completed, and the adventures or enchantments of the kingdom of Logres have come to an end. Things have normalized in Arthur’s kingdom. While a gloom hangs over everything in the wake of two of the greatest knights’ deaths, there is a sense of tranquility too that gives great calm to the kingdom. Tournaments and hunting are the favorite pastimes of knights and Arthur. Lancelot dominates at these tournaments, but celebration and merriment is had by all. Lancelot’s decision to wear the sleeve of a young maiden on his lance during a tournament causes ripples, with word eventually making its way back to Guinevere. A wound Lancelot receives in a tournament from Bors keeps Lancelot from competing in subsequent tournaments, and Arthur’s stay at his sister Morgan’s castle, where Lancelot was kept in the past, earlier in the prose Lancelot, reveals the secret of Guinevere’s and the knight’s affair. The walls of Lancelot’s old quarters are painted with images and words, by Lancelot himself, describing his exploits and his love for the queen. Morgan makes it clear to the king what has been going on. Lancelot is later shunned by the queen after she hears of what she assumes is dishonor, sending Lancelot and his kinsmen away from Camelot. Arthur is enflamed by the dishonor done to him, and the girl rejected by Lancelot surrenders herself up to death. Through a knight’s treachery aimed at Gawain but misguided, the queen accidentally poisons and kills a beloved knight of the round table. The knight’s brother challenges her for justice, awaiting either a champion to defend her, or the death penalty to be served. A tragic sequence of events and tension soon splinter the knights, and Arthur’s realm is split in loyalties. What was once a grand kingdom, a unified brotherhood of knights, is now a boiling cauldron that will spill over into war. Gawain’s brothers cannot even take the same side, as two reveal the dishonor to Arthur and take his side in bringing Lancelot down, and Gawain and another take the side of Lancelot. It’s a brilliantly orchestrated drama of incredible stakes, with a somber, gloomy overtone that never lets up, quietly reminding us this is the end of an age. The loyalties become complicated further after Lancelot and Guinevere are caught in the act, and the queen is led to her execution by fire. In a daring rescue by Lancelot and his kinsmen, many of Arthur’s knights are killed, including all three of Gawain’s brothers, even those who did not wish to oppose Lancelot. One brilliance of this story is its realistic complexity and drama, drawing on conflicting emotions and the awful nature of this rapidly growing struggle. Soon Lancelot and his men are besieged by Arthur at the Joyous Garde, the castle Lancelot liberated earlier in the Prose Lancelot, once known as the Dolorous Garde. Gawain has vowed to avenge his brothers with the taking of Lancelot’s head. It’s unsettling the amount of disruption and chaos that has been unleashed in Logres. When Lancelot surrenders the queen he flees with his men to Gaul, where he is later attacked by Arthur. After reading through all the Arthurian lore chronologically, watching the characters grow into formidable heroes, coming into their own as distinct entities within the canon, being immersed in a universe of splendor and enchantment in which the one constant is the love and comraderie among Arthur’s knights, this book presents an oppressive shift in tone and character. We can only helplessly watch as all the glory of the kingdom comes unraveled in a masterfully written sequence of events that make it hard to align ourselves with any side, as everyone in the story seems to be justified in acting and feeling as they do. It’s difficult to figure out whose lot in this tragedy is the worst. Lancelot, Guinevere, Arthur, Gawain… Each experiences compounding tragedy and loss as the story unravels. We simultaneously sympathize with two sides as they try to destroy each other, making it all the more gut wrenching. Mordred is left behind to watch over Logres as Arthur goes to attack Lancelot. His treachery puts the queen in danger. Over in Gaul, Lancelot and Gawain finally duel to bring the conflict to an end, and this harrowing battle is presented masterfully, like so much else in the story. As the tides turn for each, each blow and strike hurts the audience as much as it hurts the knight. In the middle of their fight, as Gawain’s strength flows back into him at noon, the narrator takes a minor detour into Gawain’s childhood to explain where this power comes from — the hour of his baptism. This flashback makes the battle more depressing, seeing the innocent, happy child Gawain juxtaposed against the bloodied, thrashed adult Gawain, on the verge of death, battered by his most beloved comrade in arms, after a long chain of personal loss. After this battle, Arthur hears that the Romans are sacking his lands. This harkens back to Geoffrey of Monmouth’s mythos, and after Arthur strikes the emperor dead, not before losing some of his own glorious knights, he hears the news of Mordred’s treason. So begins the end of Arthur, the destruction of the Round Table, the fall of Logres. The brilliance of composition never ceases, and after each tragic climax that we think cannot possibly be topped, it is topped, and the tragedies are heaped upon one another, the violence and drama grow more intense, the emotional toll on once unshakeable paragons of courage is excruciating. The orchestration of the most significant battles to ever occur in Arthurian lore is a show of genius, incredible pacing, peerless sadness, and dynamic, enthralling narration. The battalions of Mordred’s men are each led by the king of a land, Scotland, or Wales, or Saxony, and Arthur’s men, trekking long across the country after a week of battle against Lancelot, are drained and weakened, but driven as ever to go up against the treasonous hordes, in hopes of saving their once glorious kingdom. There are universes to explore within each knight’s tribulations over the course of this story. All are complex and made more effective when read after having worked through so many other works of Arthurian literature. There is despair, but there is redemption, and there is the recognition of folly when it is too late, and there is love and honor toward one’s enemy, as well as hatred toward one’s kin, and vengeance, and remorse, and every glory or victory is paired with disaster and profound loss. Death is indiscriminate, and all the beloved figures of these legends will meet their end, some in blood and violence, some in illness, some in old age. No one comes through this piece of high art unaffected, unchanged, and most do not come out alive at all. A timeless work of an unnamed master storyteller.
