Back in the early '90s, it became fashionable to try burnishing the reputation of Richard Nixon, who before had been consigned to presidential oblivion. This initial impression has only been intensified through later revelations in way of newly released tapes, declassified documents and other research. Who now can deny, for instance, Nixon's sabotaging the Paris Peace Talks during the '68 election and his utterly cynical handling of Vietnam? The efforts of Joan Hoff, Len Colodny, Conrad Black and other revisionists, often working with Nixon's imprimatur, added a brief blip of spirited debate, but haven't stood up to scrutiny. If anything, recent works by John Farrell, Rick Perlstein and especially Ken Hughes' devastating duology (Chasing Shadows and Fatal Politics) confirs that the initial impression America gained back in the '70s was mostly correct: that Nixon, despite his occasional brilliance and vision on foreign affairs, was the most gruesome excuse for a human ever to occupy the White House (at least prior to 2017). Written by a former MP, Defense Minister and fellow convict, Aitken's book tries convincing us that Nixon was a brilliant statesman unfairly hounded by the press and political enemies. This requires many sins of omission along with outright nonsense. Sure, there's the usual fluffing over his administration's achievements like the China opening, but there's also ahistorical nonsense about Mr. Outhouses-in-Peoria being devoted to civil rights and the environment. It's a claim which any source from the White House tapes to his aides' memoirs to Haldeman's diaries and specialist studies by Kotlowski, Flippen, etc. demolishes. Any achievements that can be credited to Nixon on these front were either pushed by his more liberal underlings (Pat Moynihan, Bob Finch, John Ehrlichman) or acquiescing to Congressional initiatives and public pressure. After reading Dean Kotlowski's Nixon's Civil Rights in particular, we know that he used affirmative action and desegregation policies in an utterly cynical fashion to turn blacks and working class whites against each other. At best, you can argue that Nixon deserves credit for not resisting an already sweeping public tide, or that his policies had positive effects regardless of how much Nixon believed in them. At worst, it's the sort of unprincipled, triangulation that other politicians are excoriated for. Though Aitken's capable of even worse, as when he insinuates that Daniel Ellsberg was a Soviet spy and grouses about the "Jewish lobby" sabotaging Nixon's judicial appointment. Or Aitken's assuming that Nixon's handling of Vietnam, far from a callously cynical prolongation of an already wrongheaded war, was executed in good faith (which is easier, admittedly, when Aitken ignores disasters like Lam Son 719 altogether), made earnest efforts at peacemaking and sabotaged by Democrats and protesters. This "stab-in-the-back" myth was dubious during Nixon's presidency and is positively untenable now. Not after the release of more tapes over the past few decades showing Nixon musing about dropping nuclear weapons on Hanoi ("I just want you to think big, Henry!") or openly discussing how best to prolong the war through election day. The idea that Nixon and Kissinger would have saved South Vietnam had it not been for Watergate and those darn liberals, having openly washed their hands of America's longtime ally, is simple fantasy. As for Watergate: Aitken brings us the worst of two idiotic theories. One, advanced way back in the late '70s by H.R. Haldeman, is that the CIA was jealous of Nixon for creating the Plumbers and framed him in the Watergate affair (using Alexander Butterfield, Bob Woodward and other ostensibly nefarious figures as plants), a theory too dumb to survive scrutiny. The other is the Len Colodny-Silent Coup theory that John Dean arranged the break-in and cover-up to cover up a call-girl scheme, citing the unimpeachable word of rat-eating lunatic Gordon Liddy. I am no fan of Dean and the way he's still touted as a Man of Principle rather than a fink who turned on his boss to save himself, but the evidence Aitken and Colodny present is laughably weak, based on insinuation rather than facts. We won't even get into the "two wrongs make a right" playground moralizing, asking us "what about Kennedy and Johnson?" or claiming that the media was out to get Nixon, and that Agnew was either framed or unfairly targeted for commonplace crimes. This childish whataboutism is no more convincing defending today's Republican monsters than it was decades ago. The worst part is that Aitken, being an Englishman, pretends that he's bringing an objective view to a man unfairly smeared by panicky Americans who can't see the forest for the trees. Which is fine, if you ignore fellow Englishmen like William Shawcross and Fred Emery who've written works that hold Nixon to the same scorn and ridicule as us mere provincial Yanks. Like another later Nixon hagiographer, Conrad Black, he does bring the experience of a conservative politician-turned-crook to bear in analyzing Tricky Dick's character, and perhaps there'd be some perverse value in that. Unfortunately, Aitken hadn't yet been jailed when he wrote this book, meaning it's merely stupid, morally vacuous garbage.
