The Wall of the Eye, The Wall of the Sky contains eight short stories by Jonathan Letham: The Happy Man Vanilla Dunk Light and the Sufferer Forever, Said the Duck Five Fucks The Hardened Criminals Sleepy People Out of all of the stories in this collection, I found The Happy Man to be not only the most effective, but the most emotionally impactful, followed closely by The Hardened Criminals. Both stories involve a fractured father/son relationship that is believable and nuanced, and have no problem communicating the devastation and despair of the characters to the reader; the ending to The Happy Man stayed with me for quite a few days after reading. Also, science fiction or fantastical elements in both of these stories, while comical or ludicrous on the surface, are an integral part of the narrative, both metaphorically and literally. Light and the Sufferer is also a serious story involving familial relationships, but the science fiction element is less of a contributing factor to the the main actions in the story itself, and in my opinion the story would be equally as strong if it were to be removed altogether. Five Fucks and Sleepy People are more lighthearted, humorous additions to the collection. Just as enjoyable, if on a different level. Five Fucks actually made me laugh out loud at one point. Good stuff. Vanilla Dunk is a decent read, but seeing as how it is primarily about basketball - a subject I have no interest in or knowledge of - it was a little lost on me. Forever, Said the Duck was my least favorite of the bunch, and I think it mainly falls flat because it feels somewhat out of place. While the science fiction elements of the rest of the collection are either incidental to or a catalyst for the overriding story, in this one the science fiction element takes center stage as the focus, setting, and even character of the piece. It's a shift in tone that throws the entire collection slightly off kilter, but while it is the weakest story of the bunch thematically, it is not necessarily bad, just different. Overall, this is an excellent collection of works by Letham, full of human frailty and the overwhelming struggle against emotional distance. I would hesitate to classify this collection as Science-Fiction, as I feel that most of the stories manage to transcend the genre, but I guess when it's this good, it doesn't matter what you call it.
