I'm sorry, I read this book when I was 6 or 7 and it almost scarred me for life..the sight of Ginger's body being carted away stayed with me for years. Between this, Where the Red Fern Grows, The Yearling, and of course Old Yeller I have to assume that somewhere there is a Marquis de Sade school of children's literature. I never gave these to my children as they were growing up (they had to make do with Narnia, Charlie Bucket, and some others). Neither the books nor the movies did I take them to. If they want to read them later on their own, that's up to them. Note....There is a spoiler below line.-------------- It's a classic, and oh by the way when the horse is old he finally stops being tortured...whoopee. I hated it. Update Jan. 2013 Okay I originally reviewed this in 2009 (just after my wife died). There has been a lot of "controversy" over my dislike of this book (as there has been over my reviews of Old Yeller, The Yearling, etc., etc...). This was (I think) the first book my dad bought me when it became clear I was reading well beyond my "school fellows" (I was 6 I think). I hated this book. I still retain the picture in my mind of Ginger being removed lolling head and all. In my life I've had enough of pain. As a kid (on a farm) I had 2 dogs shot lost a dog to distemper and had to deal with deaths of other animals I loved. I also had to deal with the loss of people I loved. My dad (and mom) were of the generation that said, "their just animals". I believe they thought that stories like The Yearling, The Red Pony and so on toughened kids up and prepared them for life. The fact I actually loved my pets was almost foreign to them. They saw no difference (or little difference) in a dog and a hog or a beef cow or whatever. I have dealt with the actual pain of loss in life and I see no reason to spend good time and money to experience artificial emotional pain. Yes life can be hard, but love is worth it. In the darkest view of things to love anyone or anything is a down-payment on pain. To love a pet or a person one of you will in most cases die first. Still to concentrate on that misses the truth that with pain there is a time of love. C.S.Lewis said:“To love at all is to be vulnerable. Love anything, and your heart will certainly be wrung and possibly broken. If you want to make sure of keeping it intact, you must give your heart to no one, not even to an animal. Wrap it carefully round with hobbies and little luxuries; avoid all entanglements; lock it up safe in the casket or coffin of your selfishness. But in that casket- safe, dark, motionless, airless--it will change. It will not be broken; it will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable.” I don't think inoculating a child with stories like Old Yeller helps them. It actually helps build those walls. As I noted. The books still exist. If my kids choose to read them they can. They're both adults now. I think they actually effected me negatively and chose not to expose my kids to them. Had one of them brought one of these books home from the school library I'd have warned them it was sad but they would then have read it, I wouldn't have forbidden it. I just didn't choose to supply that experience. We have lost pets to death and from that I think they have understood that life ends. Their mother (my wife) died in 2009. They know people you love pass. I don't think children need these books to "get it". Each parent will decide on their own...but MY EXPERIENCE of these books has been negative and I rate them accordingly. Each here may rate and review them as they see fit...please if these are books you like enjoy. I've lived life and don't need my free time reading (or indeed viewing) to tell me how life can hurt.
