5★ . . "Or How Toys Become Real" "There was once a velveteen rabbit, and in the beginning he was really splendid. He was fat and bunchy, as a rabbit should be; his coat was spotted brown and white, he had real thread whiskers, and his ears were lined with pink sateen." He was the perfect Christmas gift for a little boy who actually had a china dog he used to take to bed every night. The Rabbit was overlooked in the toy cupboard, snubbed by the other toys except for a threadbare, old "skin horse". The Velveteen Rabbit in the toy cupboard with the Skin Horse The Skin Horse explains that that love can make toys real. (Not a spoiler, it's the subtitle!) One night, Nana can't find the china dog, but she spots the little Rabbit. The boy clutches him happily as he goes to sleep, and from then on they are inseparable. The boy plays with the little Rabbit everywhere and digs pretend rabbit burrows in the garden for him to hide in. One day, the little Rabbit discovers REAL rabbits! The Velveteen Rabbit meets two real rabbits. They poke terrible fun at him because he isn't real. " 'Can you hop on your hind legs?' asked the furry rabbit. That was a dreadful question, for the Velveteen Rabbit had no hind legs at all ! The back of him was made all in one piece, like a pincushion. He sat still in the bracken, and hoped that the other rabbits wouldn't notice. 'I don't want to!' he said again. But the wild rabbits have very sharp eyes. And this one stretched out his neck and looked. 'He hasn't got any hind legs!' he called out. 'Fancy a rabbit without any hind legs !' And he began to laugh." Poor little chap. But his boy declares that Bunny is real, so that should mean something. But then, horror of horrors, his boy becomes so ill with scarlet fever, that when he's well again, all of his toys and bedding must be burned - including . . . gulp, the little Rabbit, who is looking decidedly grotty and worse for wear. The boy is so excited about a promised trip to the seaside for the fresh air, that he doesn't notice. But wait! This story hasn't been a firm favourite since 1922 for no reason. Just before the gardener is going to set fire to the sack, the little Rabbit wriggles out of the top and thinks. "He thought of the Skin Horse, so wise and gentle, and all that he had told him. Of what use was it to be loved and lose one's beauty and become Real if it all ended like this? And a tear, a real tear, trickled down his little shabby velvet nose and fell to the ground. And then a strange thing happened. For where the tear had fallen a flower grew out of the ground, a mysterious flower, not at all like any that grew in the garden." The little Rabbit and the Fairy Flower " 'I am the nursery magic Fairy,' she said. 'I take care of all the playthings that the children have loved. When they are old and worn out and the children don't need them any more, then I come and take them away with me and turn them into Real.' 'Wasn't I Real before? ' asked the little Rabbit. 'You were Real to the Boy,' the Fairy said, 'because he loved you. Now you shall be Real to every one.' I don't care that this may owe something to Pinocchio , which was written in 1883, or that Toy Story probably owes a lot to both. I'm just delighted to have enjoyed it again because I was reminded of it recently and saw it wasn't on my Goodreads shelves. I found a copy of the 1922 publication, from which I've copied illustrations, just to show where it started, but there are countless newer editions with more modern artwork that would probably appeal more to today's children (and parents and grandparents). But I thought I'd share the old art here. It's as heart-warming as ever, and I love thinking that the old family toys might be frolicking around somewhere in another dimension (not this one - they'd be too old by now).
