this looks to be a good story, present tense even....yay! i'll quote the dust-jacket: in summary, this new novel appears to be deceptively straightforward. yes. new, in 1966. and yet another story that i wish i had read back where i come from...cue the song, so much water flowing underneath the bridge...and so on. this is not a simple tale. this is a tale w/stories inside, characters coming and going, past, present, now. i said, 'present tense even'....yes. and there are tense shifts...this one has a summary, right, so why do you need me to do one? one story, past, allard benson, harold, who wears a hairpiece. that comes down to a telling scene, you can feel the horror of that moment. and then it is gone. this train. this train backwards on the tracks. why o why didn't i pay more attention? this is one that will stay with me, one that i will want to revisit, as the telling is...nice. i like how williams tells the tale in the present, the shifts to the past. "but now it is the present, timeless time; only we pass, and that is some of the meaning, he supposed, of every story, even of that other,unchanging one, in which billy hemlock gained strength and knowledge from the powders...." stories within the story within the story. like one of those, what are they, russian wooden dolls, you keep taking the top off and there's another below, like above? even the names are somewhat alike aaron benson, the now...heh heh...past present. some real poetry at times...water in a kettle is described as...well, i forgot to mark it, but it is described as...squeaking, i think. i think that was the word, or part of it. and i've heard that. you? the way the kettle beings to boil? the water in it? straining? some other stuff. too "In the absence of real power blood seemed the only alternative. Though he could walk away, and had to walk away, he could not walk away with impunity. He could never be a mordantly amused or merely interested observer of the beast. He acquired the Nambu later, but never carried it." Another, a quote about lies....I marked it and a few others...maybe they're on the Thomas Williams's page? or: "the black holes of periscope slits slid half shut..." or: this fight scene, ears laid back....just before the train... this: "nothing can stop a lie whose fashion has come..." the remainder is "....so why bother to try?" or: "for its fellow mammals it reserves the longest, most thoughtful deaths." "what future there is is the work h he will do, the chaos of the past...." yes. "we perceive depth slowly. when a man tries himself he constructs a scaffold and a throne." yes. good read. been around since 1966. neglected? makes me want to break my plate.
