Very interesting theory about how human cultures are heavily influenced and determined by ecological realities. I really enjoyed how the author methodically built up his theory, starting from the big-game/hunter-gatherer stage all the way to the age of capitalism. In line with his theory, here are three brief snippets (from more detailed chapters) on 1. How ecological realities spurred the agricultural evolution, and 2. how the agricultural revolution intensified human warfare: 1 "...what keeps hunter-collectors from switching over to agriculture is not ideas but cost/benefits. The idea of agriculture is useless when you can get all the meat and vegetables you want from a few hours of hunting and collecting per week." "What I have shown so far is the emergence of village life was a response to the depletions brought about when the hunting-collecting mode of subsistence was intensified." 2 "Warfare after the development of agriculture probably became more frequent and more deadly. Certainly the scale of combat increased. Permanent houses, food-processing equipment, and crops growing in the fields sharpened the sense of territorial identity." He attacks many commonly held views about human nature by mapping how they were adopted as a cultural response or adaptation to changing environmental and productive realities. In the example below, he disagrees with the Oedipus complex as a feature of human nature (after building from evidence and theory): "All of this leads to but one conclusion: The Oedipus complex was not the cause of war; war was the cause of the Oedipus complex (keeping in mind that war itself was not a first cause but a derivative of the attempt to control ecological and reproductive pressures)." That said, and contrary to the feeling people get after reading his theory, he doesn't diminish the power of people to change culture. As much he believes culture to be an adaptation to ecological realities, he also believes in individuals being a determining factor. In his opinion, understanding these ecological and productive factors equip us with more power to define culture moving forward. "Since evolutionary changes are not completely predictable, it is obvious that there is room in the world for what we call free will. Each individual decision to accept, resist, or change the current order alters the probability that a particular evolutionary outcome will occur." All in all, it's an interesting theory that I'll be thinking on for days to come.
