Hey, finally it's Christmas time, not only here, but at Harmony too! This is a short book in the series, this time we are spending Christmas with Pastor Sam Gardner and the eccentrics who make up his congregation. The always annoying church elder Dale Hinshaw- and why is he constantly an elder without a break anyway? - has another one of his schemes going, this time it is a progressive nativity scene on Christmas Eve. This is guaranteed to convert the heathen while making a tidy profit for the church. Here's a little bit of what is going on: Ten feet above the manger, tied in a tree, was a mannequin I recognized from Kivett's five and Dime, garbed in a flannel shirt and blue jeans. I pulled over for a closer look. Dale climbed down from the tree. "What's Ned Kivett's mannequin doing up in the tree?" I asked. "That's the angel of the Lord," he explained. "Oh, I see. I always thought angels of the Lord had wings and wore white robes." "Yeah, well, Ned said I could borrow the mannequin so long as I didn't change it clothes." I peered closer at the angel of the Lord. There was a sign I hadn't noticed at first, tied to a branch beside the angel. "All Flannel Shirts Now 10% Off During the Christmas Season." "I'm glad you stopped by, Sam. I need someone to help me test the sound system." "Tell me again why it is we need a sound system?" "For the commercials for Clevis Nagle. I talked him into donating half the cost toward renting the sound system." "Will we be doing anything else with the sound system? Perhaps playing music or Scripture readings? "Nope, just the commercials for the movie theater," Dale said. "That was part of the deal if Clevis paid half of it." I thought about that for a moment. "Now, Dale, I might be mistaken, and please correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me that if Clevis only paid half, and his commercials are the only thing we're using the sound system for, then we're paying Clevis money so we can advertise for him." "Well, I suppose if you wanna be pessimistic, you can look at it that way. But he didn't have to pay any of it at all. Then we wouldna even had a sound system. This way, we have the only Nativity scene in town with a sound system." He beamed at the thought of it. It had been a long day, and I was tired. Plus, the goose was thrashing around in the trunk of my car, so I let the matter drop. I'm not sure how many years you could go to church with Dale and stay sane. He even wants to raise a Quaker militia just in case some wacko terrorist tries to infiltrate their progressive Nativity scene. He gets the ushers to meet at Asa Peacock's farm that Tuesday for target practice. And so the progressive Nativity is all set, the animals in Sam's yard, the wise men in Bea's yard, the shepherds at Fern's and the Holy Family at Asa's. And the Quaker militia spread out to stop Nativity terrorists I guess. How it all works out I will ask you to read for yourself. If I ever happen to visit Harmony I am staying far away from Dale.
