This book is part biography, part astronaut memoir, and focuses on NASA astronaut Jerry Linenger's eventful mission aboard the Russian space station Mir in 1997. Linenger was one of about a half-dozen American astronauts who trained in Russia for missions during a transitional program called Phase One. That program was partly meant to establish a partnership with the Russian space program, and it was also to give American astronauts experience aboard the Mir space station while the planned American space station Freedom was transformed into the International Space Station. I read this a few years after Bryan Burrough's Dragonfly , which portrays Linenger in unflattering terms. According to that book, Linenger avoided helping his Russian crewmates with frequent repairs aboard Mir, and instead engrossed himself in his daily exercise regimen and carrying out his experiment manifest. Linenger apparently never formed much of a bond with his crewmates, and he may have clashed with supervisors at ground control over his mission priorities. I went into this book fully expecting Linenger to address Burrough's book, whether directly or indirectly. I felt Linenger might be defensive, motivated to 'set things straight' and play down the aloof, antisocial character portrayed in Dragonfly . We get a strong dose of Linenger's motivation right from the outset of the book. Perhaps even moreso than other astronauts, Linenger is intensely self-centered and resume-driven. In fact, he went back to school again and again and earned a string of doctorates, and he doesn't hesitate to boast of the number of 'doctor' titles that would precede his name (i.e. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Linenger). It is sort of refreshing to note that Linenger does not address Burrough's book directly, suggesting either that he never read the earlier book, or perhaps that he just doesn't pay any mind to criticism. The only moment where he appears to contradict Burrough was by clarifying that the disharmony during the mission was from friction between the crew and ground control in Moscow, and not from internal tension. In any event, Linenger has no axe to grind here. He isn't gossipy, and he's not pointing fingers, and that was surprising and good to see. His coverage of his spaceflights is the core of the book. As an MD, he shares some good insight on the effects of long-term spaceflight on the human body, and addresses other medical matters of spaceflight. Even better is his coverage of the mission's crises, the most dangerous of which was when an oxygen cannister caught fire and burned for fourteen long minutes. Just a few weeks later, a Progress resupply flight nearly collided with the station during a docking attempt. His writing tends to skim over details, though, and his tone is too breezy for my liking. He has a slightly annoying tendency to make post-flight commentaries on-the-fly, too, when those observations should have been assembled in an epilogue. So the writing could have been more polished. Linenger tries to portray his working relationship with his crewmates as positive, but I don't think there's enough shared to show the kind of camaraderie he suggests. So I'm not sure there's anything that directly dispels what we know of him from Dragonfly . Linenger basically lets Burrough's book stand without a fight. So in summary, it's a good book, but I wish it was fleshed out with more detail, and I wish it was a little better organized. It's still one of the only books by a NASA astronaut from a long-term stay in space, so that makes this a fairly rare book of its kind. If you do read this book, I recommend reading Bryan Burrough's Dragonfly as its companion. Dragonfly is the superior of the two books, with much more detail and a greater scope than just Linenger's mission. The reader comes away with a stronger perspective on all the problems of the Phase One program, and especially the challenges of surviving a stay on the rickety Mir space station. I continue to be fascinated by the fact that there were a number of NASA astronauts from the Phase One program who struggled with either their training or their missions, or both, and then there were arguably the stars of the program--Michael Foale and Shannon Lucid, who endured, adapted and thrived. It's a shame we still do not have their stories documented in long form. Linenger's story will have to do for the time being.
