3.75 stars I always seem to find Lessing difficult to read, and this was no exception. This is Lessing’s first novel and it is set in what is now Zimbabwe in the 1940s. The title is from Eliot’s The Wasteland. Dick Turner is a poor white farmer who wants a wife: he meets Mary and asks her to marry him. The novel starts with Mary’s murder by Moses, one of the black workers on Turner’s farm. The rest of the novel is a linear chronology up to that point. It shows Mary’s disillusion with her life, her disillusion with her rather incompetent husband Dick and her total inability to relate to the black workers on the farm. Their neighbours try to be neighbourly but to no avail and Lessing vividly describes the heat: “she went out to look at the sky. There were no clouds at all. It was a low dome of sonorous blue with an undertone of sultry sulphur colour because of the smoke that filled the air. The pale sandy soil in front of the house dazzled up waves of light and out of it curved the gleaming stems of the poinsettia bushes, bursting into irregular slashes of crimson.” This is an extended diatribe about the immorality of the farming system and that is clear, but it also feels like Lessing is also being negative about the natural world the farmers inhabit. The climate and landscape almost feel like characters in themselves. The language consists of frequent racial slurs and the main black character, Moses is not very well drawn. As his relationship with Mary develops the reader sees all of Mary’s issues and angsts but Moses seems more inscrutable because his character is not developed. The failed farming and strained relationship Lessing takes from observation of her parents and presumably relationships with the black workforce came from there as well. Lessing does sum up well Mary Turner’s attitudes to race: “She had never come into contact with natives before, as an employer on her own account. Her mother’s servants she had been forbidden to talk to; in the club she had been kind to the waiters; but the ‘native problem’ meant for her other women’s complaints of their servants at tea parties. She was afraid of them, of course. Every woman in South Africa is brought up to be. In her childhood she had been forbidden to walk out alone and when she had asked why, she had been told in the furtive, lowered, but matter-of-fact voice she associated with her mother, that they were nasty and might do horrible things to her.” Some of the attitudes are much more visceral. I have speculated why Lessing chooses not to enter the minds of the black characters. It may be that she didn’t really know how to. Maybe she wanted to focus on the arrogance of the white farming community. It was published in 1950 and certainly held a mirror up to the racism of the she was brought up within. Lessing writes from a position of privilege, but one thing she does very well is analyse the roots and nature of the white supremacism she saw in her home country. Where she is on less sure ground I think is her description of Mary’s mental disintegration and the murder. I found this section of the book less convincing. Nevertheless this is a powerful description of the racism prevalent in 1940s Rhodesia.
