Meandering in Portland, Oregon, we discovered the LARGEST bookstore in the whole world! It was a block long and wide, but inside were many different levels! Each one had different kinds of books. Only trouble was: We had barely one hour to be in it! I was so cranky about it, that when the kids came rushing over asking me to help them find their books i almost shouted at them: "Get lost", which would not have been too difficult. I knew there was no way any of us would have time enough, even if we were left to our own devises, so I explained to them I was on a five minute mission to find a couple of books I wanted and then I would help them out with their missions. Unfortunately, they only had Cutting for Stone, and not his other book, and well... this is not a story of that day, so I will move on, but if you ever find yourself in Portland, stop by and be amazed and amused in this the Powell Bookstore. Did I mention they sell new AND used books? This book was my find! We drove down to Elmira, Oregon to visit some good friends from our life in San Diego, and happily I learned how to do Freezer Jam with the bucket of strawberries we picked earlier on that morning. Well, that was just a taste of what was to come! Two days later we picked four buckets full and my friend Stephanie and I spent the whole day making strawberry Jam! Luckily for me, I also had this book, which makes me wonder; What came first the book title or the desire to make Jelly? The book is a coming of age (I LOVE THAT KIND OF BOOK) of a young girl (Ratchet) whose mom does not love her as much as any girl needs to be loved, and so is sent to visit some two aunties, old as the hills, in a little forgotten backwater country home in Maine. The Great Aunts do love her and lavish her with wacky stories and love, and though they forget to make and eat dinners with her, and have their own little upheavals, including a forest full of humongous and hungry bears, none-the-less, this little girl gets a bizarre and loving family. Not much later into the story another girl also gets dumped there by mistake, thinking the place is an orphanage, and she, as well, becomes part of the family. What they harvest is Blueberries with a shotgun to keep the bears away. The story is filled with drama and slapstick no nonsense humor, a story full of gruesome stories that are poignant yet hilarious at times. I cried and laughed at the same time! The only thing I wish was different, was that those two aunties were mine!
