Opening line: “…Nicola was still standing in the doorway when Jonathan began to speak: she hadn’t even had time to take off her coat…” Nicola only popped out to buy a packet of cigarettes at the local shop but when she gets back she finds a stranger in her apartment instead of her live-in boyfriend. Oh he looks like Jonathan but he doesn’t act like the man that she knows and loves. This Jonathan tells her that he no longer wants to be with her and that the relationship must come to an end and that it would be best if she moved out straight away. “…Then he looked up at her again. ‘There’s no nice way to say this,’ he said. ‘But I’ve decided – that is, I’ve come to the conclusion – that we should part.’…” THE ESSENCE OF THE THING is the tale of a breakup of a relationship, but it has a very humorous edge to all the drama. Nicola’s first reaction is disbelief, followed by utter devastation as her world just falls apart. She turns to her friends for advice and support, thay all seem to think she is better off without Jonathon, in fact the consensus of opinion is that he’s a bit of a cold fish and she can do better, but Nicola is not ready to see this herself quite yet. "...'Let's say he's a prat. But he's the prat I love.' She paused. 'Actually, I've never been absolutely sure what prat means, exactly…" There are a lot of characters in the book, mostly couples who are either her friends or his, along with both sets of parents. All terribly middle to upper class and willing to give their point of view which gives author Madeleine St John the opportunity to show that the breakup of a relationship just doesn’t affect the couple, it also affects the other people in their lives. THE ESSENCE OF THE THING is not a lengthy book and the chapters are very short with a lot of conversation rather than lengthy scene settings. Each chapter had a different point of view, whether it was Nicola or Jonathon, their parents or friends. Yet with minimum fuss St John explores the human emotion that is wrapped up in a separation, the various mood swings that occur as the relationship is split from one entity to two, the realisation of how irrevocable the decision is. There was also the truism that you don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone. As I mentioned before, despite the terrible bleakness of the breakup, THE ESSENCE OF THE THING is actually full of hope, warmth and humour and there comes the point in the story where Nicola found herself laughing at something and forgetting about Jonathon for a moment and that was the point where her life moved on, she had turned the corner and is no longer crippled by misery, she has hope for the future. In contrast though it is about this time that Jonathon realised what he had done and he finds himself unable to move on, and wanting to turn around and make things return to the way they were. For Jonathon the table has turned. C – Above average. Was very readable and I really liked it but was easily able to put it down and walk away for a while.
