The Alphabet Value Collection by Sue Grafton contains 3 of her Novels: D is for Deadbeat, E is for Evidence, and F is for Fugitive. "D" is for Deadbeat is an interesting novel where Kinsey shows she is willing to sleep with a married man but is so dedicated to her profession that she continues to work even when she finds that the check for her services is bad. She is dubious about accepting the assignment to find and give a $25, 000 cashier's check to a teenager, which she thinks the client could do himself; she becomes even more dubious when the check for her services is bad; but when the client is found dead due to an "accident," she intuits that he is in fact murdered, and she accepts his daughter's assignment to find the murderer. (This is after she has found the teenager and given him the check.) The original client is a true deadbeat--as are most of his "friends"--but Kinsey continues the investigation. There are many potential murderers, making it difficult to find the correct one. It is an exciting and engaging story, and finally Kinsey herself is not beaten bloody and near death at the conclusion. Others, for once, are in more danger than she. I thought it was more original than the first three novels. "E" is for Evidence gives us a much more thorough view of Kinsey's second husband (so far we know nothing about the first), and it is a far more negative view than the brief mention made in "C." It is also the first novel where the client is Kinsey herself. During a bleak Christmas season where Kinsey is alone with all her support group (Henry, Rosie, Jason) gone elsewhere, Kinsey discovers $5,000 added to her bank balance, but soon discovers it is not just a mistake, but that someone is trying to frame her. She was trapped into making a mistake on an estimate she turned in to California Fidelity on an insurance claim for the Wood family, many of whom she knows because she went to school with them--as did Daniel Wade, her ex-husband. She loses her "free" office space, one of the nicer Wade family members is blown up and killed (Kinsey, off center of target, is also blown up and damaged, but not killed--the series has to go on), her home (Henry's converted garage) is blown up, she realizes just how truly Daniel Wade is damaged (he is helping the murderer convict her, his ex-wife), and helping a disgusting new lover, and she learns a truly disgusting family secrete of the wealthy Wood family (aren't the rich always awful in some way?). What a lovely Christmas. But it is a pretty good novel, in spite of some awful revelations. The plot is definitely original and involves Kinsey in tighter ways. I certainly had trouble spotting the exact guilty party--and I am rereading the novel! (Many years later--I am now reading them in sequence which I didn't before). It is getting ready to set Kinsey up in new digs and paths. Definitely a good read. "F" is for Fugitive takes Kinsey out of her home (It was blown up in E and is being rebuilt) and away from all her support crew to a very small village up the coast, Floral Beach, where she is hired by an elderly man to find proof that his son did not kill his girlfriend 17 years ago. (He escaped prison and lived an exemplary life, but is back to see his parents and is wanted again for escaping prison). Kinsey lives in a motel run by the man who employs her and soon discovers the whole family is insane. In fact, most all of the people in Floral Beach are insane. It is a rather dark, depressing novel. We learn nothing new about Kinsey, and the story, while intricate and fairly interesting, is not as engaging as many previous novels in the series. Certainly, I found it the weakest of the three collected in this book.
