This is a book that I wish I had never picked up. The thing is this: it was a great book, but it absolutely made me hate J. D. Salinger, formerly one of my favorite authors. This memoir was written by his daughter, Peggy, and in it she writes the shocking truth about how she and her brother were abused when they were growing up, about how their father mistreated their mother and forced her to quit school three months before graduating from Radcliffe College and forced her into a life of seclusion in Cornish, New Hampshire, where after a while, he built ANOTHER home on the property where he could live and work by HIMSELF even after allegedly their mother tried to burn their house down because Jerry wouldn’t buy her new clothes (the fire started in her closet). Needless to say, at the age of 40, the author is working out a lot of her issues through the writing of this memoir and now I know why it was advertised as “unauthorized” because there is no way in hell that Salinger would want the truth of his being such a shmuck out there for public consumption. “ . . . his search for landsmen led him increasingly to relations in two dimensions: with his fictional Glass family, or with living “pen pals” he met in letters, which lasted until meeting in person when the three-dimensional, flesh-and-blood presence of them would, with the inevitability of watching a classic tragedy unfold, invariably sow the seeds of the relationship’s undoing” (50). This explains Ms. Halloran’s curious relationship with Jerry Salinger via pen pal when she met him in Boston for lunch at Chinatown. What a strange character. “*A generation later, a girlfriend of my father’s wrote that when he came to pick her up from her student apartment at Yale, to come to live with him and drop out of school, he arrived in his BMW, not his big Chevy Blazer, so that nearly all of her possessions, including her beloved bicycle that she’d had since she was a kid, were left behind. (The girl, Joyce Maynard, was eighteen, he was fifty-four)” (93). Peggy’s mother had an interesting relationship with sanity herself. I’m not sure if she was crazy BEFORE she met Jerry (she was 17 and he was 31), but she certainly flirted with insanity AFTER the fact. She wrote to her daughter something insightful about going crazy: “Craziness arises from things being blocked not from self-expression. It comes from not being able to face reality nor express one’s worries. If there is a pressure or pain too deep to bear then a necessity rises, in some people, to short circuit experience so that it doesn’t – as is feared – destroy them. Craziness is really an appropriate reaction to what is too intolerable for a certain nervous system to bear. It occurs in weak egos not in strong ones, so I don’t think you have any need to worry about it” (287). Definitely something to think about there.
