Being Gass, all four of these novellas are replete with immense descriptive power, though their individual impacts varied somewhat for me. The title novella is the most obscure of the lot, with the narrator (and I suppose author) initially refusing to stick the story he's started. There is in its first part though a strikingly sad but fleeting portrait of one Peg Crandall, proprietress of the Harrison County Historical Museum. Eventually Gass settles on portraying the married life of the clairvoyant Ella Hess with which he started but subsequently avoided. There seems to be something going on about the relation of Mind and Matter that's presumably the rationale behind "Cartesian" in the story's title, but it largely eluded me. The second novella is a more straightforward tale of a lonely travelling accountant who resolves to stay on, perhaps even indefinitely, at a Bed and Breakfast teeming with trinkets and memories. Many fine descriptions abound and although more affecting overall than the first story, I had a sense of this one being less than the sum of its, admittedly very fine, parts. However, the third novella, Emma Enters a Sentence of Elizabeth Bishop's is a complete and utter masterpiece. This portrait of the titular Emma's youth and maturation on an Iowa farm - where, emotionally abused, actively by her father and passively by her mother, she seeks solace in poetry and literature. It's easily among the three best short fictions of Gass' I've read ( The Pedersen Kid and Heart of the Heart of the Country being the other two), which is to say it's among the best short fictions I've read by anyone. Gass switches so brilliantly from evoking Emma's sadness and burning resentment to creating beautiful moments of transcendence in Emma's escapes into reading and nature. Totally and overwhelmingly marvellous. The fourth was my second favourite with Gass focusing on some of his favourite themes: revenge, resentment, meanness of spirit. Gass is truly wonderful at rendering how everyday slights and pettiness fester away into visceral interior epics and, not surprisingly, he does just that repeatedly in Master of Secret Revenges . Although I found its title charcter, Luther Penner, finally more of a comical figure and a less full, impactful character than some of Gass' other great resenters and revengers (e.g. William Kohler or Jethro Furber), but I did also think this novella the most philosophically interesting of the collection.
