I read this one because it is the first of a trilogy, the second book of which, The Way West , won the 1951 Pulitzer Prize. I found it was an interesting story, but was a bit put off by the racism and misogyny. Racism as AmerIndians (and blacks) are presented as inherently inferior to whites and misogynist especially towards female Indians who are portrayed as prostitutes and at best submissive wives. It is the story of the West in the 1830s and 40s, setting the stage for the Oregon Trail story in the aforementioned second book. The characters of Boone, Jim, and Dick are the most developed and yet none of them really grew on me all that much. There was a moment which I found made little sense towards the middle where Boon and Dick narrowly escape a massacre and it is never explained how Jim somehow survived the incident and hangs out with them again. I found that the ending was largely unsatisfactory as well. It still gets 3 stars though because of the more anthropologically interesting writing about life in those frontier days which was fairly well-described. I hope that the next book will be better. One quote: "You think there is a hell sure enough, Boone? It nigh made me take to God, Boone, hearing Clemens play and sing. If'n I close my eyes I can hear him plain, the nice tunes twangin' out and the voice with them and the mountains theirselves seemin' to crowd round and listen. Hi-yi. Hi-yi. Don't sound so good when I sing it, but even a Injun song was something in Clemens' mouth, like as if it brought God down from the sky. Instead of takin' to God, I took liquor and women, but God seemed all around just the same. Seems like he must have felt good, too, seein' us caper. It's agin nature he would be set against frolics. Sometimes, lyin' with a woman and the night thick and a wolf singing from a hill, I figgered God was close.figgered He must be a friend, Boone, and not no stiff and proper son of a bitch puttin' my name down for hell. Sometimes when I looked out over the plains, so far and mighty it dizzied the eye, I figgered God was there, too. Who made it all and give a body an eye to see with and a heart to feel with if 'twarn't God?" (pp. 290)
