Sin Killer , by Larry McMurtry, is the first of four novels featuring the large and dysfunctional Berrybender family. Lord and Lady Berrybender are obscenely rich English aristocrats who are whimsically navigating north on the Missouri River in an attempt to reach Wyoming and Yellowstone before the Missouri freezes over. Though travel is by steamboat, the Rocky Mount , readers may be forgiven for feeling they are on a rollercoaster facing imminent disaster with every dip and rise. For the trip, Lord Berrybender has assembled the most creative mix of oddball characters which include: six of the fourteen Berrybender children; a gun bearer and a gunsmith; two tutors; a cook, a kitchen maid, and a laundress; a carriage maker and a hunter and his son; a naturalist, a cellist, a painter, and a stable boy to look after the horses stabled below decks. There is naturally a steamer captain, and any number of dogs-body Frenchmen. With such an assembly, McMurtry has no shortage of opportunity for mishaps and misunderstandings, some of them semi-serious, but most of them hilarious to the point of slapstick comedy. Another source of humor is the stark contrast between members of the group who are seasoned frontiersmen and women skilled in survival skills in a vast and unforgiving land, and the English visitors, whose utter lack of knowledge is dwarfed only by the lack of awareness of their ignorance. There are many sexual liaisons going on with lots of individual agendas desired from such matings. Chief among the mischief-makers are the lord and lady themselves! People also seem to accidentally or deliberately find themselves on and off the steamboat as it makes its way upriver. Lord Berrybender is about as out of place as a penguin among peacocks, and is single-minded about one thing only—shooting buffalo, which he does with obscene disregard beyond any sporting etiquette. His carelessness with guns results in several hilarious accidental discharges of weapons, one of which brings brutal reality to the expression “shooting oneself in the foot!” Emerging from this motley crew is Tasmin, eldest Berrybender daughter, who is something of a romantic, but one that has a stubborn streak and is unafraid of speaking her mind. After whimsically departing the steamboat, Tasmin encounters the taciturn Jim Snow, also known as The Raven Brave and the Sin Killer of the book’s title. Tasmin wastes no time in falling in love with Jim, even though he is stunned by how much she can talk and ask questions, which means Jim wastes no time in returning her to the steamboat. Also present on board and on land are various Indians and Indian tribes, who bring even more comedy to the proceedings. Even when women from the steamboat party find themselves captives of Indians and are brutally maltreated, it is difficult for readers not to consume the macabre humor with a tolerant chuckle. One gets the impression that McMurtry had a lot of fun writing these Berrybender chronicles, and despite all the slapstick comedy and dark humor, one cannot help being impressed with the author’s signature intimate knowledge of the American West in the 1830s—its culture, climate, native Americans, and also the interloping white variety. This is a fast, enjoyable read and I will doubtless read the remaining three books in the series…but I might allow myself many other books in between.
