This review contains spoilers Just a bunch of random thoughts I had while relistening to the audiobook. Warning, this is very silly and frankly just for my personal amusement. I love this book. 1.Props to Quinn for ending a letter to Lestat with: I´m young, dumb and pretty, please help<3 2.I half expected Lestat to kick Quinn in the shins for being taller than him. 3.I want an Aunt Queen, where do I request one? 4.If you look up the definition of chaotic bisexual in your average dictionary, you finde a picture of Tarquin Blackwood. 5.Goblin is back, someone call the Ghostbusters. 6.I hate Patsy. 7.Quinn lives Narcissus´s wildest dreams. 8.Ok, sirously, what is it with this boy and sleeping with ghosts? 9.You heard of love at first sight, now get ready for proposition at first glimps. 10. Mona is fifteen, has a monster child, is completly nuts, is a witch, keeps a "cousin list" and her biggest dream is to drown in a river sourounded by flowers like Ophelia. Quinn: That one, I want that one!<3 11. It´s not an Anne Rice novel unless there´s tons of desturbing religious imagery (Rebecca)........... ........ and also not unless something is going up in flames (Greetings from Rebecca). 12.If a very angry, very dangerous creature attacks you at night and tells you to stay away from their lair, you should probably... uhm, STAY AWAY from it Quinn?! 13.Did he just drink blood from a... ok, never mind. It’s an Anne Rice novel, what did I expect? 14. Aunt Queen:( 15. Quinn seems way to sweet and innocent to be a main character in an Anne Rice novel, he´s so cute and caring and... he just broke his mother´s neck. Never mind. Forget what I said. 16. I guess Merrick had outlived her purpose in the series. 17. Mona really knows how to make a dramatic first (last?) impression. 18. I bought a cameo necklace because of this damn book. 19. Suggar Devil Swamp sounds like a Goth Club. 20.Someone give Quinn Blackwood a hug, please. 21.I´m impressed if you have made it that far, thanks for reading!
