Alexander of Macedon, 356-323 B.C.: A Historical Biography Peter Green Read it in old Hard Cover, 617 w/ biblio+apendix+etc. Our final Historic Side Pot of 2014 and what a resounding success. Green gives all of the elaboration of a true historian but is able to retain a lot of the flavor that makes fictitious accounts of the facts of Alexander so interesting. While some Historians summarize culturally, militarily, or politically, Green instead gives more than adequate attention to all of them. Alexander was a military genius, a practitioner of regicide (which was common in the B.C.'s), motivated, driven, and eventually succumbs to paranoia and his ego. His accomplishments are vast, at least in conquering and he was able to break the yoke of Persian hold in the Eastern Mediterranean and putting Macedon at the top of the food chain. At least for a time. The wind up is appropriately long following his upbringing and the no small accomplishments of his father Phillip who laid the groundwork for Alexander. Green also uses this time to ensure that the reader is aware of the developments of Greece and Asia Minor as it's important to understand what was before what became. Through his mother Olympius and a convenient plot to assassinate Phillip, Alexander rises to the throne and conquest is realized. Despite the slower wind up its worthwhile and required. Once Alexander gains prominence and the conquest begins, things move quickly. Whirlwind quickly. Before you know it, the life of Alexander is at an end, as abruptly as it started, with only his legacy and deeds for the world to remember. Also, you get to read things like this: "A great banquet was held to celebrate the king's full recovery. This occasion gave rise to an unpleasant but all too characteristic incident. One of Alexander's most distinguished Macedonian veterans, Corragus, challenged the famous Athenian boxer Dioxippus to single combat. Dioxippus, defter than any Roman net-fighter, finished off his opponent in a matter of seconds…From now on his sycophants made endless trouble for Dioxippus, even going so far as to plant a gold cup on him at a dinner party, and then accuse him of stealing it. In the end the wretched athlete committed suicide rather than endure further prosecution." Highly recommended.
