OK, I know what you're thinking, but really, I am ordained as a man of the cloth, and as a neo-pagan universalist, I must pursue the broadest understanding of the human spirtual dynamic as is possible. The NIV Zondervan edition is interesting from a myriad of perspectives, not the least of which is the translation to contemporary prose, eliminating all the romantic, colorful English that has been a hallmark for this tome for the last several centuries. If I ever questioned the legitimacy of the translation before, I have no less concern with this one, and miss the the old "yea and for thou" stuff in an ironic sort of way. Regrettably, I have yet to find a published edition of the Bible that is free from the Evangelical endorsement perspective. It would seem that even the most extraordinary tales of the old testamnet (or, Pentateuch, as it should be rightfully referred to) are given the utmost in historical legitimacy, making a true, objective evaluation nearly impossible. Rife with allegorical teachings and spiritual revelation, the NIV Bible veers from the matters at hand and, as is traditional, focuses instead on the glorification and triumph of the Lord's 'chosen peoples,' and, as anyone with a modicom of spiritual insight easily recognizes, really embellishes the sanctity of the identity of Isreal as the standard-bearer for divinity. A sort of grand insecurity complex, the challenges of facing the human archetypes are lost in the Holy pursuit of fulfilling God's will for the glory and success of these peoples. Historical, factual, identity, gender and reality issues aside, this edition, with it's plain language, really does help to paint a picture of the better qualities of early Judiasm, particularly as regards societal context; and demonstrates the cultural acceptance, redemption, and egalitarian ideology of an early monotheistic religious culture, despite the wholesale killing and genoside perpetrated by the Isrealites in the name of the Lord. Those transparent moments are yet another reflection of the dynamics of the complex human archetype, and our struggle for validation and identity, and play nicely to the notion of conquest and suppression that we have yet to wrench from our collective psyche. Another helpful quality of this edition is the 'red-lettering' of the quotes of Jesus, which you Jesus Freaks out there might find particularly helpful. I'm finding it difficult to summarize such a large and influential work which I would generally classify as fiction from a literary perspective, bt much can be learned from even a casual exploration of this work. Amen...
