Getting The Girl, by Markus Zusak, tells a story of two brothers. The older of the two, Rube, has girls falling head over heels for him. On the other hand, Cameron is quiet. He and Rube are friends, even if they are complete opposites. Cameron doesn’t pay much attention to any of Rube’s girls until Octavia comes along. To him, Octavia is different, not only is she around for longer, and not only does she talk to him, she’s just different. Soon, Cameron finds himself wanting Octavia, which, is why when it’s over between Her and Rube, Cameron decides this is his opportunity to search for the love he craves. When Rube finds out about this, he is appalled. He calls Cameron “scraps” on the few occasions that he talks to him. Rube’s new girlfriend, Julia, has a jealous ex who calls the house looking for Rube. When they arrange a fight, Cameron lurks around watching out for Rube. This really surprised me. I think that as brothers, or as siblings or family members, you owe something to the rest of your family. Next year, I will be at school with my older brother, and if I got into trouble and people were beating me up, I’d hope that he’d be there for me. Now, I’m in school with my sister, and I know that if she was in trouble, I’d try to help her. However, if I she had been ignoring me for the past few weeks, giving me the cold shoulder and calling me “scraps,” and the fight was far away, at night, I’m not so sure the circumstances are the same. It’s so brave of Cameron to go help Rube after Rube has shunned him. His sister into art, and drew a picture of him with boxing gloves on, because he fights for what he wants. His sister, Sarah, threatens him, telling him that if he didn’t fight for what he believed she’d erase the glove and replace them with nothing. Cameron knows Rube is his brother, and he knows that no matter what they’ve gone through there is a point where you should give up a little bit of your self to protect someone you love. Where is that line though, and how is that line different from the line that makes us think sometimes it’s okay to go after what you want even if you hurt someone you love because they’ll forgive you? I don’t think it’s fair to make one sibling carry the other siblings’ pain because of the fact that they have the same parents. I think protecting people you love is a choice, and there is no real obligation. People feel obligated, I think, to help people they love because they love them and because they want to, they feel obligated to the love not the doing what other people think is needed. I think that in someway you owe the people you love trust, your word, and getting their backs, but I think in other ways you don’t owe anyone anything. No one is forced by law to do anything for anyone they love; they just force themselves to do it because they love them. When you stop loving someone, you are free of the weight that they give you in the role you play in their lives, and, I think that’s the only way to be unobligated. Cameron never stopped loving Rube, which is why when he knows he can help Rube is such a time of trouble, he does. He still plays an important role in Rube’s life and he still loves him. With the love comes the weight and the responsibility. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
