aka This Gun for Hire Review of the William Heinemann hardcover "Uniform Edition" reissue (1947) of the William Heinemann original (1936) [3.5 rounded up] I chanced to watch an online posting of the film This Gun for Hire (1942) dir. Frank Tuttle, starring Alan Ladd and Veronica Lake and enjoyed its old time noir staging. At the library I found a fairly old edition of the Graham Greene novel which was surprisingly still in circulation and borrowed it out of curiousity. A Gun for Sale was Greene's 7th published novel (he later suppressed publication of his 2nd & 3rd and they've never been reprinted since the early 1930s). Greene categorized A Gun for Sale as one of his "entertainments", i.e. escapist thrillers or comic escapades which he felt didn't qualify as literary "novels." The film adaptation was surprisingly faithful to the book, except for the casting of the handsome Ladd in the role of the disfigured assassin Raven who originally had a harelip. Raven is hired by an English war profiteer to assassinate a continental Minister in order to set off World War 2. The 1936 scenario is prescient of the war paranoia of the time which was temporarily appeased with Chamberlain's 1938 Munich Pact promising "peace for our time," but which only postponed the war outbreak to 1939. Raven pulls off the assassination but is betrayed by being paid in stolen bank notes by the profiteer's agent who has the apparently tongue twisting name of Cholmondeley, which, in the usual bizarre English fashion, is actually simply pronounced as "Chumley". The police start a pursuit based on knowing the numbers of the stolen currency and aren't even aware of the assassination connection. Raven starts a pursuit of his betrayer and encounters chorus girl Anne Crowder (played by Veronica Lake in the film) who also has a run-in with Cholmondeley who is a backer of a dancehall show she auditions for. Anne has a sort of Stockholm Syndrome sympathy for the assassin, until she learns of the number of people he has killed. Meanwhile, Anne's policeman boyfriend Mather is one of the lead detectives in charge of the Raven pursuit. It all ends up in a karmic ending with war being averted at the time. The thriller plot was quite straightforward and marked with a surprising number of coincidences in order to force everything to come together. The most interesting parts of the book were actually the several vignettes of secondary characters which Greene took an extra amount of care with. A subplot of university medical students policing an air raid / gas attack rehearsal in a shockingly sadistic manner was particularly harrowing.
