In the grand scheme of things, I'd call myself Niven-agnostic. Sometimes he writes really influential books which lack a bit of quality (ala *Ringworld*), sometimes he writes interesting but poorly done stories (like *The Integral Trees*) and sometimes he writes interesting short story sequences which make you smile, like those collected in *Flight of the Horse*. *The Long ARM of Gil Hamilton* follows in the steps of *Flight of the Horse*, consisting of three short novellas about a single character, a detective for ARM - a global police force in a future where humanity has reached eighteen billion people - as he takes on three separate cases, all of them relating to "organleggers," criminals who kill people for their organs, which are worth a lot of money in this future. The stories are charming and fun, and even though the visions of these short stories is pretty quaint nowadays, I still think one can have a lot of fun while reading this. The first story, "Death by Ecstasy," explains Gil Hamilton's history - he was an asteroid miner before joining ARM in order to get an arm transplant after he lost his arm in a mining accident. At the same time, it explores the mystery of his old asteroid-mining partner's death by electrical current overdose. A current addiction begins when you first put high-voltage electricity into your brain through a kind of pleasure plug, but Hamilton doesn't believe that his old buddy would kill himself like that - it's not what Belters do. So he digs into his death with the manager of his late friend's apartment complex and a local LA cop and finds out that he had been hired to fly illegal organs between Earth and the Belt. He'd taken the job, but he also started collecting evidence on his boss, infamous organlegger-linchpin Loren, in order to hand over to Hamilton. He left it in a locker where he knew Hamilton would find it, which Hamilton he does, and he uses it to take down Loren, despite a close call that forces him to use his psionic third arm to smash Loren's heart . This story introduces a few trademarks of Hamilton's, such as that psychic third arm he gained when he first lost his physical arm, and the telepathic woman who works with ARM's detectives to sooth them in times of crisis using a mix of her feminine wiles and compassion. "Death by Ecstasy" is a good mystery that lays out key pieces of the plot really clearly while never being *too* predictable, and even though the mystery won't exactly whack you out of left field, there are enough pleasant character-development beats that I didn't really mind. This story is about Hamilton more than the other two pieces, and I personally found it worthwhile. Niven's prose is also good. Now, it's nothing amazing, but it's a little smoother and, I think, slightly more engaging than writers like Isaac Asimov, even though their prose has a similar timbre to it. I think the short form helps Niven, and that within the constraints of this story - and the others - he doesn't really have room to go wandering any rabbit holes you don't care about, instead sticking to the mechanical beats that, as he acknowledges in his afterword, are necessary to craft both a tight mystery yarn and an effective science fiction tale. "The Defenseless Dead" introduces us the the countless humans who have frozen themselves for one of two reasons; 1) to be revived in a time when either their physical/mental disorders have readily available treatments or 2) just to wake up in cool future. This story also recontextualizes the world of its predecessor by adding some explanation for why Loren needed to smuggle organs to the Belt ; the world had voted a "Freezer Bill" into law that decreed all "corpsicles" who could not financially support themselves upon waking up should be cut up for organs to be distributed across the world. This allowed organs to become a bit more readily available, and decreased the demand for illegal ones on Earth. But this artificial supply is waning, and people are now getting ready to vote on a second bill which would have all corpsicles frozen due to mental disorders cut up and scattered across the seven medical seas. There are also corpiscle heirs who would receive large inheritances from being dead, like Holden Chambers and his practically-lobotimized sister. Hamilton only gets himself involved when there's an attempt on his life by a man with ties to Anubis, an organlegger linchpin who seems to be out of commission at the moment, although one can never be sure... Hamilton investigates and starts wondering if organlegging interests are trying to manipulate people away from the bill so their products are still in demand, or if the same powers now have control over corpsicle heirs and therefore want huge rushes of cash and will campaign in support of the bill. Eventually Hamilton figures out that Holden is actually Anubis (who transferred his brain and possibly his spine into Holden's body) and has him arrested, and the bill to chop up the unfundable gets shut down because the people find out an organlegger had something to do with its promotion . The expansion of the world put forth in "Death by Ecstasy" here in "The Defenseless Dead" shows how good of a worldbuilder Niven can be when he tries. The things he reveals about the world always have things to do about his cases, but the fact that those things also make the world seem illuminated either show some of Niven's skill or project the appearance of enough skill that there's really no distinction between the two. It's a really good sequel story, and probably a better mystery than the first story since it's much less concerned with Hamilton's past - after all, that past doesn't have as much to do with this caper, does it? The world that Niven is expanding is really the Known Space world, where books like *Ringworld* or those in the Man-Zkin War series take place, but you wouldn't need to read any of those books to read this, and reading this text after some of those volumes (like, say, *Protector*) reminds me fondly of those books since they definitely feel like they're part of the same world. But when speaking of expanding the universe, let's talk about... "ARM," the final story in this collection. It introduces us to ARM's two non-organ-related functions: enforcing population laws (what Hamilton thinks of as hunting down poor defenseless mothers) and keeping of track, and sometimes even suppressing, new human technologies. It's that latter function which pulls him away from a stumping case of a couple charred organleggers when a young woman named Janice, I believe, reports that she's found her uncle dead in their living room. His body and the grass around it is already severely decomposed or dehydrated, respectively, because it seems they've been left under an invention of his which makes time roll by much, much faster than normal - just imagine experiencing over six months in one night. If you put a part of your body into it, it can develop gangrene because of your blood flow not being able to overcome that temporal barrier, but there's still evidence of someone reaching into temporal field, so Janice - who spent the night in the autodoc, possibly because of a leg injury - becomes the primary suspect. But Hamilton doesn't believe it, so he spends some time trekking around town and interviewing the dead man's old business associates and the like. The case is especially tricky because this is a locked-room mystery, but eventually, Hamilton correctly reasons that the mad inventor had two time fields and that one was stolen, and that a certain of one his associates had spent the night in that field to regrow his arm, and that since he was diabetic, he'd bought six months' worth of insulin from the organleggers who showed up charred by a new kind of technology, a murderous flavor of flashlight that is part of the brawl right after Hamilton figures out the solution . At least, that's my understanding; I didn't find "ARM" as clearly written as others in this story, and while I don't think this ending completely breezed past me... I guess I'm not completely sure if it did or not. "ARM" is a bit different from the other two stories because its scope is a bit different, but it's not bad by any stretch of the imagination; I just found is slightly less exciting. Still, all the fun elements are there, and I guess while these stories were a little dark, they were also fun. I had *fun* returning to Known Space for the first time in a year and a half, and it made me want to return again, even sometime this year. It's a pretty good time for mystery and science fiction fans alike, and I don't have much ill to say except things like, "it wasn't as good as x, y, or z." With that in mind, I'd give the whole *The Long ARM of Gil Hamilton" package an 8/10 and say that it's close to, but maybe not successful at, beating *Flight of the Horse* as my favorite book by Niven. I hope you'll check it out if you see it at a used bookshop near you. Otherwise, thanks for reading one of my reviews, as always, and here's hoping you can solve the case of where to find this book even quicker than it takes Gil Hamilton to solve a murder...
