Phew! Finally! I've been truckin' through this one for way too long now. I was really happy to see that the last 25 pages were notes and an index, so I was done sooner than I thought I'd be. Okay, this wasn't a bad book, really, you just have to know what you're in for. I was expecting more "chocolate" and "secret" and less "world of Hershey and Mars." This book was primarily about the "chocolate wars" of these two large corporations. Any discussion about awesome things like candy bars, developing chocolate recipes, and eating chocolate was secondary to business strategy, management style and marketing. Some of this was interesting, but having it continually in the context of candy kept making me depressed that this book wasn't more about candy and less about business. One thing I did like was the history of Forrest Mars, Sr. and Milton Hershey. They were both compelling men, and I especially liked learning about Hershey's benevolence and the way he developed the town of Hershey, P.A. Still, the interesting parts of this book were too few to make the dry spells worth it. Also, (and I'm not saying this out of any bitterness at being deprived of a figurative chocolate fix) Brenner was a surprisingly bad writer. She is a former Washington Post reporter, yet her writing was bland and unimaginative. She followed all the writing conventions we were taught in journalism school, yet with none of the finesse that could raise her writing to art. Her descriptions continually fell flat. I think this was especially noticeable after reading Candy Freak where Almond's descriptions of candy bars (ones you'd likely never tasted, no less) left you with the feeling of melting chocolate on your tongue and the scent of roasted peanuts in the air. Not so with Brenner's descriptions; from people, to situations, to taste sensations, that left me not only feeling like I wasn't experiencing it myself, but even unsure whether the author herself ever had. Oh, and the information was painfully dated. Operation Desert Storm was treated practically as a current event, and the book ended with an unresolved lawsuit in 1998. If it were more about the early history of these two companies, that would be fine, but it was much more about their current business strategy...which is less compelling when "current" was 12-15 years ago. Anyway, don't read this book for the chocolate, but if you're interested in the big business of candy companies (particularly in the 90s) you'll probably enjoy this.
