When I was in elementary school, there were several girls' book series that I avoided because I thought they sounded so . . . insipid. For example, the Betsy-Tacy books. What kind of a dumb name was Betsy-Tacy? Another series that I gave the stink-eye to when I saw it on the shelves was Trixie Belden. What kind of a name was Trixie ?! Trixie sounded like the sugar cereal with the rabbit mascot that I knew from TV commercials, not like the name of a girl who solved mysteries. Two years ago I finally read a Betsy-Tacy book and felt like a big dope when I discovered how sweet and adorable it was and realized how much I would have loved it as a kid. Last week, while impatiently waiting for the next Sammy Keyes book to come out, I decided maybe I should give Trixie Belden a chance too. When I opened the first Trixie Belden book, The Secret of the Mansion , to the first page and read the first sentence, I felt very smug. All my suspicions were confirmed. Oh, Moms," Trixie moaned, running her hands through her short, sandy curls. “I 'll just die if I don't have a horse.” Ha ha! I knew it! Trixie Belden was an idiot! All my revulsion had been legitimate! But then I kept reading, and I discovered that Trixie Belden was a little more complicated than she first appeared. For example, Trixie's dad comes home a few pages later and informs Trixie and her mother that he found their elderly neighbor collapsed in his driveway and drove him to the hospital, where the doctors predicted that he would have little chance of survival. Trixie's response? "Serves him right," Trixie said, wiping her grimy hands on her rolled-up blue jeans. "The mean old miser. You should have left him lying in the driveway, Dad." HA HA HA!!! I never expected a girl's mystery hero from the late 1940s to say something like that. "Should have left him lying in the driveway." Hee hee hee! Also, did you notice that her hands were grimy? And that she's wearing blue jeans? As it turns out, Trixie's a pretty badass tomboy. She's impulsive, determined, a little selfish, and not afraid to get dirty or explore creepy places. I HAD NO IDEA! That said, the book's tone is reflective of what was considered acceptable fare for minors in its time: The plot works out in the same magical, unrealistic way a Nancy Drew plot works out. The good guys are good and the bad guys are bad. Trixie and her friend Honey appear to be unaware of sex--for example, they continually daydream about their parents adopting the hot teenage boy down the road so he can be their brother because they like him so much--what?! And it's hard not to hear Haley Mills's voice from The Parent Trap film coming out of Trixie and Honey's mouths when they speak ( "Gosh," Honey breathed. "Golly! Golly! Golly!" ). It's interesting how 1950s-and-60s-children's-book wholesomeness meshes and jars with Trixie being an intensely strong-willed character. Trixie is a little too complicated, a little too independent for the world she lives in, but at the same time she doesn't have the experience necessary to always make good decisions. And isn't that the same tension that lies at the very heart of the complexity of being a teen? Long story short: the first Trixie Belden book is a fun read featuring a reasonably strong female character. And since the first book ends on a bit of a cliff-hanger, I guess I'll just have to read the next one.
