Title: Miss Spider’s ABC Author: David Kirk Illustrator: David Kirk Genre: Alphabet Book Theme(s): Alphabet, Bugs. Opening line/sentence: “Ants await” Brief Book Summary: As Miss Spider prepares for her birthday party, each letter of the alphabet is presented to the reader. For each letter, there is a different bug doing an action that begins with that corresponding letter of the alphabet. Professional Recommendation/Review #1: Jan Lieberman (Children's Literature) Miss Spider's ABC has just been published as a board book. What an extravaganza it is! A wildly colorful romp through the alphabet has all of the insects preparing a surprise party for Miss Spider. "Ants await./ Bumblebees blow balloons...Ladybugs laugh/ Moths mingle." The moths' wings look like flowing robes fit for royalty and the ladybugs seems to be jitterbugging. This is great fun that may inspire children to make their own ABC book of insects planning a class picnic or beach party. 2000, Scholastic, $16.95 and $8.95. Ages 3 to 6. (PUBLISHER: Scholastic $16.95 and $8.95., PUBLISHED: 2000) Professional Recommendation/Review #2: Pat Ferguson (The Lorgnette - Heart of Texas Reviews (Vol. 13, No. 1)) David Kirk uses concise, alliterative text and vibrant illustrations in this alphabet board book to introduce the reader to a wide variety of creatures from ants to a zebra butterfly, who are preparing for Miss Spider's surprise birthday party. Young nature lovers will delight in the bright, colorful pictures and playful tone of the book. In addition to the obvious use of reinforcing the alphabet, this book also fits well in a life-science unit. Throughout this well-written book, phrases such as "fireflies fandango" and "moths mingle" provide excellent opportunities to build vocabulary and strengthen language development. The sturdy design combined with short text and bold illustrations make this book appealing as a read-aloud for toddlers. However, it is sophisticated enough to avoid appearing babyish to primary-age children. (1st board book ed.) Grades Preschool-2. 2000, Scholastic, Unpaged, $8.95. Ages 2 to 8. (PUBLISHER: Scholastic $16.95 and $8.95., PUBLISHED: 2000) Response to Two Professional Reviews: Both professional reviews support this book for early readers. Both recommendations think that this book is a fun way to introduce the alphabet and a variety of insects to the reader at the same time. I agree, I think that the book is filled with colorful illustrations that will be sure to catch the readers’ eye. There are also uses an array of vocabulary words that can be used with slightly older readers as well. Evaluation of Literary Elements: The first obvious literary element that is being used is the use of every letter. As an alphabet book, it is crucial that the book introduces each letter. The book also pairs each letter to a corresponding bug/insect as well as a verb/noun that also begins with the same letter. I think that this is a great way to reinforce a student’s ability to recognize the letters of the alphabet but also introduce a handful of new vocabulary words as well. Consideration of Instructional Application: I think that this would be a great book for pre-school students or those who are just learning the alphabet. The book is not too wordy and the colorful pictures will keep children entertained. This would be a great book to incorporate into a science lesson as well. The teacher could have each student focus on one of the insects included in the book by researching and presenting an informal assessment on what they have learned.
