Redneck. Hillbilly. Yokel. Have you ever used any of these terms to describe other people in your society? I have, (sorry Queenslanders!) and after reading The Redneck Manifesto I can see the classist, snobby error of my ways. If you're easily offended, I recommend reading something else. Goad is vulgar, occasionally extreme and prone to long, enraged rants. He's also damned entertaining, and has produced a fascinating book that looks the lives, hopes and stereotypes of poor white Americans. As much as our neo-liberal masters would like to pretend otherwise, class both exists and matters. Trump and Brexit give us a glimpse of the shocking things that can happen when you ignore the reality of what life is like for large sections of our societies. Class is very much alive in the US and Goad shoves that reality in your face, while verbally slapping you and yelling at you to not look away. He paints an ugly picture, its lines and colors dictated by poverty, the disdain of the mainstream, substance abuse and a government that hurts more than it helps. Goad traverses a lot of territory, from history through to leisure, politics and race relations, taking up the literary cudgel in defense of that most maligned of groups- the American redneck. The Redneck manifesto is vicious kick in the face to assumptions people make about poor white folks who are seen to be outside the acceptable white middle class mainstream. I've never read anything like this book. This is unfiltered rage put onto page, with an intellect and wit the equal of its passion. I don't know how Goad was able to see his keyboard past his personal cloud of anger-spittle, but I'm glad he did. His writing is near musical in its torrent of insults and expletives and it's a joy to read, providing you have the stomach for his deliberate provocations. The insights he provides into the real, everyday lives of poor Americans are often shocking, giving readers a glimpse into a near hopeless world where life is getting worse, not better, and everybody involved knows it. I don't agree with some of Goad's assertions, and his tone is often needlessly (if entertainingly) antagonistic, but his point of view is not often heard in our cultural discourse. When the results came in on the 8th of November 2016, I thought of this book. In the era of Trump (the Trumpassic? The Trumpermian? The Bullshitocene?) Goad points a flashlight at a largely ignored section of American society and helps us understand why so many people are so angry, and why they feel their nation has let them down.
