The Berrybenders, a family of rich English aristocrats, decide to take a journey up the Missouri River in 1830's America. The goal is to see the Wild West of buffalo, Indians, frontiersmen and trappers, so with great anticipation, they lease a large boat, the steamer Rocky Mount , which is able to carry everything they need for comfort - food, servants, tutors, guides, clothes, weapons. However, the family expects America to conform to the usual social conventions of English society, particularly the milieu of England's country manors. None of them realize Americans have very little idea of their expectations. Most of the family sees the trip the same way as we would view a trip to Disney World. As a result, the English servants and tutors despise them, while the American guides are mystified by their behavior. Being a free agent of one's own destiny is rather terrifying in these circumstances. The adventure quickly becomes very messy, with preventable accidents, kidnappings, deaths and rapes. All in good fun! Honest! This novel is pure farce, similar to the popular movies made in the 1930's https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screw... . (However, whatever wit the author includes is only in playing with genre conventions, not in the dialogue. The prose is straightforward, not clever.) Educated Tasmin is the eldest daughter of Lord and Lady Berrybender. Also traveling with her are her parents and a few of her ten brothers and sisters - Bobbety, Bess and Mary. Mary, age twelve, is considered by the family to be the peculiar strange child, but all of these characters appear to be remarkably free of emotional attachments to each other. Tasmin is desperate to separate herself from her loathsome fellow travelers, so she sneaks off the boat and falls asleep in her pirogue. She is rescued (although she is unaware that she is being rescued since she is clueless about danger of any kind, as are all of the Berrybenders) by an inarticulate dirty hairy uneducated Christian fundamentalist Indian fighter, Jim Snow. She immediately falls in love with him, despite his ignorant brutality and abuse, so she plots to get him to marry her (none of the older Berrybender children are virgins since they all begin to consort with grooms and hunters and servants early - Lord Berrybender is thought to have a possible 30 bastards in addition to his ten actual recognized children). Tasmin is not going to allow her family of idiots to prevent her Grand Romance with primitive America (as if their self-involvement already hadn't precluded any attempt at noticing she was even missing). However, this New World is a place where there are no rules, including those of genre conventions, except to turn everything upside down...
