OK first things first. Ignore the cover. Seriously - just rip that thing right off of there so it doesn't influence your thinking about this book (um, but not if it's a library book - no ripping anything off or out of library books). So here's what you must understand about this book: it is not "Chick Lit" or a feel-good romance or anything else inferred by either that inexplicable cover or the synopsis. This, readers/listeners, is a piece of Lit Fic, which means you're in for something far akin to a snapshot of the main character's life, than a plot-driven novel full of suspense or humor or action of any sort. [Warning: whole lot of personal opinion on literary fiction ahead] I LOVE literary fiction. But literary fiction is HARD. It makes you work when you read it. The characters often don't seem to make sense, and just as in life, aren't always all that likable (and not in the hate-him/her-to-love-him/her-hero/heroine way either). The plot seems to take a backseat to the internal processing and musings of the main character, especially in a first-person POV novel such as this one. No one does what seems to be the "next logical step" in a typical fictional progression. In short, I find that literary fiction is a whole lot like life. And not everyone feels like reading about life that reads just *like* life (although much more cleverly phrased). Ain't no judging going on here as I like reading all sorts of things (er, as long as there is lots of pain, angst and "messiness" involved - I'm damaged, what can I say?). But this type of book is MY kind of book. It is perfectly constructed. Casey has a true gift with turns of phrase. Not punch-you-in-the-gut style like Sarah Braunstein (who has that down to a phenomenally well-executed literary science), but bits that make you go, "ohhh, that was amazingly well said." The characters are weird, and in being so, actually more realistic in terms of what people are really like - how weird the inside of their (and thus our) brains really are. Romance is weird and messy. Mother/daughter relationships are weird and messy. Finding yourself in your mid-thirties and suddenly realizing that you have no clue what you should be doing, and having a slow dissolution of self is weird and messy and absolutely realistic. So yes, I recommend this book. It was far more and far better than I expected, from the first page on. But go into it knowing that it's not straightforward, it's not really plot-driven, and you might not like the characters all the time. But it will get under your skin, and Casey's writing strength alone is worth the read. Starting the narration of this today and am looking forward to it like I look forward to an amazing cup of dark roast coffee and the (almost) darkest chocolate I can find - om NOM.
