Having never read Melville beyond Moby Dick and Billy Budd , and with a mild distaste for "seafaring tales," I was pleasantly surprised to read several quite good, non-seafaring stories in this collection. Bad news first. Billy Budd to me has, and always will, represent that stark allegory of fable or parable, without the blessed brevity of a fable or parable. I don't enjoy reading constant reminders that Billy's character represents pre-fall Adam. Without the agony of the details, this story boils down to a very interesting paragraph. If Melville's verbose and choppy style is meant to simulate tossing waves, he succeeds. For example, his use of reverse negatives ("not unabashed" or "seldom unheeded") make reading slow. The story Benito Cereno exhibits similar problems, though with a more interesting twist. Unfortunately, Melville grinds out 10 extra pages explaining the twist at the end, just in case the reader hasn't understood. The intro to this story, however, deserves mention for its uncommonly poetic and lovely opening description– "The sky seemed a gray surtout [19th century word for overcoat]. Flights of troubled gray fowl, kith and kin with flights of troubled gray vapors among which they were mixed, skimmed low and fitfully over the waters, as swallows over meadows before storms. Shadows present, foreshadowing deeper shadows to come." Melville proves himself capable of natural description most in The Piazza , a subtle allegory of the experienced writer withdrawing from the world. The story Bartleby is my favorite. The setting is more modern and apt than any other. It's a dark, middle class office-worker tale about a man that loses his reason. The mystery of the tale balances with the pathos of his effect on those around him. The Encantadas is a group of journalism/collected folklore about the Galapagos Islands. Fairly good and easy in style. Finally The Bell-Tower is an interesting story, told in a gothic style. It seems to be an indictment of industrialism, and feels upon reading like an H.G. Wells. It may be the very first appearance of a robot in literature. *Added August 2012* The story "The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids" (not in this edition, in Penguin's Billy Budd and Other Stories ) is a sort of binary parallel. The style is very jovial, especially in the warm, sumptuous first half, but by the second half Melville's elemental nature returns. Gender difference is a major theme, with industrialism and class pictured as well. I was surprised by the narrator's affected voice. Was Melville just playing his character emphatically, or was he being sarcastic? His delight at low ceilings, hushed conversations, taking snuff… I'm not sure I understood...
