With the exception of Johnson’s brief but dangerous war time episode, this second volume of The Years of Lyndon Johnson gets off to a slow start as his political prospects wallow in the 1940’s. However, the pace quickly picks up with the Texas senatorial primary election of 1948. Describing elections, Caro never fails to create excitement and suspense even if we know the outcome. In the first volume, The Path to Power , he gave us riveting accounts of Johnson’s failed senatorial run in 1941, his first congressional victory in 1937 and even his masterminding of the elections of college schoolmates. But Caro is at his absolute best in his mesmerizing account of Johnson’s 1948 Senatorial primary run, gifting us with writing of the highest order. And of course Johnson offers plenty of fascinating material, particularly in the ’48 campaign. He is a straight “A” candidate: Aggressive, Astute, Assiduous, Amoral and an Asshole. He masters innovation in his use of the media, in-depth private polling and even the helicopter, never before seen by many Texans in 1948. And while many of his other tactics were not new, the massive amount of money and important connections at his disposal enabled him to employ them on an unprecedented scale including the methodical use of duplicity, deceit, bribery, quid pro quo’s and every other illicit activity imaginable. Johnson makes Richard Nixon look like a rank amateur, even Jimmy Walker and Boss Tweed could have learned a few tricks from Johnson. In fact, I am not sure even Tammany Hall exceeded the scope and scale of Johnson’s election rigging. Caro exposes the vast corruption of New York politics in his first book, The Power Broker . When Johnson lost his first senatorial bid in ‘41 to an opponent who stole more votes than he did, FDR told Johnson that he gathered Texans didn’t know how to sit on ballot boxes the way New Yorkers did. This is of course to ensure votes are not changed after the fact which apparently happens frequently. In essence FDR was chiding Johnson for losing to corruption he should have anticipated because it is to be expected. They may talk very differently in Texas than New York but the politics is amazingly similar and one has to suspect in many other states too. I will never view an election the same way again.
