I first heard the author's name during my grad studies as he is most famously known for his famous work on "flow." After seeing this book in the bookstore, I immediately bought it, and what an amazing and informing book it turned out to be! His wisdom and his insights are on point to such an extent that personally, I believe that this book should be a required read in schools. His most striking point is about "entropy" which is defined as gradual decline to disorder. In his own words, it is defined as "...the most universal law of nature; it states that complex systems tend to break down, ..., that order will decompose in disorder." The only way to exist is "finding ways to forestall entropy, and this self-preservation includes using some outside source energy to keep themselves intact over time." (p. 152) This fight against entropy makes us more complex beings because we are evolving day by day while constructing a reality for ourselves. In author's own terms "evolution is the history of complexification of the living matter." (p.170) When we regard evolution as a guiding process, it does not mean to simply forgetting about all ethical rules, living like animals, and living only for pleasure as opposed to what some religious people would suggest. This would actually go against the complexity that we are striving to achieve for as a part of our evolution process. Instead, we humans should aim to grow our emotions, character, and sensitivity, and keep learning new things or reinforce our learnings through our lifetimes. It shouldn't only involve taking in information mindlessly, but critical thinking and integrating that knowledge into our world. Only that way we can create better and more complex generations and contribute to the never-ending evolution process. Only then, we can come close to being successful in our fight against entropy. This book is almost like a manual on how humans operate and should operate just because the ideas rely on what is true about us as living beings–evolution. And if you read this book, as you read through the pages, you will also realize how common sense and how straightforward some answers are when the explanations are based on our evolution and progress over time as opposed to other explanations maybe your society, family, religion, or culture offered you. Highly-recommended.
