First off, real confused. The book I read was about driving cars and spy stuff. It's possible that at some point it would be revealed that I'm an alien, as suggested here in the description, but before the ending I got it didn't seem to be an explicit part of the story. I feel like I made it pretty far in this one. But ultimately, some rally driver got killed and I pretty much sucked it up in the rally race. So no biggie as long as living with a death on your conscious isn't a big thing. I guess that's an adventure? You semi-caused a man's death, and you're not going to prison, but you DO have to live with the guilt. I'm not sure that was the intended adventure, though. The title was kind of ominous, sort of sounded like a driver's ed video where you see a man's femur on the road in a pool of blood. But really, I didn't think the adventure would be so much a long, lifetime grind of emotion as it would be a, I don't know, car race. Most interesting, in this volume the author felt the need to show you what was happening in a secret conference between the Bad Guys. So, in order to maintain that second-person fourth wall, the solution was: "What would you say if I told you that these people were planning your death?" a voice inside your head asks. "That's right, your death. Right here in this little out-of-the-way cafe, your fate is about to be decided. Come, let's listen in." At first you are jarred by this voice, its tone strange and yet familiar. Then you realize that it is your thought guide, and you give into it, allowing yourself to go along for the ride." [cut to inside of cafe] Oh, riiiiight. That's just my lil ol' thought guide. Nothing to get excited about. Just that thing that happens where I watch little movies in my head regarding people sitting in a cafe and plotting my death. Seems reasonable. People plot other peoples' deaths all the time, and we all know it. It's not like only a crazy person would think someting like that was happening. What really blows my mind is the pain taken here to maintain the perspective of the reader as being the same as that of the person in the book. YOU are, after all, choosing this adventure. Now, me personally, if I were choosing an adventure, a rally race might be fun, but if i had a secret Spirit Animal Brain or whatever the hell, I would think that I could find more useful and intriguing ways to spend my time than driving a car quickly. Hell, a daytime show with a 1-900 number would probably be better uses of my precious gifts.
