In 1980, Chicago based Dr Randolph and MsChrisl had a telephone conversation. He told her I could never regain my health living in our newly built dream house, which contained formaldehyde building materials and had been sprayed with pesticide. His book listed eleven nation-wide doctors practicing Clinical Ecology. Two of them were in Oregon. Memories of the emotions and bodily symptoms produced by sublingual provocation testing, particularly with salicylate, are more powerful than those of riding the building moving geological waves of Alaska's 1964 Good Friday earthquake. (See - Sharla Race) ** Review copied from KIRKUS REVIEW "A worthwhile introduction to clinical ecology and environmental disease--together, an area of growing interest in medicine that involves reactions to foods, synthetics, and pollutants. Randolph--one of the first to treat patients using these considerations--sets out three basic problems. First, allergy and addiction are very similar; and the foods people enjoy may be those they are both addicted and allergic to (eggs are frequent culprits). Second, some of us are more susceptible than others to common chemicals (cooking gas, substances used for food packaging). Third, some pollutants (e.g., industrial air pollutants) affect everyone. "The effects these environmental irritants can have are detailed here by case histories: instances of people suffering symptoms of psychoses, migraines, and arthritis from environmental pollutants are reasonably well-documented. Along with data on addictions to food, there is disturbing information on food processing, waxes, and hormones. These and other materials are being increasingly implicated in hyperactivity and autism in children; the latest evidence appears here. Randolph and Moss cite practical countermeasures, some available to the individual, some in the developing field of clinical ecology. "Where traditional medicine may recognize that people are chronically fatigued, but be unable to help (except pharmocologically), clinical ecology treats by isolating the environmental irritant and devising ways to avoid it. "Thought-provoking, reliable, up-to-the-minute."
