Like the book Commitment , Covey stresses the importance of making commitments and keeping all commitments. It's not personality that counts here, it is character, and this book is about building character. These few notes capture a few things from the book that I want to remember. Three temptations Most sins fall into three categories: to the body, Pride & vanity, and worldly aspirations. "In Ireland we observed the conversion process of hundreds of people, amid struggles, doubts, fears, escapes, and fights. Over and over again we came to the conclusion that an individual would know the truth to the degree he was true to the truth." (Page 55) "The unfulfilled person often prefers to sit back and watch others live. He spends endless hours in undiscriminating television viewing. .... Or he may resort to other compensating activities or escape mechanisms, such as alcohol, illicit sex, cheap movies and literature, ... When he is asleep, he is half awake, and when awake, he is half asleep. He is never fully involved with life. ... However, when alone, he is also bored. ... Familiarity with (rather than feeling toward) Church services provides him with relatively shallow satisfactions. ... Religious observances, for him, become a substitute for service rather than an inspiration to serve. ... This hypothetical example may or may not be extreme,..." (Page 76-77) "We often think that the family problem is one of time - that there are only so many hours in the day and so many important things to be done, and we simply don't have the time to do them all. We rationalize ... Though I acknowledge and sympathize with this reasoning, I do not believe that time is the main problem. I believe it is the excuse. I think the main problem is twofold: first, a lack of real commitment to the vision behind this emphasis on the family, and second, the lack of internal discipline to act accordingly. The Lord has told us that he will make our backs equal to their burdens. If we will obey true principles, take the time to prayerfully search the scriptures to maintain the larger eternal vision, and carefully plan and organize our days, and then work our plan, most of us will literal be amazed, even astounded, at what we will be able to do and accomplish. (See D&C 90:24.) (Page 206-207) "In a priesthood session, October 2, 1954, President McKay counseled: 'Say nothing that will hurt your wife, that will cause her tears even though she might cause you provocation. Realize that those children are your eternal possessions, treasures of eternity." (Page 211) "Husbands and wives must learn to talk through their differences and difficulties rather than either taking them out on each other or withdrawing into a silent sullen world of quiet anger and self-pity." (Page 212) "We can all become so busy following such hectic schedules, tyrannized by the telephone, meeting the small crises, that we may go for days without any deep meaningful communication with our husbands or wives. There is some communication all right, but it is often rather superficial and focused upon just the practical necessities of day-to-day life. Every person needs someone else to whom he can speak freely without fear of censor, embarrassment, or ridicule of any kind People need to feel understood, and that comes from being genuinely listened to. (Page 212) The time may come in some places when the gospel can only be safely taught in the home. (P 224-225) "I have found in my own family, for instance, that if I have a tendency to be more lenient, indulgent and permissive, and my wife, in order to compensate, leans over backwards in the other direction. The children sense this and sometimes try to test 'which way the wind blows' and then wrangle to get their own way." (Page 230-231) "Take installment financing, for example. This is a system of external discipline simply because people do not have sufficient internal discipline to save before they spend. (Page 233) "It also costs them in character growth. They are not learning thriftiness, frugality, and industry, careful budgeting and planning." (Page 234) "Multi- billion dollar industries have been built around people’s lack of internal discipline in the areas of exercise and dieting." (Page 234) "To summarize, if parents, leaders and teachers obey the laws of love, they encourage obedience to the laws of life. " (Page 246) His suggestions to missionaries also apply to all of us: (Page 306-308) - 80% of the success comes from 20% of the activities. "These five keys will take less than 20% of your time, but they will make all of your time effective." 1) Communicate 2) Plan Ahead 3) Simplify 4) Be Strong 5) Multiply yourself by using Members (This also applies to the rest of us in that efforts to make a group effective will yield greater results than working as an individual contributor.) Likewise, his advice to return missionaries (the penultimate chapter) is applicable to all of us. (p 319- 326) 1)The habit of daily, private, and sincere prayer from your heart. ...4. Learn to listen in your prayer... 6. Don't rush out of his presence when you conclude your prayer. 2) Study the scriptures every day. ... every morning and before retiring 3) Honor the Sabbath day as a day of worship and service. 4) Keep yourself morally clean in thought and action. 5) Magnify a Church calling and your priesthood. The last chapter was about spiritual aerobics. "Evidence shows that those who build up and regularly jog or swim or whatever will not only feel and look fitter but will also sleep better and can work longer and more efficiently than they otherwise would." (p 342) He also recommends spiritual aerobics for two reasons: "first, to gain perspective and second, to make some decisions in light of that perspective." The concluding paragraphs of the book: "As with physical exercise, those of us who say we haven't the time for "spiritual aerobics" are excuse making and will find ourselves, whenever the situation calls for strength beyond our reserve, incapacitated by self-doubt, envy, jealousy, pride, fear, anger, bad tempers, all indicating a lack of spiritual oxygen." "We must never become too busy sawing to take time to sharpen the saw." (last page) These few notes are not so much a review of the book, as a reminder, to me, of the things that I have learned from reading this book. After I have read a book, I need a refresher from time to time because I gradually forget. If I applied the good that I have learned, I would be awesome. Instead, I flounder around, and need reminded to get back on the path. Thus, the habits that Covey promotes in this and later books are habits that I want to develop in my own life.
