I had to do a double-take when I saw that Project Pope was published in 1981. Simak, though not technically part of Science Fiction's Golden Age, his stories tend to smack of that old sense of brass rocket nostalgia and futuristic optimism. Science Fiction by way of Prairie Home Companion. He was a throwback even in his own era. This makes Project Pope something of an interesting literary object if only because it is endearing and worth studying (if you're into this sort of thing) for looking at a writer who so adamantly stuck to his guns and wrote the story he wanted, even after the New Wave had sent ripples through the genre with cyberpunk in the on-deck circle (Neuromancer was only three years away). Simak at this stage of his career was fully a writer outside of his own time, his own world. Sadly, Project Pope does not serve as a bridge between the two eras but instead must have arrived stale with outdated portrayals of artificial intelligence and the emotionless logic of robots and a bewilderingly narrow scope for such a lofty topic. Ultimately, Simak did not have the horsepower necessary to make this story work. The novel lived and died by its robots, sadly some of the worst I think I've read. Never before has a science fiction setting used robots more prominently and then made them feel like stage actors in grey facepaint-- wholly and completely human, familiar in every way when robot pilgrims forming their own religion should feel some level of distinction. Their way of life does not feel fully considered, their futuristic Vatican nothing more than slabs of cardboard cutouts for the stage actors to speak awkward Simakian "aaaawwww shucks" dialogue that I typically find good wholesome fun but here was dull to the extreme. That so much of the (supposed) big ideas in this book hinge on how the robots interface with faith or reckon with the fact that they, like God, are created in the image of their creators (only they get to look their creators in the face) end up being obfuscated by deeply uninteresting aliens shoehorned in is bad enough, but Simak does shockingly little with his own premise even when he devotes the time to it. To write a novel about the collision between Faith, Logic, organized religion, and spirituality-- one would think you would need to cast a wide net. So much of these religious robots would seem to lend themselves to Eastern religions like Buddhism or Hinduism, but Simak does not go anywhere near this. It is an unimaginably narrow-minded story. The premise is built on robots trying to comb the galaxy for signs of heaven and prove god through robot practices is indicative of Arthur C. Clarke's famous short story The Nine Billion Names of God. The tension of being familiar with this story can't help but loom over the entirety of Project Pope. The entire book should have been about unpacking what it would look like and even mean to comb the heavens for empirical signs of, well, heaven. Instead, it devotes enormous space to nothing-characters and aliens that feel like they're from an entirely different book. This was late career Simak, a twilight of a career that is not generally well regarded. While this was a tantalizing potential bridge between the old and new, it is a sad attempt by a writer of the old guard to tackle new ideas, new problems, and ancient philosophies with rusted-out tools. A big disappointment.
