"The irony of man's condition is that the deepest need is to be free of the anxiety of death and annihilation; but it is life itself which awakens it, and so we must shrink from being fully alive." —Ernest Becker The sloppy latticework of gnarled tree branches anchors the foreground while Devlin and Geoffrey puff upon thick, stolen cigars, steathily removed from a father’s humidor, stashed in the closet of a house that was summarily purchased with blood, sweat and finely tuned 'n' directed tears. Their lanky fuzz-lined sillouettes bend and puff and laugh together within the sea of sundown hues that grant them visualization. Geoffrey digs deep into his tanned corduroy pockets and his left hand removes the distant, quiet clink of coins upon coins. A square-jawed, stiff-limbed snake of iron and steel flows by the two teenagers. The word ‘train’ materializes within the skulls of both boys as their sleeves and trousers are shaken to a fluttering life by its newfound wind. The pair reacts to the new calm by a continued puffing and swaggering, smirks etched step-by-step upon their faces. "Let's do some penny dreadfuls," Devlin exhales along with a stacco waft of floating burnt tobacco. Geoffrey nods affirmatively and re-digs into his corduroy for the fullest answer. He hands Devlin a metallic rustle of currency and steps over the first track in order to hover over the second. Geoffrey clinks his purchase down upon the iron and walks back towards Devlin doing the mirror-same. They lie in wait for the next bulldozing carrier. A great silence envelopes them as they inhale and exhale, stare and unstare at nothing, anything and everything. "Don't you ever worry about dying?" Devlin mews with unnerving sincerity. "Of course. But at this millisecond I’m pretty much ready to go." "Really?" "Really. I keep thinking about an old friend who—even when he was merely eight years old—once told me—and told me with great certitude and sincerity—that he wouldn't care at all if his father hurled him off a cliff. This was a week before he was going to visit the Grand Canyon on a family vacation." ". . ." "Death only really frightens me if I have the time to really, really think about it. When it's just an immediate thought, well, I usually just think about it as an either an inevitably or a blessing—which is sad, I know, but that's just how I feel most of the time. I mean, I don't want to die—I really, really don't—but more often than not, I just don't care enough either way. Darkness forever doesn't always seem like 'Darkness Forever.' Sometimes I stupidly think of it as a vacation—a vacation of blank peace—rather than the traditionally, plausibly understood, deep dark destination—the Big Sleep, the eternal dirt nap, etc—you know?" "Wow. Yeah, I know what you mean. But most the time it mostly scares the living shit out of me and seems like the worst thing in the whole wide world." "Well, it is! Of course! It's the worst! The worst reality there can every possibly be, I guess. But it's so inescapable that eventually I feel beaten into submission by the fact that it's so goddamn certain and ever-present." ". . ." Devlin passes a pint of bourbon towards his closest friend who accepts it with a smile, a limp grip and then a simultaneously pleased and pained grimace. "There's no real comfort to be found here, my friend. I’m sorry to say. I wish it was otherwise, but it just isn't. Sure, there's some distant "hope" to be found within the deep, deep, unanswerable mystery of it all, but all that's really real is this. This. Here. Right now. Us standing together, having a deep thought or two, sharing our thoughts—whatever those are, really—ya know?" "Yeah, I think so, too. It's just so damn depressing—no matter what, ya know? It's so fucking hard for me to think about it all with any real seriousness. Just imagining the death of my mother makes me feel like, like, like...like, I dunno, the whole world is coming to an end. It's just the most awful feeling ever." "Believe me, I know exactly what you mean. It's really the worst. If there's supposed to be a silver lining that's better than all the ol' cliché silver linings—which fail us left and right—well, I don’t know what that is. We—we human beings stuck in this predicament—we're simply forced to deal with it. It's horrific and unfair. Period. So let's just finish that bottle, smoke these cigars, and keep moving and talking and thinking until we can't." The train announces its arrival in the distance. Devlin's head hangs low. Geoffrey's eyes well with fluid and his gaze cranes upward to the murky, bloody cloudiness of the slit vein of the sky, booming its melancholy echo around the world exclusively to those who can perceive it. The distance collapses at a brisk pace. The distance disappears and a single penny is ground down into a new shape for an audience of two.
