Every human being should be required to read this book. I guarantee it will change forever the way you look at life. The memoir is a true account of Corrie Ten Boom's experiences in German-occupied Holland during WWII (and afterward in prisons and concentration camps). The most amazing thing to me is that she was not Jewish. She was a Dutch Christian who freely sacrificed her own life, and the lives of those she loved most, to fight against cruelty and hate. I read the book aloud to my husband, taking a break at some point in each chapter just because I couldn't read for the tears. I can understand overcoming amid tragedy, but thanking God for the fleas that are eating your flesh? Praying for the guard who beats you? Two questions kept going through my head in the journey with Corrie: "Are there really people in the world who are this GOOD?" and "Why am I such a selfish, ungrateful, spoiled brat?" I loved the paradox of a tragedy not told as tragedy. Unimaginably horrible things happen... and yet it's told as a wonderful story of forgiveness, faith, and gratitude for the constant miracles and mercies of God. Unbelievable. Probably my #1 recommendation for people who feel like they need an attitude adjustment - it certainly adjusted mine. Permanently. And please don't say, "ANOTHER Holocaust book?" I hate it when people say that. As far as I'm concerned, I'll be terrified the day we STOP writing them. FAVORITE QUOTES: "Corrie... do you know what hurts so very much? It's love. Love is the strongest force in the world, and when it is blocked that means pain. There are two things we can do when this happens. We can kill the love so that it stops hurting. But then of course part of us dies, too. Or, Corrie, we can ask God to open up another route for that love to travel. God loves Karel--even more than you do--and if you ask Him, He will give you His love for this man, a love nothing can prevent, nothing destroy. Whenever we cannot love in the old, human way, Corrie, God can give us the perfect way." "It is wrong to base faith upon wishes. There will be war. The Germans will attack and we will fall... Oh, my dears, I am sorry for all Dutchmen now who do not know the power of God. For we will be beaten. But He will not." "Father held the baby close, his white beard brushed its cheek, looking into the little face with eyes as blue and innocent as the baby's own. At last he looked up at the pastor. 'You say we could lose our lives for this child. I would consider that the greatest honor that could come to my family.'" "There are no 'ifs' in God's Kingdom. His timing is perfect. His will is our hiding place. Lord Jesus, keep me in Your will! Don't let me go mad by poking about outside it." MY FAVORITE STORY: "One dark morning when ice was forming a halo around each street lamp, a feeble-minded girl two rows ahead of us suddenly soiled herself. A guard rushed at her, swinging her thick leather crop while the girl shrieked in pain and terror. It was always more terrible when one of these innocent ones was beaten. Still [she] continued to whip her... I was grateful when the screaming girl at last lay still on the cinder street. "'Betsie,' I whispered when the guard was far enough away, 'what can we do for these people? Afterward I mean. Can't we make a home for them and care for them and love them?' "'Corrie, I pray every day that we will be allowed to do this! To show them that love is greater!' "And it wasn't until I was gathering twigs later in the morning that I realized that I had been thinking of the feeble-minded, and Betsie of their persecutors."
