This is a collection of twenty-six portraits of influential rock musicians. They are stories of happy extroverts who become sad introverts, geniuses who leave their mark on music but not on healthy family life, and also, a lot of drugs, alcohol, debts, and fighting. Such is the price to pay to create good music. My verdict on each section Sources and Acknowledgements: A very informative four pages on the history of each chapter, when/where it was first published, etc. Though it already makes a mistake because the cover says “Selected writings on rock music 1972-1993” and the most recent article on here (Serge Gainsbourg) was published in 2006… 🤨 Foreword by Iggy Pop (from 1993): Unnecessary. It’s barely a page long and doesn’t feel eccentric enough, which is what I would expect from Iggy Pop. I suspect he dictated it to someone (maybe Kent himself) who transcribed it for him. Brian Wilson: A touch too long, but an interesting and engaging portrait on the Beach Boys mastermind, especially his deteriorating mental state and how he survived it. Jerry Lee Lewis: Fun, narrates his rise, fall, and rise again without being verbose. Roky Erikson: I get that Kent’s attempt at interviewing him failed because Erikson was barely communicative, but could more have been fished out from this interview? Unless it was done on purpose to reflect the impossibility of interviewing him. Very inconclusive overall. Syd Barrett: One of my favourites on here, it's a great portrait of Barrett, the early Pink Floyd, Barrett’s exit (from the band and from reality) and his solo career. Brian Jones: Another one of my favourites. Jones is excellently described as a tortured man, and there is a lot of detail regarding his personal life. Rolling Stones: Jagger and Richards are portrayed like big twats here, destroyed by their addictions and their egos. New York Dolls: The band members are portrayed in a bit of a douchy way. Kent tries to redeem them without glorifying them. Lou Reed: Wonderful and poignant. Sid Vicious: Tragic and brutal. Elvis Costello: It's amazing how Costello collected a book with the names of all the people that made him angry and used them as inspiration for his songs as a way of revenge, and how he tells Kent he almost made it in one of his songs because Kent didn’t see him when he was an opening act to Dr Feelgood. Quite brilliant. Morrissey: I don't like him, but this was a decent and fairly concise insight. Shane McGowan: Another portrait of a madman. I enjoyed it. Guns and Roses: I'm not fond of them, but an interesting read. Happy Mondays & Stone Roses: I didn’t like this one (90% can be summarised as “Ecstasy’s f*cking class, mate”). Then again I’m not fond of Happy Mondays, though I do like some Stone Roses songs. Iggy Pop 1: Iggy Pop is undoubtedly an interesting person with plenty of amusing things to say, though this was mostly about drugs. Miles Davis: Brilliant, my favourite one in the whole book. Yes, Davis much like everyone else in this book was no saint, but he was a different musician, not just because he didn’t play rock, but because he was on a whole different level of musicianship and artistry. “His philosophy is shaped from one simple point of view: He is Miles Davis, and you’re not.” (p. 297). Roy Orbison: Another lovely piece rendered more poignant by the fact that he was interviewed shortly before his death. He comes across as a very wholesome person, making him stand out compared to other extreme lifestyles on here. Neil Young: Interesting read but very, very long. If you’re not a Neil Young fan you’ll have a hard time. For the most part, it’s just a long Wikipedia article about his discography. Kurt Cobain: A short obituary, focussed more on portraying Cobain as a tortured human soul rather than a rock deity. I particularly loved this quote: “How much of a tragedy is it really when someone who so ardently craves to embrace the void twenty-four hours a day finally gets his wish?” . Iggy Pop 2: Could have easily been edited into the first piece on Iggy Pop earlier on. Prince: An important document especially in light of his recent death. Johnny Cash: Very dark, yet a very insightful account on a talented yet troubled musician. Eminem: Immortalises the rise of Eminem well (1999-2000), though on the whole, it feels quite dated, especially taking into account Eminem’s current career. Sly Stone: It's sad how he went from genius to coke-addicted maniac. He's probably the only musician on here with no proper conclusion; no death, no sobriety, no self-acceptance, he remains a coke-addicted maniac right through the end. Is he still one now? Serge Gainsbourg: Very honest and personal, especially in how repelled he was by him, despite openly re-evaluating his career at the end. Also for once Kent doesn’t try to write a biography by him like the others, as he just sticks to when he met him in person. Phil Spector: A portrait of a madman, who perhaps became a madman because the press at the time inflated his ego - at least that’s Kent’s interpretation. “Self-Destruction in Rock and Elsewhere”: A short conclusion about self-destructive rock personalities and that self-destruction in rock is a necessary evil. Overall this was an enjoyable if inconsistent read. I didn’t love every single section. It’s worth mentioning how this is very much a document of a time when music journalism was still relevant: before Wikipedia, Pitchfork, Youtube album reviews, Mojo Top 10, etc. Kent is a good writer, but considering this is a reprint I feel more effort could have been done in editing some sections. Some parts could have been shorter, a few phrases on the artists/bands now could have been added (such as something about Prince’s death), but that is my opinion. Good to keep as a reference. Favourite sections: Syd Barrett, Brian Jones, Lou Reed, Elvis Costello, Shane McGowan, Miles Davis, Roy Orbison and Johnny Cash.
