"Destruction is like a snow-ball rolled down a Hill, for its Bulk encreases by its own swiftness and thus Disorder spreads." The novel’s main protagonist, Nick Dyer, ( partly based on the architect Nicholas Hawksmoor who worked alongside Sir Christopher Wren), is a follower of a Satanic cult who consecrates his churches with human sacrifices. Hawksmoor is a 1980's detective investigating a series of murders that mirror those committed in the name of Dyer’s art. This is my third novel by the author having previously read 'The Lambs of London' and 'The House of Doctor Dee' so in some respects I knew what to expect. The novel will be based on a real historical character but mixed with a modern fictional character, the real world colliding with a fictitious one. The setting for the novel will be London but it will be a far darker and gloomier London than what the tourist of today is going to see with its 18th century smells and noises. Ackroyd’s narrative will shift between the early 18th century and the 1980s, as does the idiom. In all these respects this book doesn't disappoint. I have been under-whelmed by the previous books by the author that I've read and this one is no different. I had higher hopes for this one as it promised to be a macabre (if fictional) tour of the history of Hawksmoor's churches featuring occultism, magic, sacrifice and horror. What's not to like? Nick Dyer, is an interesting character however, the policeman Hawksmoor simply isn't credible. The 1700s setting is very atmospheric although I found the 1980s version of London to be rather grey and bland. I also found the dialogue ever more artificial and un-natural as the book progressed. The plot rambles and nothing much happens for large chunks of it. Even the ending is inconclusive. By the time I'd reached the end of the book I wondered why I'd bothered. This is my least enjoyable of the three books by the author that I've read but on the plus side it did make me go and read more background about Nick Dyer and his churches.
