Alexander being my favorite historical personality, I've read much on him. I highly recommend this book as maybe the best modern biography of the Great one. Alexander was a complex man who realized Greek dreams by conquering the Persian Empire. He never lost a battle and at the time of his untimely death ruled more land than anyone ever had previously, or would again until Genghis Khan if I'm not mistaken. He was intelligent, a great general and soldier, and above all: lucky. Favor of the gods I suppose they would have called it back in the day. Alexander's biggest stroke of luck was that his father Philip was killed after he had set everything up so well. Of course maybe it wasn't luck...but I digress. It was Philip who made the Macedonian army a force to be reckoned with. It was Philip who trained the generals who fought for his son in Asia. It was Philip who conquered Greece, weakening it so that all Alexander had to do before he left forever was to raze one city to the ground (Thebes) to cow the entire populace. It was Philip who taught Alexander how to be a soldier and general and king. It was Philip who brought Aristotle of all people to be his son's tutor. (This is like Obama paying Stephen Hawking to tutor Sasha and Malia, LOL.) Poor Philip. He gets little love from historians, and he received none from Alexander, who insisted he was the son of Zeus himself. Thankfully there is nice coverage by Green of the rise of Macedon under Philip! Alexander's one failure was intrinsic to his personality. It could be no other way I suppose. Alexander won his battles partly due to his physical presence on the field of battle, and was wounded many times. Since he always won, he always had cause to celebrate, and celebrate he did with much alcohol flowing. Wounds and alcoholism coupled with the multitudinous diseases of Asia at the time meant that he would almost necessarily have a short life. Add to the mix that you're quite the assassination target when you basically rule the world, and you have a recipe for disaster. At his death his empire crumbled, and the Successors and their successors fought each other for centuries, those using Rome winning until finally Rome started doing the using and took over everything.
