“That reminder brought me straight to her. She was as open and trusting with me as ever, but her expression was very sad, and as she sat in her poor house, gazing out over the dewy garden and crying in concert with the crickets’ lament, I felt as though I must be living in some old tale.” An Imperial Celebration of Autumn Foliage , by Tosa Mitsuyoshi (17th century). The young man has never been here before. He notices a dim light and hears the subdued hum of whispered conversation. (What could it be about?) He makes his way softly to a crack he finds in the lattice shutters. A blind rattles. He stops for a moment, heart pounding. But no one seems to have noticed. He peers through the crack and sees three women sewing in the circle of the lamp’s brightest light. Then he sees her , the girl he had seen that night, also by lamplight—it has to be! She lies with her head pillowed on her arm, gazing into the lamp, her hair spilling over her forehead. Her whole figure stirs troubled yearnings in him. We may condemn the young man for his voyeurism, but we’re twice as guilty, peering through another crack into this distant world. And like him, we fall hopelessly in love. * * * Around this time last year, when the plague struck and the world seemed to be coming to an end, I was looking for a new book to read. I’m not even sure what made me settle on this thousand-year-old Japanese novel, but with all the time I’d be spending at home, I figured I could knock it out in a month or two. Ha! I couldn’t have been more wrong. For a long time, there was no greater comfort than lying propped against my pillow, reading this book by lamplight. But as often happens with very long books, I began to grow restless. The book has hundreds of characters (most of whom are never named, and referred to only by their titles, which change over the course of the story—if you’ve ever complained about Russian patronymics, just wait till you read this!), and it has nothing resembling a plot. The “action” unfolds at the breakneck pace of a Heian-period ox-drawn carriage (about two miles an hour). I was sure I’d made a mistake. But it was too late. I was already melting under the caresses of Stockholm syndrome. I just had to finish this. A year later and I finally have. I’ve been waiting for this moment for so long, but now I’m sad. The characters I’ve come to know over a year are gone. “He felt her there beside him, just as she had always been on evenings like this when he had called for music, and when her touch on her instrument, or her least word to him, had been so much her own; except that he would have preferred even to this vivid dream her simple reality in the dark.” The Tale of Genji was written in the eleventh century by Murasaki Shikibu, a lady of the Heian court of Japan. It’s sometimes said to be the world’s first novel, which isn’t exactly true, though I don’t think it matters. It’s a strange, almost a haunted book, with a beauty that seems not of this world. Its hero, Genji, “The Shining Prince,” isn’t a fighter (as you might have expected—the Samurai warrior ideal enters Japanese literature a few hundred years later), but a poet, a calligrapher, a musician, a dancer, and, above all, a lover. Casanova’s exploits seem to pale in comparison. Murasaki tells of his adventures and many, many loves. “The sight of her lying there, so beautiful yet so thin and weak that she hardly seemed among the living, aroused his love and his keenest sympathy. The hair streaming across her pillow, not a strand out of place, struck him as a wonder, and as he gazed at her, he found himself unable to understand how for all these years he could have seen any flaw in her.” Murasaki Shikibu Gazing at the Moon , by Tosa Mitsuoki (17th century). Murasaki’s themes are the eternals: love, lust, and loss—but mainly love. Heian-period gentlemen were almost never able to see the ladies they pursued. Strict court protocol kept women hidden behind curtains and blinds. All it took was the sight of a woman’s sleeve spilling out from underneath them, or the sound of rustling silk, to make a man burn for her. There’s a lot to enjoy here, but there are sections that make for, uh, uncomfortable reading. Men in the book sometimes force themselves on women. Sometimes this is portrayed as romantic. At other times, it’s frightening. Murasaki’s tale is less about her hero than the women he’s involved with—“their feelings, their experiences, their fates,” as Royall Tyler writes in the introduction. In fact, one of the most fascinating things about the book is the way Murasaki acknowledges and critiques the patriarchal society that confines her and other women. “Ah, she reflected, there is nothing so pitifully confined and constricted as a woman. What will reward her passage through the world if she remains sunk in herself, blind to life’s joys and sorrows and to every delight? What will brighten the monotony of her fleeting days? … What a waste for her to shut herself up in her thoughts…” This book is sometimes compared to Proust’s In Search of Lost Time, a comparison that at first hardly seems worth taking seriously. But the similarities really are striking. Both Murasaki and Proust always have their eye on the future: even the most seemingly insignificant details, however casually mentioned, are picked up again, like motifs in a musical piece, often two or three hundred pages later. Both authors tell of their aristocratic milieu’s splendor and decline. And both are obsessed with time and its passing. This book’s dominating feeling is that of mono no aware , the pathos of things, the sadness of their transience, exemplified by the spring mist rising from a lake, by the light of fireflies, by the parting of lovers, by, of course, the blooming and scattering of the cherry blossoms. Our lifetimes are like a dream—time passes quickly. Our dew-like lives will vanish before dawn. We should cherish every moment we have. “The place was a little way into the mountains. the blossoms in the City were gone now, since it was late in the third month, but in the mountains the cherry trees were in full bloom, and the farther he went, the lovelier the veils of mist became, until for him, whose rank so restricted travel that all this was new, the landscape became a source of wonder.” The characters in this book are always yearning for the irrecoverable. The scent of orange blossoms always drifts in to bring back the past unbearably to them. I’m still trying to understand why I love books, and films, and music, about memory so much. Maybe it’s because reading a book, especially one as all-embracing as this one, is the closest we can ever get to living another person’s life. Their memories become ours as well, and their sorrow, our sorrow. But I guess every book, every work of art, is an artifact of memory, someone’s memory, even from the instant the pen, or rather the brush, touches the blank page. It’s impossible to say where the present ends and where memory begins. What was once “contemporary,” with the flight of time, becomes a quiet rustle on the wind, a song, so subtle that you just might miss it, of the way things were and will never be again. “Not that tales accurately describe any particular person, rather, the telling begins when all those things the teller longs to have pass on to future generations—whatever there is about the way people live their lives, for better or worse, that is a sight to see or a wonder to hear—overflow the teller’s heart. … To put it nicely, there is nothing that does not have its own value.” A Boat Cast Adrift , by Sata Yoshirō (1966). This book has taken its place among the actual experiences of my life. It reaches to us through time. How strange it all feels, yet how familiar, how distant, yet how close! In a sense, it’s a lovely testament to the constancy of the human heart in this ever-changing world.
