Rating: 3.4 / 5 Good as Ms. Bittner's writing is, it occurs to me that she enjoys toying with her characters a bit too much for my taste. I mean, forgive me for being sensitive, but when I read a romance novel, I don't like to have to go through continuous rape , a so-and-so's dead, but not actually scenario, and a whole lot of talk about running away together but then not actually doing anything just because . Romance writer or not, I'm convinced that Ms. Bittner has a sadistic streak in her, because no way could anything short of that explain why she toys so much with her characters and her readings in dragging on this romance. For the record, yes , there is technically a happy ending , but it takes us a long time to get there. The story centers around Katie Russell, a woman married to the abusive Ezra Russell against her will. Ezra decides that the pioneering life is for him, so he drags Katie along to west Nebraska to get settled down--in a mud hut home. O-kay. Anyway, on their way they meet Tohave, mega-hot Native American man, and his gang, who joke around with them but, racist times being what they are, Ezra tells them to f-off. But Tohave and Katie have already locked eyes and hearts with one another, so good luck keeping them apart! The entire novel as a whole was extremely repetitive, especially with it got to Katie's inner monologues about how she's feeling. Now, usually I really hate things like that, and it's an instant turn-off for me if I feel like I'm reading the same thing over and over again with no real plot progression. Unfortunately, Native American romances are my Achilles heel as far as judgement goes, so I can put up with almost anything as long as the romance is satisfying. And although I liked both Katie and Tohave as characters, I have to say that their romance was not the best. I mean, it's a convincing romance in that they love and are compassionate towards one another, but what doesn't make sense is that they don't do anything about it. The facts are that Katie and Tohave love each other, Katie is unfortunately married to Ezra, and Ezra's an asshole that I was willing to personally shoot. Ergo, why not get to the scalping or something? Seriously, I was ready to join in, he was just a terrible character! But, NOPE. Bittner would rather have them spend 400+ pages either pining after each other, talking about love but not actually making any move to do anything about it like get Katie away from Ezra, having misunderstandings about the other, and ultimately going through a lot of difficulty before they actually get together for a permanent solution. Not my favourite Native American romance by a long shot, but it was more bearable for me than I thought it'd be, considering all of the above things I've mentioned. A very respectable 3 stars for this one. Show more
