I give this a 4 star rating There will be Spoilers Below! The Writing I have finally finished reading the Wicca/Sweep series, as I've recently tracked down the last four books, though I still need to find Book 8, feels pretty awesome to re-read this series that I thoroughly enjoyed in my youth. I thought that this book was an unnecessary addition, as I thought the previous book tied all the loose ends nicely and leave it for the audience to decide what Morgan's and Hunter's fates would be. Instead, the author decided to switch between the perspectives of Morgan and her daughter Moira, which I found myself more invested in Morgan's side compared to Moira's where the story takes place 20+ years later as fates aren't finished with messing with Morgan's life and those around her, but their journeys through their perspectives eventually overlap as events unfold. This story I found very fast-paced and a tad longer than previous books, even though the culprit responsible was predictable, with Morgan's half-sister Iona plotting for more power and to take out Belwicket and extension Morgan and Moira. There were parallels to previous foes i.e. Selene Belltower, Cal Blaire, and Ciaran McEwan in regards to Lillian and Iona, with them possessing similar goals to gain power but yet Iona had different motives of revenge and jealously regarding Morgan and her relation to their father Ciaran and Morgan's unparalleled powers that Iona coveted. Cate Tiernan's got a way with words when describing magick in this series and I've always enjoyed them, it definitely feels like she has done her research concerning some of the basics of Wicca and has spun her own creative spin that suits her storytelling. Morgan and Moira The parallels between mother and daughter were evident throughout, especially through Selene/Cal and Lillian/Ian, ironically both Morgan and Moira recognized this and it was nice for Ian to be the complete opposite of Cal. Once long-buried secrets had been revealed to Moira of her mother's past, once the pieces were put together by Morgan, Moira, and Sky of what was happening around them. There are some differences between the two: Moira had more education and training compared to her mother as she had grown up with Wicca and been surrounded by her coven Belwicket, unlike Morgan who was raised as a Catholic by her adoptive family, and in this book, Moira is preparing for her initiation and she has inherited her mother's innate powers. At the start, Morgan's magick had always been more instinctual until Morgan gained better knowledge through sharing knowledge with more experienced blood witches, and by the end of the series, Morgan became initiated, and by the time Morgan faces Lillian and Iona, she's much more experienced and battle-hardened and Moira is able to hold her own too, despite being uninitiated. I thought Moira handled the revelations a lot better than Morgan and Alisa did when they were the same age, even though she was understandably upset, betrayed, and hurt. I felt like Moira was more levelheaded, perhaps a tad naive due to her age but she had optimism and shrewdness when she has visions and through conversations with others is able to objectively put the clues together. In the end, Moira was proven right when it came to Ian, she continually gave him the benefit of the doubt, innocent until proven guilty, when it was revealed that Ian was innocent. Other Characters Killian - I always thought Killian was seriously underused as a character and even though he has always used a plot device to reveal information or set things in motion, that remains in this book. I always liked Killian's personality, irresponsible, and fun, down to earth and here I liked the subtle growth in his character, still laidback and carefree, yet he came across as more mature compared to his other appearances, as it's revealed that Killian has settled down with a family of his own. I've always enjoyed his sibling relationship and bond with Morgan and despite his past impulsiveness and his habit of finding trouble, that sibling bond and connection with Morgan is still strong in Night's Child as he's the only half-sibling who has pursued a relationship with Morgan and the only one NOT to hold any ill will towards her connection to Ciaran's infidelity with Morgan's mother Maeve Riordan. Ian Delany Also, Cate Tiernan has a habit of pairing her main female lead with an older teenager whose more magickally educated and experienced (Ian/Cal and even Ian/Hunter) though, Ian wasn't complicit and was innocent and unfortunately was just caught in the middle of his mother's plans and ended up siding with Belwicket in stopping the dark wave. I would've liked to see more of his personality stand out a little bit more. Morgan's adoptive family, Bree, Robbie, Raven, Alisa .... there are mentions of them throughout, though they pretty much disappear in this installment. Unfortunately, Morgan's parents and Mary K are still singing the same tune, strict Catholics, and still haven't accepted Morgan's life choices to pursue her calling and that includes Wicca and by extension, their familial relationship has become strained and it doesn't sound like that they are close as they once were, which was a shame. Katrina I find it very hard to believe how easy Morgan forgave her mother-in-law who had lied to her and Moira for 16 years about the paternity of Morgan's child, allowing her to believe it to be Colm's child even though Katrina had saved Morgan's life when she lost Hunter. The Dark Wave I find it extremely unbelievable and more of a plot hole that nobody, including Daniel Niall, hadn't written down instructions on how to combat the dark wave successfully and that this knowledge isn't public knowledge by now. Despite the disintegration of the International Council of Witches and the creation of the New Charter that focuses on the rehabilitation of corrupt blood witches through education and therapy isn't the final act of stripping those of their magick. I would've liked to see this elaborated further on the damages that the council inflicted on the witch community and the ruthless attitude in stripping magick of those who abused their powers and how their methods affected those who lost their magick. We saw that through Ciaran's appearance in this book, after being stripped of his magick and despite the atrocities, he inflicted on others, the act of stripping a blood witch of their abilities reminded me of a Dementor's Kiss, they become echoes of their former selves and yet even though he couldn't practice magick anymore his knowledge was unparalleled and abused by his own daughter Iona for her own personal gain.
