I wish I'd read the book, before watching the movies. About half-way through the novel, my copy of Manhunter came crashing through the letterbox. The dvd incorporated a 54-page booklet: Michael Mann's HeadGames by Steven Paul Davies. Contents: Introduction. The Making of the Film. An Interview with Brian Cox. The Thomas Harris Sequels. Michael Mann - Cult Hero. Michael Mann Filmography. Manhunter Credits. Ex-FBI Profiler, Will Graham, is dragged out of early retirement, when a second family is slain by a serial killer, who has a penchant for doing his work, during the lunar cycle: when it's a full moon. Still recovering from physical and emotional scars, he received years earlier, courtesy of Hannibal Lecter; he's reluctant to work on the case. But FBI-head, Jack Crawford, persuades him. Or maybe, it's the photos of the killers, handiwork, that makes him want to help. Graham has the unique ability, to see what others' miss. Is able to think like the killers, he's pursuing. He spends time at one of the crime scenes, at the Charle's Leeds home, in Atlanta: working in minute detail, which was extremely, creepy, as he moves from room to room, trying to ascertain, how the crime played out. How did the perp enter the property? Who was the first to be killed? Why were the bodies, rearranged? How long after the murders, did the killer stay in the property? - and what was he doing? Why are there broken pieces of mirror? How does he choose his victims - and how does the killer know so much about them? What about the blood patterns, trajectory, etc? Being inside Will's head, seeing what he's seeing, was unequivocally, disturbing. And where's Jack: the Leeds dog? What do the two families, have in common? - the list goes on. By working the scene, he learns a lot about the Leeds' family. The first family, to be slaughtered, the Jacobis - a month earlier, is a different matter. There isn't much left of that crime scene, after it was cleaned up. He needs to know them, as well. We also get the killers' POV, as well as flashbacks to when he was younger, which was strangely, amusing. Especially, when he gets a visitor, and he's able to tell that person his name - and that's only because the other children at the orphanage, kept calling him it. And it's got no ('s) in it. I was a little disappointed that there was little time spent with Lecter. We don't get to see his inner thoughts. Well, that's probably for the best. I think. So, this is the novel that spawned the movie, Manhunter (1986), starring William Peterson (Will Graham), Brian Cox (Hannibal Lecter), Tom Noonam (Francis Dolarhyde) Joan Allen (Reba McClane. She spent time at the New York Institute For The Blind - in preparation for her role, walking around blindfolded), Stephen Lang (Freddy Lounds), Dennis Farina (Jack Crawford) and Kim Greist (Molly Graham). It's impressive, how close the movie is to the source material; including some of the dialogue. The ending was notably, different. Obviously, they couldn't squeeze everything into the film. Manhunter was going to be called Red. Not sure how close the Red Dragon movie, resembles the book, as I can't remember squat about it, for some reason. I'll probably watch it again, someday. Red Dragon (2002), starred Edward Norton (Will Graham), Anthony Hopkins (Hannibal Lecter), Ralph Fiennes (Francis Dolarhyde), Philip Seymour Hoffman (Freddy Lounds), Harvey Keitel (Jack Crawford) and Mary-Louise Parker as Molly Graham. Personally, I preferred Michael Mann's 1986 movie adaption (I'll never forget the wheelchair scene.), which had a budget of $15 million and took $8.6 million at the box office. In contrast, Brett Ratner's Red Dragon (which is basically a remake), had a budget of $78 million and took $209.1 million at the box office. The chronological order of the movies is: Manhunter (1986), or Red Dragon (2002), The Silence of the Lambs (1991), Hannibal (2001) and Hannibal Rising (2007). I still need to watch that one. Jody Foster didn't reprise her role as Clarice Starling in Hannibal, as she didn't believe, she would have much of a part - wasn't worth her participation - and she wanted to direct the movie (amongst other things), so Julianne Moore, took over. The inspiration for Hannibal Lecter, is based on a real-life person (who wasn't a serial killer), Alfredo Balli Treviñi, who was a Mexican doctor. The authors' foreword, provides more insight - Foreword to a Fatal Interview. I guess I'll have to read these in chronological order. I loved The Silence of the Lambs film - watched it a multitude of times - and Anthony Hopkins was quintessentially cast as psychiatrist/serial killer, Hannibal Lecter. Brian Cox's role as Lecter was very good, as well.
