I wish I could pinpoint what about Morris West’s writing draws me in as far as it does. I can see what I consider flaws in his writing, the flatness of his characters, for example, his lecturing mode, and how he represents his female characters – not with disrespect exactly, more like they are children that have surprised him with their talents (granted, some of this is due to the time in which he wrote, in some ways he could even be considered enlightened). It drives me crazy, annoys the hell out of me, and yet the days I can read from a book of his I count myself lucky. I have studied religion, although only certain elements of certain ones much more than others, and yet I am closer to atheist than agnostic. I enjoy learning more about what others hold dear even as it doesn’t move me. He has put much of that here, and once again I have learned a lot. Sadly the last five pages (discounting the epilog) were terribly disappointing, though I suppose with West’s background it couldn’t have ended any other way. Oh well, I liked the other 420 pages. Quotes that caught my eye A panic of devotees was the last thing we needed. (23) The prophet was another kind of creature altogether. He claimed a direct communication with the Almighty. Therefore, his commission could not be withdrawn by any human agent. He could challenge the most scared past with the classic phrase, used by Jesus himself: ’It is written thus … but I tell thus and thus.’ So the prophet was always the alien, the herald of change, the challenger of existing order. (28) God draws; but he draws the willing ones. (43) I have worked as a missionary in Muslim countries and I have learned to say ‘Inshallah’. What4ever is the will of the Lord will be done, however we humans read his intentions. (82) Because violence can only flourish when men are afraid to speak and act against it. (89) “This used to be a nice quiet town; but if you could see some of the stuff that crosses my desk, it would make you hair stand up.” “What’s the answer?” “Christ knows! Maybe we need a good war to kill off some of the bastards and let us start clean again!” (185) “We are threatened with war. How do we protect our possessions?” “So far as commercial paper is concerned, …we all have the most modern storage and retrieval systems, triplicated and sometimes quadruplicated in strategically protected areas. We’ve hammered out a common code of inter-bank practice that enables us to protect our clients against document loss. Gold, of course, is a strongroom operation. Rural land is perennial. Urban developments will be reduced to rubble, but, again, war-risk insurance favours the big operators. Art-works and antiques, like gold, are a storage job. It might interest you to know that for years now we’ve been buying up disused mine-workings and converting them for safe deposits.” “I am comforted…. I wonder why it has not been possible to invest similar money and similar ingenuity for the protection of citizens against fallout and poison gas. I wonder why we are so much concerned with the retrieval of commercial paper and so little with the proposed mass murder of the infirm and the incompetent.” (281) …he was reminded of the words which the twenty-five-year-old Catherine had written to Gregory XI at Avignon: ‘It is no longer time to sleep, because Time never sleeps, but passes like the wind… In order to reconstruct the whole, it is necessary to destroy the old, right down to the foundations…’ (298) The only way to stave off disorder at home is to march against the enemy abroad. (306) He had always admired the British, though he had never wholly understood them. The subtleties of their humour often escaped him. Their snobberies always irritated him. Their dilatory habits in commerce never failed to amaze him. Yet they were tenacious of friendships and fealties. They had a sense of history and a tolerant eye for fools and eccentrics. They could be land-greedy and money-mean and capable of extraordinary social cruelties; yet they supported great charities; they were humane to fugitives; and they counted privacy a right and not a privilege. Give them a cause3 they understood, put liberties they valued at risk, and they would take to the streets by thousands or walk in solitary dignity to the headman’s block. (333) I am truly happy when anyone is granted the kind of insight that gives new meaning to his profession of faith. I was simply warning you, out of my own experience, that the comfort you now feel may not last. Faith is not a matter of logic; and the moment of intuition does not always repeat itself. One has to expect long periods of darkness and, often, a destructive confusion! (339) I set out to make myself a thinking reed, pliant to the wind of the Spirit; but a reed is also a hollow tube through which other men may pipe a music alien to me. (342) What we have is not power but authority – which is a horse of a different colour. Power implies that we can accomplish what we plan. Authority signifies only that we may order it to be accomplished. (366) It was the longest speech Jean Marie had ever heard her make, and the finest affirmation of all she had learned as a woman. “Bravo, Lotte! You should be proud of this girl, Carl!” (415-16) [Argh!!!] Things I couldn’t find The word ’hinge-men’ comes of a few times. Is it the same as ‘henchmen’?
