‘I am a Cat’ is a little sad and a bit farcical at the same time, kind of like an American television family sitcom if the show was written by doctorate candidates of philosophy, the arts and literature. Written by Japanese author Soseki Narsume in 1904, it is a wordy intellectual essay about family, society, and ideas clothed over by a story of what a nameless cat observes. The neglected kitty, who narrates the story, is never given a name, but he has a bird’s eye view, so to speak, of his Japanese 'master', Sneaze, and his master's wife and children, Tonko, Sunko, and a baby (the oldest is six), his neighbors and university friends. The novel is not about the cat, but instead about the scholastic ideas of school teacher Sneaze, and his old university friends who visit and discuss academically the neighbors, each other and society. A few mild absurd domestic incidents and squabbles occur, and the friends discuss these ordinary mundane affairs with humor and intellectually facile joking or insight. Eventually, their discussions wander into more bookish and philosophical aspects of the intellect (Japanese and British), some of which are vaguely related to their original conversation subjects. Avalon Coldmoon and Waverhouse (my favorite human character) most often visit Sneaze, but drop-ins include Beauchamp, Madame Goldfield (a neighbor businessman's wife who hates Sneaze), Suzuki Tōjūrō (Mr. Goldfield's right-hand man but still a friend, having gone to university with Sneaze), and Tatara Sampei, mining company lawyer, who asks if he can cook and eat the cat after a burglary (the cat failed to stop a burglar). The cat has a few adventures in his backyard and in the yards of his neighbors, overhearing sometimes human conversations of servants and neighbors as well as those of his master's. This sometimes leads to his own opinionated and educated discourses on what he has heard for the edification of us readers on the cat viewpoint - never very far from the human viewpoint, actually. Clearly this novel will not be to the taste of many readers, even those who enjoy literary reads. There is not much action, and almost every scene is involving pages of intellectual conversation inside the Sneazes' Tokyo home. If one enjoys reading The Atlantic Magazine, or books of essays, this is a good read. If you love your kitty dearly, this book will definitely not satisfy you. The cat is a literary paw for the author, and regretfully, does not matter to anyone much especially in the end. Despite the cat's erudition, it is all for nought. Just for fun: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meiji...
