Windows on the World is a great book for those just beginning their interest in wine. It includes a lot of great, succinct information on the subject of wine, winemaking, wine regions, and wine profiles. It’s very accessible and the quizzes at the back of the book (to be taken upon finishing each chapter) are great tools for retaining important information. The lists for other wine publications, auctions, events, suppliers of refrigeration and equipment, value wines from around the world, etc. were a fantastic and generous addition. However, I have to say that I was more than disappointed in the sheer quantity of errors that littered this volume, both at the hands of the author and the editor. Many of these errors are minor (spelling and punctuation misprints here and there), but others can lead to confusion if not viewed with a critical eye. For instance, sloppy copy/paste jobs indicate the incorrect locations for certain wines/wineries (e.g. on page 286 the phrase “My favorite Cremant d’Alsace” is pasted from the previous page as the header for 2 regions in France other than Alsace). The biggest issue I had was the discrepancy between Zraly’s written description of locations and their locations on accompanying maps. A few examples: (1) pgs. 197 & 204: a map shows Priorat lies due west of Penedès, but the text claims it’s to the south. (2) pgs. 254-255: Argentinian wine subregions are listed from “north to south” with San Juan listed 5th when it’s 3rd sequentially on the map. The text shows that there are 3 larger regions (which may explain the disorder), but they aren’t visibly shown. (3) pgs. 278-279: the map shows Champagne being due east of Paris, but Zraly describes it as northeast. (4) pgs. 197 & 278: there are 2 maps of Spain roughly 80 pages apart that show the Penedès wine region being in 2 different locations. I may seem “nitpicky,” but as geography plays such a large role in the wine world I feel that the information being relayed should be accurate. We Americans traditionally aren’t great at geography to begin with; please don’t make it worse! :) That being said, I did enjoy the book and found it useful. More encyclopedic books like The Wine Bible are more my style, but I recognize that there needs to be a range in the amount of information presented!
