It started out a little confusing, saying that Mr. Ratburn gave the class a surprise spelling test, then saying all the other classes had parties, and then it shows Mr. Ratburn saying “the moment you’ve all been waiting for. report cards and…” and then says “school’s out!” I thought he was giving them the spelling test then, but apparently that happened before. Buster is going to camp, and Arthur is going on a family vacation, which he’s dreading, because he wants to be with Buster at camp. I didn't remember there being another sibling in the mix so I was surprised to see the baby in here. I love the humor of the dad asking DW to use the bathroom, and she said “don’t look at me” as if she wouldn’t need to go, and then on the way to the beach she announces she has to use the bathroom. That’s very typical for a kid on a trip. Arthur continues thinking about Buster, calling him before they leave and when they go out to eat lobster, he says Buster loves lobster. He wakes up and says he had a dream about Buster. It’s raining at the hotel so they can’t go to the beach. They send postcards while they wait. D.W. writes to their grandma, saying ‘You were smart to stay home!’ which was funny. I thought the change from having no fun to Arthur suddenly planning a field trip was a little sudden. I found the activities to be random, like the cow festival, where they’re pictured sitting on a cow in the rain--which wouldn’t be fun. Then they go to Gatorville, also in the rain. A fudge factory, which you can do in the rain. And then a jungle cruise, which I don’t think you’d wanna do in the rain. It always annoys me when it rains on vacation, so I wouldn't be enjoying myself anywhere in the rain. They also see a scary movie, Jaws of the Deep. On their last day there, the sun comes out, which sounds like one of my vacations. So they’re able to have a fun day at the beach. It ends with them on the way home, D.W. saying she had to use the bathroom again. Buster shows up as soon as they get home, and says he missed Arthur. He asks after their trip and if him and D.W. got along. Arthur shows him a picture of him burying D.W. in the sand, and she has a scared expression on her face. I thought it was a funny way to end the book off. The humor kept going throughout, which I appreciated. It made it more enjoyable to read. It even ended on a humorous note, with the picture of Arthur burying DW in the sand. The shark float was familiar; I wondered if it was an episode on TV that I must have seen as a kid. The float was always just sitting around. It seemed like it should have been a focal point, to have a scene with Arthur using it in the ocean or something, if you're going to have it in the book. I was surprised that each time you flipped the pages it picked up with a new scene, instead of carrying on in chronological order, like most picture books do. 2.5 This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
