This is a simplified version of the Bhagavad Gita (Sanskrit: भगवद्गीता) or “Song of the Lord” . The work is often referred to simply as the “Gita” . Prashant Gupta begins, “Here is the “Song Divine” or “Bhagwad Gita” for our young readers who resemble Arjuna in so many respects. It will serve them as a permanent and trustworthy companion in performing their various vocations and duties in life. It will lift them up in moments of depression.” The Bhagavad Gita is a commentary on the “Upanishads” . There are about 108 of these Upanishads altogether: chapters which deal with the ultimate reality of life and death. The Gita has been described as the “milk of the Upanishads” , where the “Upanishads” are the “cows” . First Prashant Gupta explains the concept of “Gita” as the Divine Mother, who looks after the welfare and uplifting of all humanity: “Lord Krishna has milked these treasure houses of supreme wisdom [the “Vedas”] for the benefit of mankind. The Gita is the nectar, like milk, which can be consumed easily by one and all ... perfect and balanced food ... easily digestible ... if it remains undigested it becomes poison ... when the body becomes a victim of disease, the mind too loses its capacity to think clearly ... the intellect gets clouded as did happen with Prince Arjuna on the battle field of Kurukushetra.” Thus we start with a metaphor, and learn that the entire work is presented in metaphor. Prashant Gupta rejects the idea that the Bhagavad Gita speaks only to those of the Hindu faith: “The Gita does not belong to any particular religion ... [It] is the Bible of mankind. Nowhere does the word ‘Hindu’ occur in it. It talks to man as such. He who reads it is uplifted to a higher realm of happiness ... The Gita does not differentiate between and man and man on the basis of caste, colour, creed, religion or sex. So the Christians, the Muslims, the Buddhists, the Zoroastrians and the Hindus can derive eternal and everlasting happiness and bliss by pondering over the verses of the Gita.” The Universal Self seated in the heart of all beings There are 18 “Upanishads” (chapters) comprising 700 “slokas” (verses) in the Bhagavad Gita : a scripture or Bible which is part of the Hindu epic the “Mahabharata” . The “Mahabharata” is an ancient text predating the Christian era, thought to be written by the Sage Vyasa Veda, somewhere between the fifth century and the second century BCE. Prashant Gupta tells us that the Bhagavad Gita is: “the essence of the four Vedas and the sweet kernel of the “Mahabharata” which is known as the Fifth Veda” . It occurs in the middle of the “Mahabharata” epic. Furthermore, he says, it tells us how to live upon this Earth: how to behave and act with others, and how to perform our duties as human beings in different walks of life: “Do you know the literal meaning of the word ‘Krishna’? It means that which is lying dormant or hidden in the innermost dark recesses of your heart. Krishna means black and dark. The Krishan consciousness is lying dormant within us ... it is none but Lord Krishna who pervades every atom of the Universe. He is there in the wind, in the oceans, on the earth, in the sky and in the sun. The neutrons and the protons are actually activated by the magic of His presence. He is the Presiding Deity of the Whole Universe ... He alone is Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent.” “The Gita is there to move us from darkness to light; from falsehood to truth, and from death to Immortality!” Prashant Gupta explains the “Mahamantra” - “TAT-TWAM-ASI” or “That Thou Art” . “Twam” : the soul “Tat” : God. “You are that - God and nothing else” . There are three steps: 1. “I am His” 2. “He is Mine” 3. “He and I are One” Prashant Gupta briefly tells the background story of the characters who will appear in the Bhagavad Gita . King Yudhishthir, the Dharamraja, ruled over the powerful kingdom of Indraprastha. He was helped by his four brothers; they were the five sons of Pandu and therefore called the “Pandavas” , and were very righteous and virtuous. But their cousin Duryodhana was jealous, and wanted to rule the kingdom for himself. His uncle Shakuni, too, was greedy and cunning. He persuaded his nephew to play a game of dice, saying that he would make the dice fall in such a way that Duryodhana would always win. Duryodhana adopted this plan, and one by one all the brothers gambled away their fortunes, until eventually the entire kingdom was lost, and the brothers became slaves: “This episode teaches us a great lesson. One must never gamble as there is no limit to the loss one may suffer in it.” But yet another dice game was played, as Shakuni pretended to promise the chance for King Yudhishthir to win back the kingdom. Of course this game was lost too, and the five brothers were all further exiled for twelve years. The Pandavas underwent great ordeals, but each stayed on the path of “dharma” (righteousness), and all five brothers returned in the thirteenth year. The first “sloka” (verse) of the Bhagavad Gita , describes Khurukshetra as Damarkshetra; the Karva and Pandava armies are arrayed against each other ready to fight. This description is highly symbolic. The battlefield represents the human body or heart, and the war being fought is the battle in each one of us, between the forces of good and evil in our hearts. The main stories in the “Mahabharata” up to now have been covered in this book. Sanjaya, the counsellor of the Kuru king Dhritarashtra, returns from the battlefield and narrates the details of the “Mahabharata” war. He tells what has happened to Dhritarashtra, the blind king. Duryodana (the nephew, who years earlier had usurped the kingdom) praised his own army, and asked all of them to protect the great warrior Bhishma, and the battle commenced: “Arunja requested Lord Krishna to drive forth his chariot between the two armies so that he may behold with whom he is going to fight.” When he realises that his enemies are his own relatives, friends, and teachers Prince Arjuna is filled with doubts. In despair he turns to his guide and charioteer, Lord Krishna (“God Incarnate Lord Shri Krishna”) for advice: Lord Krishna urges Arjuna to fulfil his duty as a warrior and establish “Dharma” , (righteousness, or holy duty). The warrior’s dharma is heroism. Energy, dedication and self-sacrifice, is the dharma of the “Kshatriya” (warrior). Krishna responds to Arjuna's confusion and moral dilemma, explaining Arjuna’s duties as a warrior and prince by elaborating on a variety of philosophical concepts, through the form of stories. These stories are allegorical, and similar to parables. This section comprises the Bhagavad Gita . Thus the Bhagavad Gita is a narrative, presented as a dialogue between the Pandava prince Arjuna and Krishna’s response via a series of battle stories: “A great symbolism goes on in the Gita in almost every verse. It conveys a deeper message than what it seems to deliver in a literal sense.” So, in metaphor, Arjuna (representing the ego) sits back in his chariot (representing the human body) and abandons his “Gandiva” or bow, (metaphorically giving up all instruments and tools of activity). The white horses (representing our five sense-organs: the ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose, enabling us to gain knowledge - to hear, touch, see taste and smell) are held back well under control by the pulled reins (the mind). This enables the Charioteer (the Pure Intellect, or our higher self, represented by Lord Krishna) to guide Arunja (the ego) to be victorious in the battle of Mahabharta, (just as we will each be victorious in the battle of our life and gain divine strength). “Dharma” has a number of meanings. Fundamentally, it means “what is right”. At the start Krishna responds to Arjuna's despondency by asking him to follow his “swadharma” , or the dharma which belongs to a particular individual. Traditionally every person is believed to be unique in nature. It is Arjuna’s true inner nature to be a warrior, and that is why it is right for him to fight for what is right. “Dharma” is his way to establish righteousness. The idea that we all have our own “swadharma” is inherent in the caste system. Prashant Gupta explains about dharma, and the basis of the caste system: “Each one of us has been alloted a battlefield of our own to act ... the field of our duty. If I am a man of learning and love knowledge above everything else, my battlefield is confined to books, schools, colleges, students, debates, discussion, reading, writing, preaching and the like. I cannot and should not go to the cricket-field as a batman to get my head struck with a bouncer.” I smiled broadly at this part, and hope it finally justifies my skiving off sport at school (although I suspect not). But I interpret this to mean “follow your own star” - a predisposition rather than a strict predestiny. “To begin with, the so-called caste system was perfectly scientific in its approach. It was based upon the physical, mental and intellectual abilities of the persons concerned. Birth alone was not the deciding factor but the worth of an individual was to decide whether he should be called a ‘Brahman’ or a ‘Vaishya’ or a ‘Sudra’ or a ‘Kshatriya’.” A Brahman is a learned person, interested in gaining more knowledge and teaching. A Sudra is interested in serving others. A Vaisha is a trader, who knows the secrets of trade and agriculture: “interested in worldly possession from the core of his heart” . A Kshatriya can defend the weak, the innocent and the poor, and has a mission to eliminate exploitation, injustuce, tyranny, torture and crimes from society. The concept of “caste” therefore, originally meant the character or characteristics of the individual. “One could change his caste by changing his character through tireless efforts.” Throughout the story we see diverging attitudes concerning the different methods of attaining “moksha” or liberation. Liberation is not something that can be acquired or reached. The goal of “moksha” , is something that is always present as the essence of the self, and can be revealed by deep intuitive knowledge. It can be viewed as a synthesis of knowledge, devotion, and desireless action, forming what is appropriate for each person. The Bhagavad Gita was introduced to the world through Sanjaya, who sees and knows all the events of the battlefield. Sanjaya is Dhritasashtra’s advisor and also his charioteer. The Bhagavad Gita presents a synthesis of the concept of Dharma and yogic ideals. “Yoga” means a joining together, and in the Bhagavad Gita it refers to the skill of union with the ultimate reality, or the Absolute: “The Gita joins us with the Supreme Reality which has no beginning and end. That is why the Gita has been called Yoga Sastra.” Another interpretation of the word “yoga” , since the root meaning is “yoking” or “preparation” , could be “spiritual exercise” , conveying the various nuances in the best way. The setting of the Bhagavad Gita in a battlefield, is usually interpreted as an allegory for the ethical and moral struggles of the human life. Its call for selfless action inspired many leaders of the Indian Independence Movement. Mahatma Gandhi, called the “father” of the Indian Nation and the architect of its Independence, referred to it as his “spiritual dictionary” : “The Gita is my mother. I lost my earthly mother who gave me birth long ago. But this eternal mother has completely filled her place by my side ever since. She has never changed; she has never failed me. Whenever I am in difficulty or distress, I seek refuge in her bosom.” There is evidence to show that old manuscripts originally had 745 verses, rather than 700. These Upanishads - the verses themselves - are composed with similes and metaphors. They are poetic, using mostly the range and style of the Sanskrit “chandas” , a particular poetic metre. The Sanskrit editions of the Bhagavad Gita name each chapter as a particular form of yoga. Each of the eighteen chapters is designated as a separate yoga because each chapter, like yoga, “trains the body and the mind” . These eighteen chapters of the Bhagavad Gita can be seen as a progressive order, by which Krishna leads Arjuna up the ladder of Yoga from one rung to another. Prashant Gupta says that the Bhagavad Gita offers a practical approach to liberation in the form of “Karma yoga”. To follow the path of Karma yoga, action is necessary. However, the action is to be undertaken without any attachment to the work or desire for results. The work is done for itself, and not for any rewards. The object of the Bhagavad Gita is to show the best way for each individual to attain self-realisation. This can be achieved by selfless action, and controlling all mental desires and tendencies to enjoy sensory pleasures. When we dwell on things of the material world - sensory things - we become attached to them. From this springs desire, and anger when they are not realised. This results in bewilderment, then loss of memory, and the destruction of intelligence. Thus, he says, we perish. Desire, the Bhagavad Gita says, degrades you: “The moment you desire, you plan your downfall. It is our desire that invites all our worries, agonies, sufferings, headaches, heartaches and hellish turmoils. That is why Lord Krishna lays the greatest stress on desireless or unattached Action throughout the whole Gita. It is known as Karmyoga or the Yoga of selfless Action.” “The moment we work with the motive or desire of getting a reward, efficiency in work is lost ... ‘Get lost in your work!’ If the secret of work, or Karmyoga is properly understood and digested, a player will become a better player, a teacher will become a better teacher, a doctor will become a better doctor, a cook will become a better cook and a warrior shall shine forth the mightiest one as happens in the case of Arunja.” “When a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due to different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception. Thus he sees that beings are expanded everywhere.” “One who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner of the body and can understand the process of liberation from this bondage, also attains to the supreme goal.” OM - omnipresence of God The Bhagavad Gita is one of the hardest books to interpret. There are differences even in describing where it comes in “The Mahabharata” : the fifth “Veda” , or treasure house of wisdom (a sort of holy text book). It is sometimes said that the “Veda” is eternal. The word “Veda” derives from “Vid” , to know. Clearly this word too has nuances of meaning. It can mean a holy instruction manual, or both the knowledge of Divinity lurking inside us, and the technique for bringing it out to be manifested. When it is said to be “eternal” , it indicates the Divine Spark within and without, which Prashant Gupta likens to electricity, which is there whether we have discovered it or not. There are numerous commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita , each differing from the rest in one essential point or another. I enjoyed this book, but even though it is intended as a simple explanation I still floundered, much as young Arunja, finding the esoteric concepts incredibly difficult to grasp, and alien to Western philosophical tradition. Some, such as the fall of “Bishma” , where Arunja seemed to hide behind a woman, “Shikhandin” , so that his enemy would be too chivalrous to strike at him, seemed to me the opposite of noble behaviour. Clearly I have not picked up all the connotations here. Plus, as always in religious scriptures, the names of people, tribes, cultures and concepts can seem overwhelming to someone not inculcated into the religion or belief system from birth, and the endless battles rather monotonous. I have attempted to distil what I feel is the author’s personal take on the Bhagavad Gita in this review. For example, he says: “I do not believe that Krishna transformed Himself into His Cosmic Form, but He only helped Arujna to gain the necessary inward adjustments so that he might see what was already there in Krishna.” In this book Prashant Gupta has attempted to explain the difficult Eastern philosopical concepts using simple and familiar language: “The mystery surrounding religion has been revealed in such a way as will be of practical importance in the work-a-day world for one and all. A loving and careful study of this work shall confer happiness and prosperity on the readers. Lord Krishna is ever smiling to bless them!” This is a worthy attempt at a beginners’ guide, and it is a very attractive book. The text is in 44 chapters, varying in length from half a side to a dozen or more pages. The illustrations by shri N.K. Vikram are quite beautiful, using traditional Hindu stylised images and vivid authentic colours. There are plenty of them, each filling slightly over half a page of this large format book. The book ends with a couple of pages of “pearls of wisdom” or maxims derived from the Gita. “The Gita is the greatest philosphical poem of the world. This song divine is being sung in every heart ceaselessly, but we have no ears to listen to it. The ears and all other senses need to be tuned to catch the divine message being delivered within our own bosoms.” “The publisher hopes and trusts that the readers of the Bhagwad Gita shall inherit the best in Indian culture and Sanatam Dharma. They will prove and asset to themselves as well as to the entire humanity.” ( “Sanatam Dharma” or हिन्दू धर्म, “eternal order” , is an alternative name for the Hindu religion.) “‘Keep smiling’ seems to be Krishna’s philosophy expressed in two words” “Desireless activity will lead to self-realisation and bliss.” “Work is worship” .
