Summary: Gaia mourns over Mary's death while planning to kill Skizz for "murdering" her, Ed and Gaia's friendship gets strained AGAIN, Heather takes notice of Phoebe's eating disorder, Tom keeps stalking Gaia, Skizz dies before Gaia can kill him, Ed and Gaia have a gigantic fight which ends with him injured from rolling down the subway stairs and with them confessing their feelings for each other before Gaia agrees to his invitation to go to Mary's funeral, and the book ends on said funeral with Ella and Tom watching it take place. Blood was pretty much another book where nothing really happens other than Gaia's grieving process and Gaia fighting with Ed yet again. When will these books stop reusing plot points? 1) Why does no one think of reporting Gaia for fighting other people in school? Bully or not, she's still causing physical harm to someone instead of trying to tell them off. Wouldn't Gaia at least be smart enough to do that? 2) Gaia claims most people don't really know her despite how she ended up in the news at least once from saving a woman and her kid from a car about to explode. You would think that some would soften their opinions after hearing about those heroic events Gaia took part in. 3) Ella is stalking Gaia at school now? Why? Doesn't she have anything better to do? Couldn't Loki give her a secret hidden video recorder that transmits back to an electronic source in real time so she couldn't go through the extra effort of being there in person (Or however the hell Ella witnessed Gaia fighting off a bully). Better yet, if Loki's so smart why couldn't he just hack into the school surveillance system so he could sit back with a cup of joe watching Gaia's school life unfold in front of him? Granted when Blood was written there was possibly not that many cameras in schools as there are now but it's still more clever than anything in this book. 4) Gaia keeps claiming she has no friends but has Ed (ignoring the fight). Plus what about some kids she played with when she was younger? Stephen? What about Ivy? 5) You know, instead of killing Mary off, why couldn’t Loki just feed her an amnesia pill? Yeah this book needed some more spice with a character death but I think a side character dealing with amnesia would be a better subplot. 6) How does Gaia not think a diverse city like New York is susceptible to foreign church buildings? That should be first grade level knowledge to anyone. 7) Speaking of churches, why doesn’t any of them in Fearless have their doors locked? Aren’t these people afraid of vandalism or getting robbed in the slightest? 8) Why are New York citizens portrayed as unhelpful asshats who ignore people who are in danger right in front of them? You would think at least one person would help Ed retrieve his stolen wallet or attempt to stop the thug but nope. 9) Why didn’t Heather tell someone about Phoebe’s eating disorder early on when she suspected it? Communication can save lives, you know. 10) Why does George bother asking Gaia multiple times to spend time with Ella and him if he already knows she’ll turn him down? 11) If Gaia is concerned about Zolov seeming sick and ragged, why doesn’t she try helping him at all? 12) According to Fearless, Having parents divorce is a completely happy and okay thing since everyone’s will eventually. Not only does that sound insensitive to people with divorced parents but that part just came off as annoyingly pretentious. 13) Ed claims no one ever used the handicapped entrance, but there had to be enough handicapped students in order for the entrance to be built in the first place. Out of 500+ kids, there’s a sure chance of another kid that’s wheelchair bound. 14) The Skizz murder subplot was completely pointless especially since in the last book Gaia encounters him but Skizz is completely terrified of her. Why would Gaia still think a scared guy like him would hire someone to kill Mary? We wasted a whole book of plot on something this dumb. 15) This book is repetitive in detail. It keeps going on about background information about characters we’ve already read about. It seemed okay back when these books were getting published monthly so it was likely you’d forget a thing or two of what happened but reading this series way past the original publish date makes it come across as the authoress thinking her readers have the memory span of a brick. 16) The fight between Gaia and Ed felt like it was going to be a promising plot point but got ruined by romance instead. God this was mind-bogglingly terrible. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
