Okay, so here's the thing: 1) This review here may contain what you may consider spoilers. But since I think most people have known how the popular legends of King Arthur end anyway, I don't consider what I write as really spoilery. 2) This was written centuries ago. So even if you have the (modern?) conviction that knights are brutal, fierce creatures, no need to ask why the knights portrayed using the high-medieval approach swoon half-to-death because their beloved ones passed away, or why men kiss each other's mouths etc. This book is the last part of the Vulgate Cycle, Arthurian legends as written by unknown author(s) that hid their identity behind one Walter Map. Which was impossible because Map has died before the first part of the cycle (the Lancelot prose) was written. What is amazing to me about this prose is how rich the characters are. Many of us tend to simplify the Arthurian legends as: 'Arthur, the king guided by Merlin, and his queen, Guinevere, who committed adulterous act with Lancelot' - an ordinary love-triangle and high fantasy story. But The Death of King Arthur of the Vulgate Cycle is none like that. The webs that tangle the characters are so complicated, and supernatural elements were largely kept out of it. I'd like to focus more on Gawain. Many modern adaptations tend to 'forget' or give less importance to this character, once so loved and held with high esteem by authors and readers alike, shifting the focus more on Mordred, since apparently we need to have a blatantly evil character, an archenemy, to hate or to explain and understand. But Gawain, and his other brothers besides Mordred, are important elements of the older myths. It was Gawain's wrath on the death of his brothers in the hands of Lancelot and his kin that drove him to push King Arthur to wage a war against Lancelot, thus leaving Camelot in the care of Mordred - who took the chance to usurp the throne and, at least he hoped to do so, Guinevere. Gawain loved his uncle, his brothers, and also Lancelot; even when his own brother Agravaine started to blow the news about Lancelot/Guinevere affair, he wouldn't have it; he believed in Lancelot so much that he begged his uncle not to pay heed to such vicious rumour. Even when he knew that the news was nothing but the truth. (You may disagree with Gawain here. What does 'being loyal to Arthur' here mean? Is it like what Agravaine believed, revealing Lancelot and Guinevere's adultery to the King? Or hiding them like Gawain and Gaheriet - also known as Gaheris - did?) But then came a chaotic event when Lancelot tried to rescue Guinevere from punishment. His cousins killed Agravaine and Gareth (Gawain's third younger brother), and Lancelot himself accidentally slay Gaheriet. This drove not only Gawain mad, but also Arthur, since he loved his nephews so much. Thus the war between Lancelot and Arthur began. (As for Lancelot, the medieval logic may once more escaped me, but I don't understand why he still thought that he hadn't wronged Arthur so much that he deserved the war, although he had slept with the queen. Somebody help explain this to me please.) All in all, this Vulgate version of the Death King of Arthur is a monumental reading for all Arthurian enthusiasts and scholars. And the translation made me enjoy the reading even more, so I recommend this version to readers.
