Oh boy, I really didn’t like this book. It was a bold topic to take on - from the mouth/eyes of babes - but here’s the thing. Babies aren’t that interesting. They eat, sleep, and poop. That’s it. So, already, I’m bored. Also, the logical part of my brain couldn’t wrap my head around how this baby could know all these words to have all these thoughts. It was irritating. There was also this general stuck-up attitude through the whole book that really bothered me. For instance, here was Sam about his dad:, And later he had gone to another school called Yaleuniversity, and later he had gone to another school called Columbiauniversity; and now that he was an old guy with a beard, he was back at Harvarduniversity again. Seriously? I guess the author is setting up why this baby could be so smart because, LOOK, his dad went to ALL the ivy leagues. I can’t even…. Here’s another one with Sam talking about his preschool: Sam took a bite of string beans. “No uniforms,” he announced with his mouth full. “But everybody wears OshKosh, same as me. Gag. Also, there was some straight sociopath stuff going on here. “Did you have to kill the cat?” Sam asked. He sort of hoped they had. He didn’t want anybody’s cat to be dead, especially, but for some reason he was very interested in shooting guns and dropping bombs. (Please keep in mind, this kid is like 3 or 4 at this point.) As this is one of the Battle of the Books choices, a lot of kids at our school will be reading it and there is a lot of stuff going on with his Dad’s pipes. His dad collects and smokes pipes. Sam even steals one and takes it for show and tell. He tries to light it with a match that he kifed. Later his sister does try and get their dad to quit because it’s bad. I just think there’s an over emphasis on pipes and smoking for a kid book. I assume that the author is trying to show that Sam is exceedingly intelligent and the smartest little kid ever. It’s really boring. There are tons of comments like this one: “I was such a cute baby,” he said with satisfaction. “Very, very, very cute.” Sam was good at a lot of stuff. He could count higher and recognize more words than any other kid at nursery school. He knew more songs than almost anybody… It got old and as an adult, I didn’t find Sam’s antics amusing. Like when he tries to tell an adult how to change her tires and gets annoyed when she won’t listen, or when he crams all the stuff in the toilet. There’s also the bit with him learning Morse Code that I thought was a little too much. Really? I guess I just don’t know any geniuses, because I found Sam a completely unrealistic child. All that said, I can see kids loving this book. I can see them finding all the dumb stuff Sam does really funny. I would even recommend this to some kids. For me, personally, I absolutely did not like it. It was too ridiculous for me. (Review #1 - June 2019) Review #2 - December 2025 This is on my niece's battle book list and I'm trying to read them as well so we can practice questions. I'd basically blocked this book from my mind and as I started reading it I was thinking "this books is really bad." I came here and read my review and was like "yep." Things I Hate 1. Sam does not act his age - he's so "smart" it's laughable. 2. So many references to alcohol and smoking. I get this book was written in the 80s. I guess the thing that bugs me the most is that they're using it on the battle list, knowing this. I'm sure better books have been written in the past 40 years. 3. When they all stop what they're doing, movers included to push trucks into a cardboard box. On the same note, when the family stands around in the bathroom for days laughing about Sam's haircut. I hate these stupid, unrealistic situations. 4. Sam is actually super naughty. My nephew is Sam's exact age and is a bit exuberant, but he would NEVER do the things Sam does, like stealing, hiding food under the carpet, cutting his hair!...basically Sam is just extremely unlikable. I didn't realize this was a spin off of another series, Lowry wrote, but it seems like it was a beloved series and so maybe people who love that series think this one is fantastic. I do not.
