Although the history of Ireland is rife with dramatic events, there is none more tragic than the Great Famine. In the middle of the 19th century the Emerald Isle was hit by Phytophthora infestans - more commonly known as the potato blight - which also plundered crops across continental Europe, where the 1840's became known as the Hungry Forties. Thousands of people died of starvation as they did not have any other staple food source. But the continental famine is a drop in the ocean when it comes to the effect the blight had on Ireland, where one third of the population depended exclusively on the potato as a sole food source: Approximately 1 million people starved to death, and a million more left Ireland for England, Scotland, Canada, Australia and the United States. Despite many people dying on ships sailing to the New World - mortality rates of 30% were not rare - emigration became almost a rite of passage: Women emigrated in the same numbers as men, and those who made it to the new country started a new life in a new land, and sent money to their families back home, allowing hem to emigrate as well. Landlords evicted the poor tenants en masse to avoid the responsibility of paying the rates for all of those who paid less than four pounds in yearly rent, effectively liquidating the small land plots and letting larger ones for over 4£. Few could afford that in time of such crisis, and during the worst part of the famine as much as 250,000 people left in one year; by the end of Ireland lost approximately one quarter of its inhabitants. Because of the famine and continued emigration the population of Ireland continued to decrease well into the second half of the 20th century. As tragic as the famine, there were things which made it a thousand times worse. At the time Ireland was in an union with Great Britain, together forming the United Kingdom. Relations between the Irish and the British Crown were strained, heightened by ethnic, religious and political tensions. Colonization and war brought Ireland under the British rule, to great resentment of many of its people who staged several open rebellions, oppressing land confiscation and the enforcement of the reformed Christian faith as practiced by the Anglican Church. Despite uprisings and protests the two nations were merged into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801, and during the famine Ireland remained a net exporter of food despite people dying of starvation. Huge quantities of food continued to be exported to England: the export of livestock, ham, bacon and calves actually increased during the famine. The poor had no money to buy any food and the government did not issue any ban prohibiting the exports and did little to help the starving. The famine was literally the last straw for the people of Ireland as it strengthened Irish Republicanism and campaigns for autonomy and sovereignty, which reached its culmination in the election of 1918 and the overwhelming victory of Sinn Féin, which won over 70% of seats of Irish MP's in the British Parliament. Sinn Féin promptly established a national parliament in Dublin, and declared Ireland's independence as a republic. What followed was a war of independence, fought between the Irish Republican Army (more commonly known as the IRA) and the British government. The war ended with a truce in July 1921, and in 1922 both sides signed the Anglo-Irish treaty, which in effect partitioned the island between the two powers: it led to the creation of the Irish Free State, an autonomous dominion of the British Empire. The northern counties of the island almost immediately exercised their right to opt out of the new state, and chose to remain in the UK as Northern Ireland. In 1937 Irish citizens voted in a referendum to replace the 1922 constitution with a new one, ending the Irish Free State and declaring Ireland as a sovereign and fully independent from the United Kingdom. Ireland declared itself as a republic in 1949, removing King George VI as the constitutional monarch and severing its ties with the British Commonwealth. Relations between the two countries became strained once again in 1968 when nationalists and unionists crashed in Northern Ireland, beginning a three-decade long conflict known as The Troubles. Although the troubles officially ended with the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, sporadic violence and riots continue to occur to this day, and a series of barrier walls had to have been developed in Belfast and elsewhere in Northern Ireland to separate Catholic and Protestant neighborhoods, and keep Irish Nationalists from Ulster Unionists from each other's throats. Bloody history, eh? Now the two nations enjoy a common travel area without passport controls and sit next to each other in the EU. Despite conflicts and tension still present in Northern Ireland the time to brood over the Great Famine seems to have passed for good. Interestingly enough, for such a defining event it has inspired remarkably little literature, poetry and drama: there exist countless novels and narratives concerned with slavery in the United States, while the number of creative works about the Irish Famine pales in comparison. There's no Beloved , Roots or Huck Finn about the famine, which is especially weird considering the country's rich literary tradition. An event so tragic and full of political, social and religious conflicts, with roles all ready for the suffering Irish poor and the greedy Irish landlords and the greedy British aristocrats just begs for a drama proper. Which is where Joseph O'Connor enters the scene. Brother to the famous Irish singer Sinéad O'Connor (who infamously ripped up a photo of pope John Paul II on SNL as protest against child abuse in the Church) and author of Star of The Sea . The eponymous Star is a coffin ship sailing for New York from Britain, hosting a whole poor house from Connemara and a couple of big fish, along with an American journalist and aspiring author and a mysterious solitary man on a secret mission. The adjective "Dickensian" gets thrown around a lot but here it fits perfectly, and the good man himself also makes an appearance in the text. O'Connor self-consciously apes the Victorian novel by presenting the text as written by Grantley Dixon, the American journalist, who in turn created his narrative from a multitude of sources: conversations, ship logs, diaries and letters. The book he wants to write follows the cruise chronologically, but is also filled with separate multiple threads which describe the background stories of the passengers before they left Ireland and England. Chapters are introduced by the title and a short summary of its events beneath - much like in serial novels of the time - and the book is filled with authentic illustrations from the period. The Star can be seen as a microcosm of Irish - or rather British, as it was at the time - society, but the novel's separate threads offer a vast scope of personal histories which begin way before their heroes boarded the ship. There's material for several separate novels in here, and the work is very consciously epic and manages to pull them all off and have all threads knitted together at the end. Difficult marine life on the ship, shades of Belfast and love in rural Connemara mixed with the corruption and abuse of the Irish aristocrats. The novel's polyphony of voices features people from all roads and classes of life. One of my favorite novels that I have read this year is Matthew Kneale's English Passengers , which I gave five stars and which earned its place on the shelf of my favorite books. Kneale's work also features a multitude of characters with their own distinctive voices on one ship and a fascinating voyage, destination and time - it's concerned with the English colonization of Australia and really is quite stellar. Similarities between The Star of the Sea and English Passengers end there, but it's a great novel about a tragic part of history which isn't written about very often. I doubt that those even remotely interested in Irish history will be able to resist this charm, but I am also sure that even those who know nothing about the period and country will find themselves picking it up with great interest. Besides being so many things, it's simply a well done yarn. Go ahead and pick it up. Éirinn go Brách !
