2 stars was too much. but im not THAT heartless to give this book just 1 star. I hate it. i dont like the plot. hate the flow, even more hate ROSS. i would never forgive him if i was her. and im amazed hw this book was written by a women, considering hw the author make what maggie has been through. more so, i hated how the main problem of her terrible terrible accident was put in just the last chapter of the book, and suddenly they got Their HEA. well, Fuck that! and someone up there in heaven need to fire Noell. for as long as i read this book from the get go till the end, i dont feel the sweetness from their so called "union", what union? Maggie was badly injured, she's been in a hospital for the whole FUCKING 8 MONTHS!! She got scarred all over her body, the accident was fatal to her, she almost lost her life!! and then how lovely that she then got her amnesia. she forgot what made her drove at that terrible night, full speed, heartbroken and in a bad wheather without that bastard-scum-cheating husband of her stop her. Nope! he just stood there, he knw it was bad to drive in that wheather and even bad to allowed someone to drive in HER CONDITION! what a lovely husband. for all the plot, i dont felt that Ross felt sorry. no he's not! he just felt guilty and fear of her memory comeback. Ross n maggie were married for 16 f-ing years. for the first years of their marriage, she gave her life, soul n body to Ross, the scum of the earth. she work soo damn hard so she can help ross to finished his college. then he work, got succes, and he bcome greedy, ambitious and forget about his wife's feeling. he left her alone for most of the time. he let her through everything in her life alone. he got her presents, jewelery which choosen by his f-ing staff. and he got a very wonderful friend who dislike his wife. did she left him? nope. she even try to work things out for both of them. but he refused and go back to work again and again. and then maggie got tired and let things just go w/the flow, which im not blamed her! but why the hell the story was plotting as if it was maggie's fault for driving ross away?? and that justifying his affair w/her f-ing best friend. i shoot my BestFriend if i found her cheating w/my husband. and in the last chapter, ross said that the affair is meaningless, what meaningless? you fucked jessica 3times, in 2 weeks and then bfore that you involved in something that i would called emotional cheating. You talk your problem to her, you talk your missery to her, you talk your tiredness to her, while you abandon your wife and you not even knw why your wife bcome cold?? the fuck is wrong w/your brain? it's all about ross. and then, IF the affair is meaningless, he wouldnt gve jessica a diamond bracelet which he purchased fron his favourite jeweler! and whre the F is/was jessica now? it's not written or told in the book. i wish she go died and divorced by her husband. ughh.... and how i hope that the story stay focused of their problem and not dragging maggie's amnesia throughout the whole chapters. it would be good if her amnesia was healed somewhere in the middle of the book. so they can work on his infidelity. i felt cheated reading this book, what they had is fake. she forgetting his mistakes, falling in love w/ross again, and he too. without even dare to come clean and said about his affair. then suddenly when maggie remebering his affair and bcome mad at him, he shoved her with this so called lovely reason "but i love you and you love me, why cant you forgive me? so i meant nothing to you?, my love meant nothing??" ARE YOU FUCKING KIDDING MEEEEE... ??????????? oh, hw i wish that when maggie left and drive the car, she would got into another accident. and ross is dying w/guilty and crying his heart out. coz he isnt sorry enough for me. all the suggestion of their reconciliation is from maggie. not from ross. god, hw i freaking hate ross!! this book is empty. it's only maggie that suffered. physically and mentally. and ross the pig is never said sorry at all about wht he did. fuck that!
