Too Much in Love Plot: Dee Dee Gordan after seeing what happened to her mother and father and her Design teacher starts to be clingy and co-dependent with her boyfriend Bill. So much so that she pushes him away and eventually breaks up with her. Not helping the matter is the fact that Jessica is the middle of everything and starts mess when she see’s Dana Larson out with Bill at a movie. Not getting over the bitterness of not getting with Bill herself, she puts it in Dee-Dee’s head he’s stepping out on her. Things turn around when Elizabeth and Dee-Dee’s friend Patty get her involved in a talent show and push her to take over the whole show causing her to get her independence and Bill back. My Thoughts: OMG this was painful to read. And if you think *reading* it was imagine having to LIVE it! YES! I was there not that long ago. I had to sit and watch this independent woman that I’d known all my life turn into the other half. And EVERY, SINGLE, word out of her mouth was her partner’s name this. Her partner’s name that. Everyone but me seemed to think this was cute! IT WASN’T. She (just like Dee-Dee) couldn’t seem to have a thought without it being related to her new partner. Sadly, her partner had an unfortunate accident and didn’t make it, but it was MADDENING! Even to see her depend so strongly on him for money when she’d NEVER done that before. It was almost like someone else had taken over her brain. And I thought god I hope I wasn’t that bad when I was in love. But it’s an easy thing to slip into getting so lost in your partner. Immediately I knew *though the book didn’t say* that the reason Bill was probably so unreachable was that he was probably trying to get away from Dee-Dee. While I read this it’s funny but an old song kept going through my head “Ooh my first mistake was, I wanted too much time. I had to have him morning, noon, and night. If I would have known then the things that I know now, I might not have lost the time I complained about!” Ladies ALWAYS (ALWAYS) have something to do. You see as SOON as Dee-Dee starts to be too busy for Bill he QUICKLY starts checking up on her. AND THAT’S A LESSON! It’s a lesson for ME! Dee-Dee drove me CRAZY! She was naggy, whiny, and obsessive. So I can only imagine what Bill was dealing with. You can NOT do that!. I was just telling a gf of mine about her husband and she was complaining to me about how he liked to spend so much time at this certain bar lately. MEN-I don’t care how in love with you they are-NEED SPACE! Everyone needs space. I’m single and I don’t like *friends* that are too clingy. I guess I’m just that lady (the one that Dee-Dee seemed to initially be) that loves to do her own thang and be left the hell alone. I had a family member have surgery recently stay with me and they drove me CRAZY with how much they seemed to call my name for something. (Some unnecessary). So you see I NEVER want to be this girl. And is it me or does she remind anyone else of Olivia? They’re kind of the same person. Maybe that’s just me though. And Jessica’s antics are getting OLD! All of them shouldn’t even pay her any attention anymore like “Oh it’s just Jessica’s BS again.” They give her WAY too much power in SV. And what did she think would happen when she invited COLLEGE GUYS to a party. They’d sit around quietly and have intellectual conversations while drinking soda. I know they use outdated references in this series but just because she’s blond she can NOT be that clueless. (No offense AT ALL to blonds. Jessica TOTALLY gives you a bad reputation). Rating: 7
