3.5 stars. One benefit of reading this memoir is what you learn about the climate of Egypt after the Egyptian revolution and the Suez Canal Company debacle, how it must have felt for a Jewish-European family living and doing business in Egypt. I must admit, I liked False Papers better because I love Aciman as an essayist. I probably cheated though, because False Papers is what comes after Aciman's exile from Egypt. Andre Aciman came of age in Egypt during Nasser's pan-Arabic and anti-imperialist reign. His family members were Turks, Italians, and Frenchmen. They were a family of privilege, as you can tell in the beginning when he describes his grandmothers: " Each was accompanied by a boy servant whom neither trusted or talked to but whose job it was to trail behind his wise old mazmazelle --all European ladies of a certain age and station were called mademoiselle or signors in Egypt." Throughout the book, he shows the family's fears of the Germans suddenly appearing and hauling them off to concentration camps. The story takes you with the family during the unrest in Egypt, and the war, when France, Israel, and England attacked after Nasser tried to nationalize the Suez Canal Company. Later, he shows how his family is at first annihilated and forced to leave Egypt because as a method of retaliating against the countries who warred with him, President Nasser forced their citizens to leave. And because of Israel, anyone who was a Jew was expected to leave as well. How terrible it must have been for a young child, to see your father lose his entire business (his factory was forcibly closed), to be called "dirty Jew" on the streets, and not know what was really happening at the time. The memoir is a family memoir that highlights classicism and civil unrest. It opens with explanations about what seems to be an aristocratic lineage, where grandmother is referred to as "The Princess." The book is slow-going though, and I wasn't hooked until Aciman mentioned his deaf mother, because through her, I was finally able to see him. Her inability to hear during the blackout raids, her struggle to be accepted by society and by her in-laws, were emotional details that truly highlighted the severity of the situation for him, through her, especially since he was always with his mother. Only, she doesn't get mentioned until 100 pages in. Only then would it hit me, this truth about her ears, that she would always be deaf, never hear music, never hear laughter, never hear my voice. Only then did I realize what it means to be alone in this world, and I would run to find her in this large house that became so quiet, so empty, and so very dark at night, because nighttime in our part of Alexandria was always somber and murky, especially with my father out so late every evening. There were moments during the war, when the family had to seek shelter in the dark and Aciman tries to show what it must have been for his mother. I looked over to where my mother was sitting. In the dark, she could not read lips. I watched as she dreamily eased a bone from the fish, looking at no one in particular, talking to no one, yet obviously thinking about something, because, after bringing her fork to her mouth, she stopped chewing an instant and let an imperceptible shrug escape her shoulders. Mother caught me looking at her. "Why aren't you eating?" she asked merely by shaking her head at me. "It's horrible," I grimaced.
