Monk's Hood is the third novel of the Brother Cadfael series. Though it fell a little short of the two preceding novels (my expectations being too high), it is nevertheless an interesting story in itself. So far, I've been used to multiple character actions, but here, the story was heavily anchored on Cadfael. He dominates while the rest falls subordinate to him. I also found the story to be slow-moving comparatively. Some of the early chapters dragged on a bit. However, the story picks up midway and moves fast till the end. All these resulted from my comparison with the two preceding chronicles that I enjoyed very much. But if I looked at the story independently, it has all the necessary elements of a good mystery novel. It is a well-written and well-executed mystery. Although slow-moving, the story built the suspense and kept it tight towards the end. The latter few chapters had enough action to compensate for the former slow chapters. What I enjoyed the most, however, was the personal entanglement of Brother Cadfael in the murder mystery. The crime had a vicarious claim on Brother Cadfael's conscience since one of his medicinal preparations was the instrument of death. And he was convinced of the accused's innocence. Also, the accused's mother was a former fiancée of Cadfael, and he felt duty-bound to assist her in her distress. There was also the question of English law and Welsh law. Which law applies to the subject in dispute? The manor house, given its geographical situation, fell into Welsh jurisdiction. It was interesting to read how justice was administered under Welsh law in medieval times. However, the best of all was the humanity Brother Cadfael shows after uncovering the truth. He proves yet again that God's justice is far greater than human justice. This may be read as allowing a criminal to go scot-free for a crime committed. But there were mitigating circumstances to justify Cadfael's resolution to leave the culprit to God's justice. I have already become quite fond of Brother Cadfael. Here, he rose in my esteem with his humane judgment. More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/
