Finally finished reading “Caribbean” by James A. Michener! This is a book that I began reading when I was actually sailing the Caribbean Sea last October. But throughout this period I was busy with the publication of my own novel, “Life Is But A Dream” and the month spent down in Australia for the production of my play “Postnuptials” that didn’t, to my surprise, allow me any time to read. This was also a huge book at 806 pages with teeny-tiny text….the definite definition of an epic. But I love epics! And I really enjoyed this book! Although I didn’t plow through it as fast as I did with Michener’s “Hawaii” – another epic – it was an enthralling education on the history of the Caribbean. I have to hand it to Michener for the enormous amount of research he did when writing this novel. It begins at the very beginning with the peaceful Arawak Indians and the warrior/cannibal Carib Indians (from which the name Caribbean is derived). From there it covers the Maya empire and their demise from greatness. Then enter the white man – Christopher Columbus – and all the other famous explorers, captains, pirates, buccaneers and slave ships that followed over the next several hundred years (and chapters in the book). The constant battles over these islands for colonial occupation by the Spanish, English, French and Dutch where these islands would fall into the hands of one or the other, some for short periods of time, others longer lasting, was forever ongoing. He tells in great depth the valuable economic trade commodity of sugar that would later replace that of the Spanish galleons laden with silver and gold that was brought over from Peru (and traversed by mule train from Panama City to Porto Bello on the Gulf side). The great sugar plantations and the brutality by which the slaves labored under for four hundred years is described in horrific detail. In fact, between the sickening treatment of slaves and prisoners of sparing countries, and the indigenous Indians and citizens of the cities and towns overthrown in war and pirate raids, this is what I came away with most from the book…..the amount of blood from massacres, executions, battles and torture that prevailed over the West Indies. Having sailed the Caribbean many times and visiting nearly every island and the surrounding land masses, I have always been aware – as any tourist would – of the incredible beauty and wonderful hospitality that has greeted me at every port, but I was very unaware of the dark past of these places (and what civilization on earth doesn’t have a dark past?). Michener brings his book along through the nineteenth and twentieth century’s (right up to 1989 when his book was published) touching upon the histories of practically all the islands – even devoting full chapters to several, such as; Jamaica, Barbados, Haiti, Guadeloupe, Trinidad, Cuba, St. John and the powerful fortress city of Cartagena – so it was of some surprise and dismay that he found a need to invent a fictional island called All Saints. Although he fills his book with fictional characters that he intermingles with non-fictional historic characters that I can fully understand and appreciate for the telling of the many stories throughout the book, I cannot understand why with so many multifaceted islands and countries to choose from in the Caribbean, he would come up with a fictional island for one full chapter that is mentioned again and again afterward until the end. Nevertheless, this aside, I enjoyed the book, especially the final chapter, and LOVED the ending!
