Catherine really is an excellent writer. She manages to weave bits of her own autobiography and stories of others in with basic tenets of faith including what God is like, how to enter in, the will, how to trust God, prayer of relinquishment, forgiveness, finding God's guidance, the power of helplessness, finding your dreams, ego-slaying, physical healing, holy spirit and death. Catherine has a gift of making basic concepts fresh with new vision and insight. God's love for the lost: Who can imagine a mother ever dropping a search so long as there is the least chance of finding a lost child?..Then would God be more indifferent than a mother? Since I had this sight of the mother-heart of God, I have never been able to feel the slightest anxiety for any of His children The problem of evil: As long as there is sin in the world as long as there is greed, selfishness, hate in the hearts of men there will be war... it is only because God is God that he is reckless enough to allow human beings such free will as has led the world into this present catastrophe. God could have prevented the war! do you doubt for a moment that God has not the power? but suppose he had used it? men would then have lost their free agency... they would no longer be wouls endowed with the ability to choose... the would become puppets, robots, machines, toy soldiers instead. No, god is playing a much bigger game. He is still awaiting an awakened sense of the responsibility of brotherhood in the hearts of men and women everywhere. He will not do for us the things that we can do for ourselves... Faith: faith in God is simply trusting Him enough to step out on that trust we cannot trust God until we know something about him. the way to begin is by reading His word and thinking about it faith is strengthened only s we ourselves exercise it-to poverty, bodily ills, bereavement, job troubles, tangled human relationships faith has to be in the present tense-now. a vague prospect that what we want will transpire in the future is not faith, but hope. absolute honest is necessary. the strengthening of faith comes through staying with it in the hour of trial...only when we are depending on God alone are we in a position to see God's help and deliverance, and thus have our faith strengthened for the next time...we must let Him do the work. Almost always it takes longer than we think it should. prayer of relinquishment: it is not easy when every emotion, every passion is tied up with what we're facing/dread the most Jesus says "resist not evil" In God's eyes, fear is evil because it is acting out of lack of trust in him. So Jesus is advising "resist not fear" Admit the possibility of what you fear most...as you stop fleeing, as you force yourself to walk up to the fear, as you look it full in the face, never forgetting that God and His power are still the supreme reality, the fear evaporates. if relinquishment is real, the one praying must be willing to receive or not receive his heart's desire...once i thought that faith was believing this or that specific thing in my mind with never a doubt. Now I know that faith is nothing more or less than actively trusting God. ...what does demonstrate trust is to put the thing or the person one loves best into the Father's hands to do with as He pleases. Relinquishment is faith in action. give him the emotions --i set my will to accept what had to be accepted. though my emotions were in stark rebellion, I knew that sooner or later they would fall into line. --out helplesness is the most hopeful note in scripture. no sinner is hopeless, no situation is irretrievable. no case is past redeeming forgiveness: only as each of us opens himself to receive this most wondrous of gifts, can the inner self deep within us be freed to become the happier, finer person we are meant to be. Finding God's guidance: as we practice obedience, the Voice becomes clearer, the instructions more definite...give God a chance to speak to us each day, perhaps the first thing in the morning when the mind is freshest. a few minutes of quietness helps us focus on the areas where we most need God's help...do not rule out God's help with the small details of life. after all, details make up the totality of life. if we do not let God into our everyday lives, He may not be able to intervene in the crises. The dream prayer: I believe you have big plans for Ray. Unshackle him from all thoughts of lack. let him know that there are no limitations to what You can do. Plant in his mind and heart the vivid pictures, the specific dreams that reflect Your plans for him. And give him joy in dreaming, great Joy...when the dream in our heart is one that God has planted there, a strange happiness flows into us. At that moment all of the spiritual resources of the universe are released to help us. Our praying is then at one with the will of God and becomes a channel for the creator's always joyous, triumphant purposes for us and our world. on healing: Gods order is fact, then faith, and at last, feeling. In relation to health, this order would mean that health would precede one's faith for it; that feling well, the disappearance of symptoms, and the clinical proof of health would come last of all. Show more
