When reading a book The Woodlanders from a superb writer like Mr. Thomas Hardy not the first one mind you... a half dozen novels precisely , anticipating the outcome before beginning is easily ascertained, Victorian authors had an unpleasant habit of no happy endings and this particular scribbler not a accurate term, he was magnificent, however the belief that life terminates badly permeates his books and accepted as a truism in his own...........Deep in an isolated pocket in the woods of southern England many miles from a city lived a group of people in a tiny village called Little Hintock, population maybe a hundred souls if that. These few are living in the mid nineteenth century what so -called industry there, is naturally dominated by trees...timber they cut and sell and scrape for other products, nevertheless some inhabitants will surprise, intelligent, world travelers, very educated , two with money even. Grace Melbury is returning home from boarding school age circa twenty, smart, lovely , educated, her proud father Mr. George Melbury a lumber merchant the richest person in the village has second thoughts about her marrying Giles Winterborne a solid kind man, working sometimes for him. Growing up and liking each other since they were children, but is he good enough for his daughter now? Above the hamlet just arrived, a new doctor about 28, lives Edred Fitzpiers , lights shine all night from his home, on the hill , beautiful colors change frequently as he presumably studies, an aura of mystery dominates the area the seldom seen physician has become almost a legend to the villagers. Mr.Melbury dreams about such a splendid couple his daughter and Mr. Fitzpiers from an ancient , distinguish but unwealthy family would make and forces Grace to break the unofficial engagement to Giles....crushing him, you can see from a mile away a big, big mistake. The not so good doctor has a propensity to chase pretty women and they find him attractive and charming, doesn't matter if single or married he is always on the hunt. Edred is smitten, Grace curious at first sight, you can guess the rest but... Falling in love the doctor or as close as he gets to the emotion with the rich, gorgeous widow in her late twenties and occasional visitor to Little Hintoch, having a huge mansion there , a Mrs. Felice Charmond, complicates the situation. Both enjoy each others company and their secret passionate rendezvous in the nearby forest become known, causing Grace much anguish... still hot flames can extinguish quickly . In mathematics three into two won't go without a fracture. If you need a terrific novel to consume and are willing to tolerate, and be never quite satisfied by the ambiguous conclusion this is for you. A very professional product from a master in storytelling...his favorite.
