Heil, Oskar Koljaiczek Matzerath-Bronski! The drummer! The magical three-year-old! The hunchback! The Jesus! The Satan! The Goethe! The Rasputin! The arsonist reincarnate! The student! The destroyer of glass! The tempter! The Skat ace! The bane of propaganda assemblies! The war veteran! The Catholic! The disciple maker! The choir boy! The fizz blower! The father! The prodigal son! The entertainer! The tombstone engraver! The art model! The devotee of nurses! The jazz musician! The star! The lover! The dog-walker extraordinaire! The friend! The accused! The insane! The man! He comes to us as a baby, yet he stays in our hearts a legend. This little boy-man that breaks every rule of humanity yet is the epitome of humanity itself. How does he do it? A tin drum in his arms, he echoes a steady beat that moves one to lose track of the pretenses we mask ourselves with. He reduces this farce we call sanity to rubble. Bladder control shattered, heart rate rising, laughter spouting, everyone surrenders. We all are born again drenched in sweats and stink. Who is he again, you ask? He is you and me. You see, all of us, like Herr Oskar, start fresh thinking ourselves timelessly young, forever denying adulthood, jesters forever being three-year-olds. We not-so-young keep adulthood at bay, a bunch of Peter Pans frolicking around the world, being silly happy, irresponsible, doing what we want, persons stuck in an age where we are merely infants, barely kids. No regard for what others think, no imparity in our straightforward vision, we arm ourselves with nothing but a tin-drum, the distilled pureness of life, a weapon against the mockery and scorn of adulthood, this sickness called youth. But then life forces us to grow up. It might be like Oskar, the death of his last remaining parent. It might be something else, something really painful. But we all bury our tin-drums and we change. We become hunchbacks, disfigured, compared to our youthful selves. Our vision, our passions they dry up and we go through life doing odd jobs, supporting our family, raising children, eating, drinking, watching movies instead of traveling, not that there’s anything wrong with this kind of life. It’s just what happens. We compromise, make the most out of the situation. That’s life for you. Given enough time, often too much time, we rediscover our youthful passions and we learn to drum again, to enjoy, to travel. But by that time the black cook called death is looming just around the corner. Singing: Ha! Ha! Ha! But considering this, even if Oskar’s life turned out this way, look up at what all he accomplished. It ain’t too bad, huh? This story of a magical little man is the embodiment of the human experience. His disparate experiences which will make you laugh, feel pain, confusion, anger and a whole motley crew of other emotions is the ultimate story of man in a backdrop of extremes yet is the story of a person who chose to live life in his own terms. He illustrates that survival is not a circumstantial matter but rather a mindset you choose to adapt. The human life with its virulent jumps through time is ever unfathomable, ever mystifying. We will never know what will happen to us nor understand why these things happen. The journey we take is wreathed with puzzling events and painful moments, but that’s not to say that it doesn’t have its beams of joy. The odd assortment of sentiments life makes us experience is ultimately what being human is. You smile and laugh when you feel happy and cry when you are pierced by pain. It’s choosing which moments to memorialize in our minds, which thoughts to make magical that will make the difference. Let’s hope that these moments find us. Let’s pray that we, like Oskar, find our own tin drums that will give a steady beat of purpose to our hearts. Drum away all the unnecessary baggage and crosses. Let go of your circumscribed thoughts and enjoy the thrilling, pounding moments life has to offer. Let’s laugh. Let’s dance. Let’s make magic. And magic is all about believing. *drumrolls please* Gunter Grass’ 1999 Nobel Prize in Literature was awarded to him: "whose frolicsome black fables portray the forgotten face of history". Good ole Oskar was living in a period of war, but Grass tells us that the fable of life no matter how dark can always be fun. It’s just a matter of rolling with it. Life’s a hoot ain’t it?
