I CERTAINLY WON’T BE ACCOMPANYING YOU... Neither hot nor cold. Essentially, a tepid mess out of season, much like an artichoke that made an early appearance in a boutique vegetable shop, but despite the careful wax coating from the posh greengrocer, it went unsold and spoiled. Nadine Gordimer tackles the years immediately following the horrific apartheid in South Africa, and - to a lesser extent- the exploration of sexuality, and manages to write a lifeless and tedious novel about a momentous period and the most captivating thing in the world (sex). Vera divorces her husband because she already has a lover she desires more, but at the last moment, she fucks has sex with him (the husband to be divorced) on the floor and gets pregnant before marrying the lover. She then cheats on the lover (henceforth… “husband”) with a rather unattractive Lebensborn (curse you, eugenicists and your Mengele-like ideals). I suppose we are meant to be shocked by her unconventional behaviour. Yet, a quick scroll through Instagram or OnlyFans, where women (and men) post images that reveal even their pancreas, makes one realise that the world has changed. You yawn at Vera’s “indiscretions,” you look on with condescending tolerance at her exploration of sexuality (another glance at the forums reveals that the world has indeed shifted, and unless you’re featuring at least “ménage à quatre” with dogs, aliens, and minerals, nobody is shocked), and you start to wonder about the fall of the system that kept South Africa in international isolation until the 1990s... Another pitfall. In the background, distant, relatively muted and smothered, the country changes, while we’re preoccupied with who’s bedding whom, who’s divorcing, who’s keeping the child, who’s been reunited with their biological father, and diving into the Great Barrier Reef of Australia... WHAT AM I EVEN SAYING?!? Generally, we’re experiencing the petty bourgeois leftovers of a mostly white family with some black friends (secondary characters in terms of roles), who, in theory, are “in the movement,” and we’re all terribly anxious about whether they’ll find an affordable home and... GIRL, YA KNOW A FELLA CALLED “MANDELA”? He played a small role in what transpired, I’m not implying anything, but if you’re planning an edit or reissue, maybe you could mention him a bit. The characters are absolutely and completely beyond salvation fucked a waste of time, utterly pointless, except for Vera, who you want to slap (not for fucking around her sexual liberty but because of her narcissistic disorder), the plot is a lukewarm broth, and honestly, even the cover of the English edition makes you feel borritated (sic).
