(2.5) “Christmas in the provinces. It’s not everybody’s cup of tea, is it?” I thought this would be a pleasant confection for our book club’s December meeting, but it turned out as a bit of a dud, being much duller and darker than expected. In 1950 teenage Stella gets taken on as a volunteer assistant stage manager at a Liverpool theatre, working on productions of Caesar and Cleopatra and Peter Pan and falling for – or being sexually harassed by – various men. There are loads of secondary characters, none of whom I got a clear sense of, except perhaps Stella’s Uncle Vernon. (She lives with her aunt and uncle in the hotel they run; her mother is absent and there’s an Eleanor Oliphant -style secret about her.) The details of backstage life are reasonably interesting, I liked how the first and last scene are the same, and it’s notable that the aftereffects of the Second World War are still visible, with some offhand references to the war days that made me laugh out loud in shock, like a horse getting its leg blown off. Rather like The Country Girls , another one we did for book club recently, this is a coming-of-age novel with a decidedly sexual component. However, because it was written in the late 1980s, as opposed to 1950 (when it is set), it’s more explicit than you might imagine, and there’s one particularly shocking/funny use of a curse word. I’ve read a couple of other Bainbridge novels I liked more, especially Master Georgie , and a similar book that was better was City of Girls by Elizabeth Gilbert. Something I’ve generally found with Bainbridge’s work is that the blurbs are really tempting but the narratives don’t live up to them because of the detached perspective and the low page count – it’s as if there’s not enough time to develop much interest in or sympathy for the characters. Note: The title phrase has a surprising context, not relating to Stella’s work in the theatre at all: “Dying wouldn’t be such an awfully big adventure for Uncle Vernon – he was too old.” [Edit: I only just realized this quote that gives the title comes, appropriately, from Peter Pan .]
