We had to go and leave our homes Some died young, some died old, The road was long but our hearts were strong - no sorry, wait, that's the Kelly Family. I would like to quote from the musical Kristina från Duvemåla, but I haven't heard it yet - it's on my to do list. Definitely is now, after reading this book. I'm sure Benny and Bjorn have done it justice. Speaking of music inspired by this book, you should check out the song by Ultima Thule called Sista brevet hem , which is a beautiful ballad about Kristina regaining her homeland in death. (make that the only song you check out by this band, though ;p) There's also the movie with Max von Sydow and Liv Ullman and there's the iconic statue of Karl Oskar and Kristina, where he looks straight ahead towards the new land and she looks back, towards her home she'll be missing all her life. So, you see, the reputation of this book preceded it, for me. I've reached the end of this 3-volume journey with mixed feelings - happy to have finally added it to my 'books I love' list and sad because it's over - I would have gladly read through more volumes, detailing the lives of Karl Oskar and Kristina's children and grandchildren. I personally love this kind of book, but for the people that might not, I'm gonna say that the book's greatest achievement was bringing vibrant life to all its characters and presenting important events in an engaging manner, even as no detail was spared for what some might call insignificant or boring matters, like for instance the chores of every-day life (which I loved reading about, by the way). It's gonna make you laugh at times, and at other times, yes - it's gonna coax tears out of you, I kid you not. At times - and this is something I've noticed with Scandinavian writers - the reader is shocked out of their complacency by a violent event - which is described with such raw power that it throws your complacency out the window and steps on it viciously. Some characters you may feel a strong dislike for, at the beginning - like I did for Ulrika and Danjel - only to feel the author chastise me from beyond the grave by subtly letting me know I was being intolerant and judging people too harshly, because this is life and its people in all their complexity, and one may laugh at their idiosyncrasies and be annoyed by some of their traits, but in the end, that's them and this is it. Actually, I think the main reason why I disliked Ulrika at first was because Kristina did herself. And like Kristina, I then changed my mind. Most of the book is from Kristina's point of view and when I realized she was going to die, it occurred to me that the rest of the book would feel empty without her. And it did, at least to me. I'm curious if that happened to anyone else, or if that was really the author's intention.In any case, I need to find a place for Kristina now in my list of top 10 favourite characters. Also, her relationship with Karl Oskar is one of the most beautiful and realistic love stories in literature. Sure, it lacks the 'adversity' and 'conflict' and the 'let me worship you down to your little toe' typical to what people call great love stories, but when I think about the veracity of it, my heart breaks. These two are taking the word 'marriage' at its word - they are walking all roads of their lives together, they share everything, they trust and rely on each other - and they want each other as much as they did when they were hormonal teenagers :) , in fact so much that - no, that's one spoiler I won't give away. I recommend this book to everyone - if you don't like it, then you ain't no friend of mine ;)
