I picked this up this summer from one of those carts of old middle school library books that they give away for free to bummy senior citizens and single mothers. My Kindle was busted (planned obsolescence, I'm sure), and it took me a while to save up the $60 for a new one. That's where my life is. The fact that they once carried this in a middle school library just goes to show how far this country has fallen -- though it doesn't look like anyone had actually read this copy in the 40 some-odd years since it was printed. (It was a white school.) I thought I posted a review of it here, or maybe I made reference to it elsewhere. It was in the news some earlier this year (I heard it mentioned a couple of different places) with all of the controversy surrounding the Rawse date rape song and the umpteen other silly rape-related controversies. Soul on Ice probably is most famous these days for the part where Cleaver explains how he practiced raping black chicks in the hood to get his moves together before he went and started raping white chicks, but that's not actually what the book is about. That's really just prologue... explaining how he got in prison, in case you were wondering. Note that the way he discusses it is just as matter of fact. The bulk of the book consists of prison autodidact-style ruminations on race. If you're related to very many black people, you've got one of these guys in your family. They love to "break it down." The amazing thing about Soul on Ice, reading it upwards of half a century after the fact, is how on point it is. In particular, this book has pretty much everything you need to know about interracial relationships, plus some. And I mean that mostly sincerely. The funny thing about it is that it becomes obvious early on that this guy really is in love with white women in a way that I don't know that I've ever been in love with anything. There's a few borderline cringeworthy notes he wrote to some lawyer chick who was trying to spring him. He was sprung alright.
