Yikes I really thought I had already reviewed this one! Buckle up, dear readers, for this was a *doozy* of a book and I have even more to say than usual! Our heroine is Saskia (Sandy) Lawrence, the student nurse of the title, and the only reason she's in nursing school is because her parents are furious with her for 'stealing' her sister's fiancee. 'Stealing' is in quotes because by no reasonable modern standard has Sandy DONE anything -- the guy has been hitting on her, and then dumped her sister, and Sandy is blamed for it because she is... wait for it... a HONEYPOT. This is Ash's favourite word so it gets repeated a lot, and the book even bounces around into the POV of several other characters to maximise her opportunities to talk about Sandy's HONEYPOT nature. In fact, the book begins not from Sandy's POV at all, but from that of Sister Tutor, who spends a long strangely thirsty time staring at Sandy and contemplating her beauty and overflowing animal spirits (1966 for sex appeal, I think?) and cute face and great body and wondering how this class of nurses will ever survive with Sandy as a member. And what about poor Sir Jerram who is just sitting in a park thinking important physician thoughts when suddenly this HONEYPOT comes along and he is irresistably drawn to her? How will he ever cope with his overpowering attraction to someone half his age who is supposed to obey him unquestioningly at work? The HONEYPOT conquers all! Ahem. Let me try this again, since that was very fun to write but it assumes that the book I read is the book Ash actually wrote, and I really don't think it was -- I've read three other Harlequins by her and they were all ordinary romances with a few fun wacky features. No, the only way I can make sense of this book is if it started life as a conventional middlebrow women's novel and was then pruned (either by the original publisher or by Harlequin) into The Story of Sandy. In that original novel we'd have the four young women of different backgrounds (Sandy, June, Miranda, and Caro) who would never otherwise have met, but are brought together by nursing school and become friends. They struggle to grow up enough to meet the demands of their new profession, they each have some nice set-piece opportunities to overcome their weaknesses (June is squeamish, Sandy is impulsive, Miranda flouts authority, Caro puts ambition ahead of friendship) and become fully adult women, and by the end of the book they would each be paired off with either the Right Man or possibly in Caro's case with the Right Career. Everyone lives happily ever after! And in THAT book, all the POV jumps to Sister Tutor and Sir Jerram would make sense, because with an ensemble cast it's fun for the reader to see everyone from an outside POV -- it balances out how they each see one another. Even all the bits of this book where adult characters are gazing at Sandy with a combination of thirst & horror would make *some* sense to me -- if the reader is supposed to care about all four girls equally, then someone like Sandy *is* going to be a troublemaker; she's there to keep the pot boiling so the rest of the girls get their moments to shine, while figuring out that she needs some self-restraint to avoid hurting the people she cares about. Wouldn't that have been an interesting book? Instead, though, we have this one, in which Sandy is supposedly the protagonist, but it seems impossible for the reader to identify with her -- the book is just so full of those scenes where other people talk about how sexy and thoughtless and sexy and impulsive and sexy she is. There's no room to sink into her POV and vicariously enjoy her love story; every time I might have gotten close someone is panicking because she's a honeypot or because she's gotten them into trouble by forgetting to tell someone something, or she's in the middle of an incomprehensible conversation with one of the other girls about people & situations that the reader has never heard about before. (For instance, there is a conversation between Sandy and Caro about Miranda sneaking out to see William. Who is William? Why is she having to sneak around? Is this something to do with why she dislikes her guardian and ran off to study at Swale? The book doesn't say! Even though this ends up being a big plot point later!) And then at the end Sandy is paired off with a doctor and oh yes remember how she was kicked out of her family because her sister's boyfriend was chasing her? It's all okay now, the boyfriend had gone back to the sister (and maybe even married her?) so All Is Forgiven and Sandy can introduce them to her much-older fiancee. SUCH a weird book, and truly nothing like Mann Of The Medical Wing (LIN) or Young Doctor Yerdley or Nurse Camden's Cavalier -- all of which are fairly like one another, actually, so now I'm starting to wonder if Ash really was one of Anne Durham's pseudonyms. Further research seems indicated!
