4 / 5 for 'The Silent Invaders' by Robert Silverberg This book was going to be a 3/5 rating almost all of the way through, until the excellent, 5/5 final 25 pages. So I thought 4 / 5 was a fairer score, overall. This is one of Silverberg's shorter sci-fi novels; I believe it was originally a magazine novella from the early 60s that was expanded to novel format in the 70s. It was a swift read, partially due to the svelt 152-page length, but also partially due to Silverberg's very readable, smooth, almost Stephen King-like storytelling style. A secret agent of one alien race arrives on Earth in human form, as Major Abner Harris, and bumps into a secret agent of a rival alien race, also in human form. The book tells the story of our MC's dawning realisation that the war with the rival race is primarily caused by his own people, and that the rival race is a decent, peace-loving people. The story also tells us what Abner does with this info, and what massive ramifications this info has on his own existence. This book, for the most part, is an interesting and engrossing piece of 1960s sci-fi. Of course, most of the actual science sounds a little naive by today's standards, but it still reads well. The first two-thirds of the book suffers a few too many coincidences and uncharacteristic sudden changes of mind for certain characters, which allow the story to progress smoothly. These plot devices stand out like a sore thumb, and kinda take the reader out of the story briefly. Occasionally, some of the more philosophical sections, where Abner is considering his purpose, the war and the future, can feel a little like padding. For these reasons, the book was almost a 3/5 book. Then, the final 25 / 30 pages offer a thrilling, logical and extremely well-told end to this story, building a grand and tense finale, with some emotional introspection by Abner, right at the end, when he makes his final choice about what to do. This last section drags the rest of the book up to a 4/5, the ending section is THAT good. Silverberg is yet to disappoint me, and this book is another good 'un. Overall, an engrossing and often thrilling slice of 1960s sci-fi told in Silverberg's comfortable style. 4 / 5
