Romans, despite their claim to civilization, had their own weird superstitions and rituals. The October Horse was the off-horse (or the one who ran on the outside track and thus had to run faster) of the winning chariot team from the annual Ides of October race. This horse---arguably the best horse in Rome in the prime of its life---was ritually sacrificed to Jupiter Optimus Maximus at the end of the race, and its head became a prize during the public scramble after the killing. This was the title chosen by Colleen McCullough’s for the final book of her brilliant Masters of Rome series. The series chronicles the fall of the Roman Republic from the advent of the General Gaius Marius to the Dictatorship of Cornelius Sulla and then the life and death of Julius Caesar. Like the previous books in the series, the events in the books closely track general historical reconstructions of the records of this time. The details and characters are fleshed out from the imagination of the author and the narratives are changed to a more gossipy reader-friendly style. Plot Details Caesar, in this book, visits Egypt in pursuit of the “boni” the group of trouble making senators behind his rival Pompeii. While arbitrating the Egyptian succession dispute, he falls in love---in a manner of speaking---with Cleopatra. After dallying in Egypt and Africa ostensibly for rounding up the final remnants of the boni, Caesar returns to Rome as dictator for life. During a visit to Rome by Cleopatra, a cabal of jealous Senators murders Caesar in the Senate forum. But in a surprise move, Caesar adopts nephew Octavian as his son and heir instead of Marcus Antonius (or more popularly Mark Anthony), setting off a new round of civil intrigues, including the forming of the Second Triumvirate (Antonius, Octavius, and Lepidus) against the murderers. The book finishes with the defeat of Cassius and Brutus, Octavian perched on the verge of power (despite his cowardice in battle), opposed by a martial brutish Marcus Antonius (with no hint yet of a romance with Cleopatra). In the course of 700 pages (in the hard cover edition), indeed over the course of 6 books of 700 pages each, McCollough has brought to life the petty jealousies, power struggles, ideals, superstitions, crises, and frustrations of life at the end of the Roman Republic: At a period in history just as the Roman culture started to struggle with the problems related to the beginning of the Empire. The Review This novel could have just as easily been titled “Caesar and Cleopatra” or “The Ides of March” if the author intended to end her series at the end of Caesar’s life. But this novel is actually about Octavian (later Octavius Caesar Augustus) since Julius Caesar dies half way into the book. But of the four main protagonists in the series, I seemed to like Octavius the least. Probably because, while undoubtedly politically brilliant (consul at 21!), he did not really have any hurdles to overcome on his rise to the top. (Incidentally, Octavian is a more casual way of refer to Octavius, like Johnny to John. In the book, Antonius also refers to his rival as Octavianus, which both mocks his rival’s name’s ending and reinforces Antonius’s view of him as a minor). From amongst the huge diversity of threads running through the previous five novels, a consistent theme seems to be the rags to riches rise of its main characters: Marius had to overcome his “hayseed” image to become Patrician, Sulla had to overcome poverty and psychopathic tendencies, Caesar had to overcome poverty, wars, and political structures---such as his relegation to flamens dialis---erected by jealous enemies. While history records that Octavius would overcome his share of political enemies and win a few wars of his own on his way to founding the Empire, these stories are not contained in this book. The physician McCullough gives Octavius asthma (not confirmed in the historical record) to probably enhance his character with something to overcome and perhaps also to explain his cowardice in battle. But this weakness fails to accomplish what McCollough did so brilliantly with her three previous characters: that is, to give a glimpse of the character’s steel inner core, to distinguish these men so as to validate their rise to power. In Octavian’s case, we have ambition, an ability to pick out good men (we are tantalized by his partnership with Agrippa), astute political insight, and skill with negotiations (witness the way he set up the Triumvirate). But this doesn’t make him great so that the core we see is more marble than steel. And it’s not just because historical events give the author little to work with, in building up Marius she worked with even less. In this sense, Octavian is the least satisfying “hero” that this series has portrayed up to this point. Critics have derided McCollough’s style as historical soap opera---like it was a bad thing. Actually, the soap operatic sequencing of well known historical events (such as the union of Caesar and Cleopatra) coupled with thoroughly researched speculation (on such topics as Marc Anthony’s role in the assassination) lend realism to the novel. It is soap opera in a very Frank Herbert’s Dune kind of way. I applaud this kind of historical story telling because the realism brings Ancient Roman history to life far more convincingly than dry historical commentary from Plutarch or Suetonius, or even modern accessible writers like Michael Grant. For example, she describes how Caesar’s murderer’s fled to the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus in panic, and then how the common people set up a shrine to deify Julius Caesar, and how a comet showed itself during the games held in his honor. And then she links all these events together into a continuous sequence showing the love that Rome felt for its dictator, and how Octavius rode these sentiments as the divi filius to power. This works for me way better than studying the classics at school. McCollough does not claim that her version of history is the only correct take. She even provides contact information at the end of the book for readers who want to refer to her bibliography. But it was by reading this series that I developed an interest in Classical Rome. I know that I am not the only reader that got hooked this way. McCollough’s strength is the way that she portrays the personal motivations behind the events, and then spikes it full of titillating details. For example, anyone who’s read or watched Shakespeare remembers Marc Anthony’s defense of Caesar speech (you know, “Friends, Romans, Countrymen: Lend me your ears!”). But McCollough has imagined a historically more controversial story by adding Anthony as a willing accomplice to the murders. Anthony had fallen out of Caesar’s grace and needed money to fund his lavish lifestyle. Believing that he was Caesar’s heir, he quietly assented to the murder so that he could get his hands on the money. As another example, Caesar fathered a son---Caeserian (yes, as in the procedure)---by Cleopatra. But McCollough spices up the romance by describing how Caesar withheld his orgasm from Cleopatra so that she would not give birth to Caesarian’s sister and then marry them together. Incidentally, Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra do not come out particularly well in this novel. Anthony is a brutal despot with delusions of oriental grandeur. Instead of Richard Burton, think Herman Goering. Cleopatra is a flawed beauty weedy wisp of a girl barely out of her teens. Instead of Elizabeth Taylor, think Kate Moss with Barbra Streisand’s nose. This series started five books and twelve years ago with the First Man in Rome in October, 1990. This sixth book is separated from the fifth by almost 5 years. Having set the new standard for historical novel writing in the previous books, this is probably the weakest book in the series: Octavian is not that likeable, the affair with Cleopatra is not fully explored, the battle descriptions are more cursory, and the politics have lost their multi-dimensional texture (this last gripe is historical and not the fault of the author). Still, this book is still far far better than any pure historical novel printed in the last couple of years. From what I’ve read in interviews with the author, this series was always meant to end at five books. But she had had so much fun in the writing that she could not manage to end her 3,500th page with the death of Caesar. So she needed this book. And so introduced us to Octavian. Perhaps this means that there is hope that she will continue this series with a seventh book! Loyal readers of this series will need no encouragement to buy this book. New readers can start the series with this book, because with introduction of so many new characters, very little of this story requires reference to what happened in prior books. Buy this if you like historical novels or if you like talkative narrative stories. This book will keep you engaged on a plane ride back and forth across the Pacific. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
