I substituted this book onto my list because I figured it was time to flesh out my Russ reading instead of relying heavily on The Female Man . I didn't know what it was about before diving in, although Delany's introduction gave some unsubtle hints. So the first-person narrator and seven other people, passengers on a hyperspace/tesseract space ship, are stranded on a random planet when the ship explodes. Delany says Russ was deliberately playing with the two contrary ideas that a) most plane crashes are 100% fatal and b) most SF stories about space ship crashes involve surviving, colonizing, and/or meeting friendly aliens. So Russ decided to buck the trend and write a more desperate sort of space ship crash, a more realistic and psychological approach than the gee-whiz-wow short story environment at the time (1976). Given that, I think this one will do nicely for my New Wave research. I really liked this first-person narrator! She's a tough cookie. I'd call this book a great example of withholding in first person (something my first-year creative writing students need a lot of help with). She never deliberately conceals anything from us, but by the end we know that she's more than meets the eye, especially to the seven other survivors. She's clearly had combat training, knows a lot about incapacitating drugs, and faces the situation with clear eyes in a way the other seven can't. Basically, she knows this: they are going to die . Nobody else gets it. They're all bright-eyed and hopeful and hearty about the colonizing possibilities, which to be realistic are nil. For many reasons: the planet they're on is not even surveyed, they don't have the equipment to test whether things are edible, the weather while livable is not comfortable, and it might be summer now but what about winter, etc--your basic character v. nature--but more troublesome is the human element. First, even if they could survive, only two of the five women are fertile, and one of the men has congestive heart failure. Two women and two men does not a viable gene pool make. Even more importantly, as the narrator sees coming from the start, she is not ready to surrender to the re-emerging patriarchy. It takes about two days for the biggest, dumbest, most socially awkward of the men to realize that dumb and awkward don't matter on a planet with no laws and no civilization; only big matters now, and he can use that. Everyone agrees that the women should bear children, and the narrator's basic impetus is not to harm anyone, but to avoid being raped. She leaves them. In other words: she takes herself out of the control of the patriarchy and asserts her agency. She knows she's going to die anyway: she doesn't even take much food with her, less than her share. She doesn't deprive them of anything. She just absents herself. But they can't stand it! They have to hunt her down and make sure they control her. She rather knew they would, too. That's kind of what makes me cheer in reading. She does something unharmful but independent, knowing that it won't be tolerated, and when they come to get her back, then she opens up her can of whoopass. I'm the opposite of Delany. He thinks the book gets all the more interesting in the second half when the seven are dead and only the narrator is left. Me, I preferred the first half when the narrator had foils (living not hallucinatory foils, that is). But I can see the appeal of the second half: the narrator, knowing she will die, sets out to deliberately die, through starvation. She could last six months on the supplies they have if she chose, but she's afraid of beginning to hope, she's afraid that she'll become like others and lose her realistic assessment of the situation. She wants to die because it is realistic and inevitable that she will die. That's fascinating stuff. But for me it doesn't quite make up for the fact that the back half of the novel is one character sitting in a cave starving and occasionally hallucinating. However, the choice to die, the ultimate in agency, is so counter to what I imagine was largely being published at the time that now I'm curious about the novel's reception (it was first published in two instalments in Galaxy Magazine ). Delany compares it with "The Cold Equations" and I can see it, but again the New Waveyness of it shows through. "The Cold Equations" is about gadgets ultimately (payload vs fuel), and the choice is not a choice, but pretty much amounts to murder: if the girl hadn't agreed to die, then the pilot would have killed her. In We Who Are About To... , the narrator chooses death at her own time and pace because it is the only human control she can exert. She is not forced to die--in fact, she kills to preserve her right to die. Rather than gadgets, what is at stake is human agency. It isn't about characters bound by the limits of technology, but characters bound by the limits of their social thinking (patriarchy vs individualism). That's New Wave, baby. I kinda love it.
