As the subtitle says, this is indeed an epic book with sweeping views of a small yet utterly fascinating country. With absorbing passion, Morris describes the landscapes, history and people of Wales I found myself easily captivated by her passion as I have been fascinated by Wales for a long time. This one book taught me more about Wales and the Welsh than I had picked up in the last decade or so on my own. I did not find it a fast or easy book to read. It has taken me months to get through and I think that stems from two things: First that Morris has such passion for her topic herself, that sometimes her book arrangements are more passionate than well edited. The first chapter is a case in point, we start with the landscape of Wales (which sounds stunning) but is often compared to places in Europe, or other places where (whether I have been there or not) I am not especially interested in reading about at present. The passion as it were, overcomes the need to present a linear landscape assessable to someone who is NOT already familiar with the country. That is the second thing, and I believe the reason a lot of the book is difficult to read, it seems to be written for someone already very familiar with Wales and those of us who are not must struggle along best we can. Morris explains she will name things in Welsh whenever possible and that is totally understandable and also sounds lovely but it is hard to read and it meant that for most of the chapter I had no idea where in Wales I was. I had to keep referring back to the small map at the front of the book and even so was mostly lost. Nevertheless, it was a very interesting book, it has explained many things about the Welsh that I did not understand, it presents the country delightfully and now, even more than before, I am dying to go visit it! I have a long list of places and things I really want to see though still, for many of them I have no idea where in Wales they may be found. It has also reignited my enthusiasm for learning the language, and online lessons may mean that when time and finances finally allow me to visit Wales I may be able to say more than just Boreda.
