I read this book because it's one of the only books that my husband has ever read more than once. I wanted to see what was so great about it, so off I went. First off, this book is not for me. In my view, this is a zero star book. (Smack-headed pedophiles, angry violent drunks, and dudes who marry a women, have kids with her, divorce her, then marry her sister and have kids with her also, don't really do it for me. Seriously -- those kids are siblings AND cousins. WTF?) Not only did my husband love this book and read it multiple times, he wrote an entertaining book report about it way back in 1990, when he was a wee lad of 13. He rated the book "excellent", so I've gone ahead and given it three stars --that's a nice balance between his five-star rating and my zero-star rating. Because it is highly entertaining, here is my husband's book report, verbatim and [sic]: Hammer of the Gods, the Led Zeppelin Saga. Rating: Excellent. March 12, 1990. "Led Zeppelin was a rock group of the late '60s, all of the '70s and the early 80s. the band consisted of four members, Robert Plant, who was the lead vocals, Jimmy Page, electric guitar, John Bonham, drums and John Baldwin, alias John Paul Jones, bass and keyboard. The group started in 1968 when they recorded their first album called "Led Zeppelin." It only cost 1,750 pounds to produce, but grossed over $7 million by 1975. Their second Album named "Led Zeppelin II" was recorded the following year. It was Attacked by critics, but the kids loved it. It sold 800,000 copies in forty weeks. Led Zeppelin's Third album...you guessed it "Led Zeppelin III" was also critisized heavily but the common people thought it was great. When they put their fourth album out "Led Zeppelin IV" in 1971 the assault from the critics was quite slight. In 1972 and 1973 they went on a world tour while writing the lyrics to and recording the next album "Houses of the Holy." They put the album out after the tour and it went platinum. They took some time off after that. Their next album, made in 1975 called "Physical Graphitti" was also a smash hit album. By 1976 they started to loose some of the sparks they had in the last 7 years. They put out an album named "Prescence" which not many people liked and neither did the critics. They were also drug addicts or Alcoholics by then. Led Zeppelin had split up for a little less than two years and Roberts son, Karac Plant had died from a respirritory disease. Elvis Presley had died too who was a good friend of the bands. In 1979 the band got back together to make another album called "In through the Out Door." It did fair on the charts and the critics didn't like it that much. They released it in 1980. One night in 1981, John Bonham got really drunk and passed out. They laided him down at the Hotel he was staying at and the next morning he was dead. The group put out one last album named "Coda" from songs never put on the other albums. It was put out in 1982 and the group split up. Each member going solo Robert was the most successful. Hedonistic - Devotion to pleasure. Gendarme - A French National Policeman. Truncheon - A short stick carried by Policemen. Troth - good faith Therme - A unit of heat equal to Umbrage - Offense Fracas - noisy quarrel Wrangle - to dispute Angrily Spiel - to say at length Tumescent - swollen Robert Plant - Was a tall, slender, young man with blonde hair, blue eyes and had quite light skin. He wasn't emotional or shy, he was quite strong and had an average endurance. How many children did each group member have? Robert Plant had three kids, one girl, two boys. One of the boys died. John Baldwin had three girls. John Bonham had one son who has his own band now.
