I really lucked out when my daughter found this in a little library and thought I might love it. She was right! I've read a number of stories about Everest climbers, always finding something fascinating about what drives people to want to risk life, limb, and more to attempt to climb this mountain. But frankly, many of these stories are either about men banding together to reach the top, or something like Jon Krakauer's Into Thin Air account of tragedy in 1996 where a number of climbers were killed. O'Dowd's book is a refreshing new take on the same challenging, harrowing climbing adventure (her ascent of the South face just so happened to happen during the same season of Krakauer's tale) to reach the top. Her book has plenty of great details on the climbs themselves, the interactions with other climbers, and the relentless struggle against boredom that can come from hours of acclimatizing or waiting out the weather. But what I loved the most was her focus on teamwork, and how it can make or break your expedition. Her tale has more of a focus on teamwork than I've seen in previous Everest stories, and sharing one of my favorite passages that help illustrate how interpersonal dynamics play out in stark magnified relief in high stress/pressure environments like this: "People expect expeditions to fail due to some dramatic event, an avalanche or killer storm. Real life seldom offers anything so sensational. Expeditions crumble because their members crumble. And the members crumble under the constant pressure of the little irritations of life. On a mountain there is no escape, from the place or from the people. For 24 hours a day, week after week, you are trapped together. There is no external stimulus, no newspapers or television, to provide neutral topics of conversation. There is no one outside the group to talk to, with whom to let off steam." When you consider that all of these climbers show up with different motivations, but often cases of extreme drive (why else would you go through with this?), then imagine putting a group of those people together in a pressure cooker that never backs off (and where mistakes are magnified and can cause risk of death with a single poorly-placed footstep), you'll walk away from this book with a different view of what life must really be like everywhere from Base Camp to the Summit (and everywhere else in between). Enjoy!
