04/2022 Lucky you. For whom this will be but one of three reviews you get of the same book. The Mixquiahuala Letters by Ana Castillo is a beautiful, intimate, and truly heart-squeezing novel. The likes of which I have never read before and perhaps will never read again. A thought that saddens me. But then, it would not hold the same power over me if there were others like it. One of the truest joys to come with reading this novel is the way the author has presented it. Writer: Teresa, and artist: Alicia spend the better part of a decade experiencing the pitfalls and rugged battery that life offers to Chicana women. We read this through a series of letters numbered one through 40. However, Ana Castillo offers the reader a personalized experience with three indexes. The three options to read the novel number different letters in different orders, even omitting some letters altogether. The indexes are as follows: to read as the conformist, to read as the cynic, or to read as the quixotic. She also adds that one might choose to read each letter as its own, unique story. And thusly many of these letters are written in different tones and styles to support the idea. I chose to read as the quixotic. This book is a book written for women by a woman. I write that with the pride of being from the fairer sex I gained from this novel. The relationship between Tere and Alicia is a rocky one formed almost out of necessity. These two women need each other to survive not just in the literal sense as they are traveling through Mexica alone. But also in the sense that they are a haven for one another. A rare constant that is only achieved through mutual experience and complete independence from one another. My favorite letter is letter 27. I have already re-read letter 27 three times since completing the novel. This book gently filled and patched cracks in my heart I wasn’t aware I had. 10/10 05/2024 This book read from the Index of the Cynic is a testament to the pain a woman will endure should she forge her own path outside the standards of the patriarchy. Teresa and Alicia must always be watchfully on guard. Always with an exit strategy, a story, or a distraction that might lead them to safety. The Mixquiahuala Letters is a testament to our station as objects among men. Where our only true companions can be one another. This story always makes me want to travel. To vagabond from pueblo to city in Mexico. But I also find that it does not romanticize this country for what it is not. A woman traveling alone is a whore. Two women traveling together are two whores and still, in fact, alone. Every man, whether colleague, dinner partner, fellow artist, or passerby knows that you are his. And knows further that it is only a matter of time until you know it too. We cannot truly rely on men, or our mothers whom we shame. We cannot rely on our partners, for we are nothing to them if we are not present. We can only rely on other women who have chosen life as we have, for they are damned the same way we are. But these women will still be all we want to be and cannot be. And we will take pride in being everything they are not and wish to be. Truly, it amazes me the way rearranging chapters has made me a cynic. 10/10
