The book, Dancing Drum, is a Cherokee legend that has been passed on and retold many different times. This book would be wonderful to use in a 3rd, 4th, or 5th grade classroom. It would also be perfect to use if you are doing a Native American project, as for it tells so much about the Cherokee tribe. The story starts out with the sun and moon talking to one another. The sun is not happy that the people do not like her because "they twist up their faces when they look to the sky." The moon then says that people like him because they smile, make music, dance, and send him songs. This made the sun jealous and mad, making her seek revenge on the people by scorching heat onto the land. The story continues with the sun being angry and a Cherokee village boy named, Dancing Drum was trying to figure it out. He went to see the Shaman, who it was Dancing Drum who had to go out and make the sun stop. Dancing Drum went on this important mission, meeting many people along the way. He was turned into a snake, to make his journey easier. In the end, the sun was very hard to get to, so Dancing Drum went after her daughter instead. Because Dancing Drum hurt the sun's daughter, she cried rain, until the people of the tribe asked for forgiveness. They sang to the sun and the sun stopped the rain. In the end, the sun and the people had a mutual respect. At the end of this book, there are many pages that the author included on the Cherokee tribe. There are actual pictures, stories, and facts. This would be a great tool to use in the classroom, especially when teaching a lesson on this tribe. Children receive everything they need from this book! A great Cherokee story and more, true information on the tribe! Even in the story, children can see the ways of the tribe, such as the illustrations show the clothes the Cherokee people wore, tools or weapons used, symbols of the tribe, musical instruments used, and how the people looked: painted faces and symbols. You could definitely use all of these in a classroom lesson because they are important to understand about the tribe. I would highly recommend this book.
