Not really a spoiler, but for anyone who hasn't read the book, the first paragraph of this review will seem like one. It isn't. There's no spoiling this book. Or at least no concise way to spoil it. A wonderful, morally complicated book that begins with a news story about the murder of Mary Turner and the apprehension of the main suspect, Moses, a native of the country then known as Rhodesia and a hired hand on the Turner farm. The confusion over Moses’s motive sets the book in motion and rewinds the narrative to an earlier time in Mary’s life. Lessing tells a vivid tale of white farmers who, for lack of foresight, good fortune, or the other reasons fall behind the prosperity curve, relative to their other white neighbors, who are making money on crops, livestock, mining, somehow intuiting where the markets will go and getting there a few steps ahead. Some, like the stubborn and obtuse Dick Turner, are a step too slow, unlucky, and otherwise unable to get ahead and often unable to break even. For Dick and Mary Turner, Lessing sketches out a social space that is not quite the privilege and affluence of the ruling whites and not quite the compulsory subservience and destitution of the native blacks. This in-between space is the site of the psychological turmoil that Mary Turner acutely feels as the years pass on the Turner farm and as Dick haplessly moves from one sure thing to the next: trees, bees, pigs, chickens, a general store, tobacco, only to be defeated by the market, finances, drought, poor planning, the endless appeal of the next sure thing that readers can see is destined to fail because what works in England or in America is far from a sure thing in Rhodesia. It is this unwarranted expectation that things ought to succeed and that things ought to be easier that sets up a lot of the tension in the novel. Mary does battle with a sharp, if unstated sense of frustrated entitlement that developed out of her comfortable and sheltered upbringing in a city in Rhodesia. She battles the hired men and resents the grubby, meager existence that she and Dick have, still pretending that it sets them apart from and above the natives but knowing that surely it doesn’t. Through this turmoil, Mary develops a complicated bond with Moses around which everything turns, and it is what makes the book so good. The writing in this novel was very good and unexpectedly vivid and clear, saying so much, but rarely directly, and just as rarely with a singular meaning. The novel definitely exceeded my expectations. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
