Cendrars last book is an exhausting romp to the end that is primarily involved with the story of an aging star burning out her last minutes with a blast that will leave nothing standing. It seems as if Cendrars was re-examining his relationships with his female characters at the end of his life. Cendrars uses that oh so unfashionable symbolist-like depiction of women as whore/devil/chimera that will be off-putting to most sentient people. However if you overlook some of those hopefully anachronistic sentiments there is much to enjoy here. As always - Cendrars writes books like a musician would make films. There is a loose concept of story telling that takes a back seat to the verbal fireworks that will engage most word-lovers. It's more about pitch and effect (affettuoso in this book) than structure or plot delivery and this can be very challenging to follow at times. There is nothing feminine about Cendrars - almost as if he was writing books for men that might feel reading fiction was unmanly. This isn't a man writing to his sons - this is an uncle taking his nephew whoring with the art crowd. A Cendrars book should be carried in a pocket not generally used to carry books and it should be decorated with stains as much as possible - if your copy is new - take it out drinking for a few nights before you bother to start reading. This pocket is described to perfection in the penultimate chapter - won't spoil it. If you can steal a copy instead - do that. When you are done - give it to a friend with no explanation at the end of a night of drinking. I will admit that is almost impossible for me to read Cendrars and not think about Abel Gance films. Of course the two worked together and Cendrars appears with his one empty sleeve at the end of J'Accuse! - an image I will take to my grave for certain. Although Cendrars could have never drawn a portrait like the Rose of the Rails (La Roue) he does share Gance's keen social intelligence. Each image in every Cendrars book appears in my head through the lens of Gance and while potentially limiting - it is also very illuminating. The chaos, beauty and masculinity of Gance's Napoleon is present in all of the Cendrars I've read so far (Dan Yack, Confessions of Dan Yack, Moravagine and now this) and I feel no need to apologize for my unreserved praise of every inch of Napoleon but there are moments when Cendrars makes me cringe a bit. Openly mocking an aging woman's vagina is only one example of the gender negotiation on display here. Cendrars offers such images not as mere banal misogyny but more of an acceptance of the failures of humans in general. The main difference I've seen with his gender roles is that men seem to stride off like Chaplin instead of lingering like Bernhardt. This makes sense when you consider that his youngest son and many male friends died in war while the women were left at home to nurse the would of others then themselves. Writing at the end of his life with the experience of artists like Modigliani, Gance, Soutine, Picasso and others in his immediate circle of friends would require little need for reminders of mortality. This element places Cendrars, for me at least, among the last symbolist writers. Once you understand the correlation of aggregated signification that is absolutely dizzying at first glance his work starts to resonate with a steady and mellifluous resonance that elevates the experience for the initiated. Like watching J'Accuse - when you know that the extras were all dead within weeks - killed on the very battlefields that were shot as fiction - the experience becomes the ultimate in cinematographic engagement; Cendrars's fiction is just a suggestion of the reality that you know he experienced. So is it cool to dig on the macho artist launching verbal bombs with little regard for who is left standing? I think there's nothing wrong with it if you can keep it in historical and cultural perspective. I'd like to think that the women in my life can be more than whores, paid or otherwise and enjoy life outside of a male-defined role. But I'd love moreso to think that people, all people, can enjoy the richness of experience without spending too much time worrying about who might be offended. If you're one of those folks that measures their life in terms of ranking your experiences with others - most of the people in Cendrars' life and books will leave you with the shorter stack. But if you're the type that can revel in the lives of others and vicariously enjoy whaling, whoring, boxing and boozing it up until closing time now and again - you're going to enjoy Cendrars. In fact - getting horribly drunk and reading a chapter a night at a late-night establishment would be a great way to appreciate what is being offered here. Cendrars is a European Al St. John, smashing his way into your conscious with a devilish grin and a sprightly hop into history. He's going to get you dirty and you're going to thank him for it.
