*April 2016 update- had to raise this from 4.5 to 5 as the feeling I got from reading the work is so raw, it's really hanging around. This impressive debut collection is perhaps given more weight by the fact that the writer killed himself in his mid twenties, making this his one and only published work. Mr Pancake's shotgun ending helps to confirm the similarity with Hemingway- although I actually thought these stories were better than the Hemingway shorts I have come across in my time. These are seriously impressive examples of outsider writing. Set in a rural and semi-rural world of West Virginia rife with poverty, this is a grim, one-note compilation (the complete opposite of Michel Faber's compendium of 16 stories, 'The Farenheit Twins,' that could have been written by 16 different writers) and yet that seems to enhance its power. Each story spotlights some continuation of misery, although generally there is the sense of characters looking back on a life that maybe once held a tenuous string of hope. This is a land of industry on its last legs, alcoholism, spousal abuse, cockfighting, fox-hunting, the intense violence of the dispossessed. It is, in some sense, a masculinised, grittier version of Annie Proulx's 'Heart Songs' (bar the different locale) and is extremely important, offering as it does takes on a white, working-class America that is not represented enough in literature. Such is Breece Pancake's writing skill, I felt as if I was walking alongside his broken characters. What immense power these stories have. Like another reviewer has mentioned, I expected this collection to be surreal- I think because of the writer's unusual name and the majestic cover art. But in fact it is hyperreal, steeped in what feels like genuine, broken humanity, with Pancake's uncanny ear for dialogue and bleak descriptions of a land and a people of the margins, where life and death walk hand in hand. I will come back to this collection again, always with a sense of wonder: what would the writer have achieved had he allowed himself to live beyond 26?
