"If there is any significant difference between the sexes, it may be that a woman can talk as she listens, while a man hears only himself." I am loving this one!! Found it quite by accident at the library (was looking for Paul Auster, this was next door) and started it this morning... Witty, snarky, wry, and full of delightful characters - Auchincloss captures a moment in time and society with wit and aplomb. I looked up reviews - he's gotten some "why didn't he write THIS instead" comments, slamming him for "only" talking about the upper class when he claimed to be writing a book about women. To me, this is ridiculous feedback - it's fiction, he wrote what he knew (he was, after all, a hereditary Vanderbilt as well as a Beauvoir step-brother!), and this is the book he chose to write. I think he does a marvelous job presenting a snapshot of lives of society women in early-to-mid 1900s Manhattan - warts and all. The book is a loving homage to the strength these women brought to bear - despite appearances, no one's life is perfect or without flaw, sadness, or discontent (at least not at times), and Auchincloss does a very good job at pointing this out with humor and delicacy... I can't wait to look up his other novels now! AFTER FINISHING: "...those girls had many privileges. But privileges don't always make for happiness." Or for consistently enjoyable stories, unfortunately. While I LOVED the beginning and several of the interludes within, the book as a whole was a little uneven for me. After getting through the setup, introducing the major characters, the chapters basically turned out to be vignettes about the lives of the various members of the Book Class. And those vignettes turned out to be the embodiment of the quote posted here about the nature of privilege... Ultimately the book wound up feeling more like a morality tale than I expected from the snarky and sassy beginning. Still, there are some great pearls in here - even if reading it through in its entirely means I ultimately changed my review from 5 stars to more like 3.5...
