It's a strange book. An awkward one. You would never have expected such famous, technical, theory-based content to be couched in fictional, prose, narrative format. As if a story being related to you from a struggling young actor in a Moscow Stage Company. Yet, that's what you discover you have on your hands. This is what it is. A young actor describing his day-to-day jitters , his self-doubts, his insecurities, his moods. The minor ins-and-outs of theater life; the personalities of his colleagues or his appraisals of his rivals. I'm very surprised to find this out. What does all this bric-a-brac result in? Well. Purely as a narrative it's just not very enjoyable. It's dense and convoluted and tortured. The style is hectic and breathy; chatty; frenzied. There are extended, overly-verbose, preachy passages. And the book is longish--so its going to be a slog of a read. All that being admitted, is this iconic work still worth the effort? Answer: yes. Resounding yes. Despite the flaws cited above the book is still electrifying. The wisdom is there howsoever it is expressed. The lessons are there. The insights are there. The book matches the enormity of its reputation. It is empowering--you will find it changes how you view theater or film performance. Stanislavski's marvelous exercises are useful as well in a non-theatrical sense. You can discover many observations about human psychology here, which (even without being an actor) are useful to help you understand yourself and your everyday behavior. Dovetails very nicely with Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and other thinkers of the phenomenology school. Could also stand on a shelf alongside Goffman's 'The Presentation of the Self in Everyday Life'. This is the primary value I receive from the pages so far. What are the little performances we constantly adopt when around others? What routines and mechanical habits unconsciously dominate us as we go about our day? What are all these coy little social masquerades we all live by? How do we communicate mood and feeling? Why do we 'read' or intuit atmosphere from others? It's all here. It's an intense read, a book of ideas. A book which makes you pause to digest every few paragraphs. But once you accept the convoluted 'storytelling' conceit, you will get a lot out of it. It's easy to see why it is so renowned. After just the first chapter I am decidedly not in favor of David Mamet's elaborate counter-arguments against this Method. Mamet lays great emphasis on 'simplicity' in stage acting; and yes it may be that some Method actors go too far in their flouncy backstage shenanigans, their green-room perambulations...but the heart of this Method is one entirely in simplicity. Mamet's finickiness and Mamet's primness is shouted down by the genius of this ardent, verbose, passionate Russkie. Blazing!
