The book's title was changed to evoke the most famous icon of the Weimar Republic, Marlene Dietrich, star of THE BLUE ANGEL. Even as a young person, I never understood contempt for the old. Don't you realize that you will become the person you condemn? Charlie Kirk in an interview said that shootings was a price he was willing to pay for the right to bear arms. I wonder whether he would have the same opinion if he was interviewed now and knew that he and not someone else would be the person paying the price. Similarly, Margarete Von Falkensee lived past the age of the women she dismisses for their age in this book. Did she change her mind once she became one of those women? Or did she hate herself for aging? I wondered why her story was told through the eyes of a man, but as it progressed I realized that the man's behavior was described, but otherwise he was invisible. His role is to look at women and be aroused by them. Von Falkensee is much more specific describing the women -- their clothes, their social bearing, their class status, even their belly buttons. Her descriptions are so detailed she confirms herself as a bisexual voyeur. The Weimar Republic appears in only glimpses, but each instance confirms the reality of the author's experience (she probably wrote the book between 1926 and 1930, since it was published in 1931 and you can cross reference the clubs she mentions with the dates their doors were open). She's definitely been to these places and witnessed these scenes. The clubs she names really existed. The street fights between Nazis and Communists are frightening and the spoiled, rich aristocrat protagonist doesn't want to get involved for good reason. For him, the world is (to quote the book's German title) a PLEASURE GARDEN. Margarete has an extremely dirty, kinky, fetishistic mind. This is not a book for those seeking vanilla erotica. At times her fantasies go to problematic places. Her hero is prone to revolting spurts of violence against innocents. But behind it all we can feel the intelligence of its author, who was apparently working in the German film industry at the time. Her book ends with an alliance between a German and an American. Perhaps that was her fantasy of a Utopian ending to the rise of Naziism in her country. She escaped to Hollywood in 1933. But the brief flourishing freedom of the Weimar Republic lives on in her pages. How quickly it can all vanish.
