the more i think about this book the more i hate it this is only two stars because i shed my expectations for a young adult novel part of the way through and just started reading it like it was an adult novel (and it had good writing) i agree it can be condescending for the young adult genre to steer clear of dark themes or bad endings. this book respects its young adult readers by not holding anything back when it comes to violence. but if i felt uncomfortable reading about the sensual thoughts of a teenage boy, i'd say that breaks the bounds of the ya category in a different way. in a really really really icky way. why is an old man writing about a teenage girl's panties?? why is she peeing every five pages?? the fixation on her limitless bladder is actually the most disgusting thing i've read in a long time. and no, a teenage girl's sensuality in a time of crisis is not a weapon to be used against her captors, and no teenage girl would be thinking to use it like that. every single girl's mind would go straight to one thing, and it pisses me off that this old man would think otherwise. her humanity is sacrificed for what? cormier's moving her character around like a puppet to inject a modicum of empathy in the book using cormier's shallow perception of femininity. so caveman of him. woman, feminine wiles, nurturing, helpless, burst of bravery, "she's stronger than she looks," a bit of light and warmth reaching her captor through his darkness. it's so primitive i want to puke. i mean, these things are real and not bad things but in this situation? when she has no other real qualities other than that she pees when she's scared? her fear results in the death of a child. that's not female strength. female strength is doing everything in her power to stop raymond from eating that chocolate. she was not a person. she was a tool to showcase miro's humanity, or what cormier attempted to write as humanity. and what the fuck what was the point of ben? aside from that whole plot line being completely unrealistic (why would you send an untrained child to negotiate with terrorists? the reason they gave was total bs. and that his father was part of that decision? does robert cormier hate children i think so) why did we even need to know about him? i get the general idea: breaking away from the safety bubble of ya happy endings and deaths with meaning, giving the readers the raw, unfiltered, harsh reality, the message that bad things happen and sometimes there are no happy endings BUT there was literally no purpose to this. if i want senseless tragedy i'd turn on the news, that would have more meaning than this. tragedies do not have to be senseless. the characters give meaning, give purpose, give a reason for the existence of the tragedy. that's why if this happened on the news, which things like this have, there would be impact. "this happened, and it happened to real people." robert cormier's characters were not real people. he didn't respect them enough to write them as real people. the dead child from the beginning that no one really seemed to care about? his namelessness wasn't an issue, that's a real horror in itself, but the fact that kate didn't even really react? i can't get over her signing off to raymond eating that chocolate oh my god that part pisses me off so so so much miro's human "feelings" being just straight up lust for the most part. the weird thing about his father. the fact that the only smart little kid on the bus was a boy (which isn't a huge deal but i'm already boiling). the weird monologues to ben that served no purpose at all. or maybe they did and the reason is too stupid for me to realize. i need to stop now i'm just being hyper judgmental might change this to one star i just need some time to process edit: changed it to one star cause talking about it made me angrier. cannot believe i had to explain to another girl in my class "i would rather be killed than be raped" because she tried to justify a teenage girl trying to seduce her captors to survive by saying that this was what she was used to, this is how she got her way in high school, through the sexualization of her body. as if the same thing would apply in a hostage situation. as if miro would fall in love with her and free her rather than rape her and just kill her later. which one is more likely do you think. or having to explain to another girl that the humanization of a terrorist is negated if the ending has him walking away from the scene to commit more murder, and how that message is really shitty given his implied ethnicity and the context of the world today. why is that hard to understand. "it shows how everybody's human, and everybody can do bad things" did the blonde pretty white girl do a bad thing? no? just the dark skinned boy from an unnamed foreign land? losing my mind if i could give this zero stars i would
