I'm a sucker for natural disaster stories, and so, when I saw the title and the cover image of a farmhouse perched on high ground amidst rising floodwaters, I was immediately intrigued. Clearly, this is meant to be a character-driven novel, using a 100-year flood as a backdrop while residents of a small town in rural Minnesota bond with one another while taking refuge from a historic flood at the home of one of the town's most venerable elderly citizens. Over four days and nights, trapped inside the home, the characters are forced to get along with one another despite past conflicts and misunderstandings that are revealed through dialogue and interior monologue. As I kept reading, however, I found myself wanting to know more about the flood and less about the chracters. From the beginning, the author does a good job of building suspense, as each time the narrator Agatha looks out the window of her home, she sees the floodwaters rising, first covering the street below, then the sidewalk in front of her home, until finally the water is lapping at her doorstep. I kept waiting for some crisis to occur that would finally test the mettle of the characters trapped inside Agatha's Victorian home, but every time the reader's attention is drawn to the flood, the author quickly draws it back again to the petty concerns of the characters (including those of Agatha herself, but I'll get to that later). In the right hands, this can be a very effective suspense-building technique. In this case, however, there is no payoff. On the third (or was it the fourth?) morning Agatha looks out her window to find that the floodwaters have begun to recede, just like that, without so much as wetting the living room carpet, while Agatha's houseguests all breathe a sigh of relief and begin preparations to return to what is left of their own homes. I do appreciate Agatha's generosity in opening her home to those less fortunate citizens who have been or are about to be flooded out of their homes, but other than that I found little to like about her. It puzzles me that a woman her age brave and strong enough to care for these flood victims would be riddled with remorse over her deception concerning the death of the postmistress, to the point where even the local priest turns his back on her. I do give the author credit for his skillful use of dialogue. Much of the backstory is revealed entirely through dialogue rather than exposition, which is a talent even some of our most celebrated authors seem to lack. I also give the author credit for his willingness to cover some of the dark undercurrents of small town life in middle America---albeit on a very superficial level---such as domestic abuse, divorce, drug and alcohol addiction, old age and loneliness.
