True to my promise/threat, I'm doing a cut and paste (or gut and waste) review, taking material from my earlier post: But first, my newer reflections: -Having recently been reading about mnemonics and memorization, it occurs to me that this book seems largely as if it were based on the images of a bizarre mnemonic, in a virtual memory palace, where every object and event is really just a symbol or a pun devised to help someone remember something . In other words, there is the perpetual feeling that what we experience as readers is cryptic, and there is a profound hidden story within... something of the nature of the unconscious, and thus emotionally charged. -There's an interesting association of ideas, or structure, which arises from the fact that certain themes, images, and ideas recur in different forms. This is subtle, and unexplained. But, for instance, the repeat occurrence of people who sweat or exude blood, or a blood-like fluid, the almost magical properties associated with magnetism and electric current, the employment of animals to communicate or participate in scientific enquiry, the existence of hidden switches, panels and passageways, the returning themes of catholicism (all within a "scientific" context)--these obsessions of the author's creative mind come back with just enough frequency to give the impression that the book is not a series of independent vignettes, but rather that they are interrelated and thematically united. Well, I'll get lazy now and just append what I wrote earlier: ----------------------------------- Locus Solus is truly unique. Like many of the great books, it makes me think "until reading this, I didn't even imagine such a book was possible." Roussel is sometimes cited as an early influence on the surrealists--a sort of proto-surrealist. But he appears to be something quite different. While influential on other writers who came after, I suspect that the others were inspired by him, but not imitative, and he may have had rather different literary goals. Anyway, Locus Solus seemed immediately engaging from the first short chapter, and the book in its entirety is rather short, but it doesn't seem short. It's dense as a text, and somewhat slow going, particularly if you find yourself visualizing and meditating on what is being described. The structure is that of a visit to the property of a wealthy, talented, and eccentric inventor. The narrator sees various mysterious objects and strange spectacles. Each object and spectacle is described with a remarkable exactitude, and each conceals a story. The story of each object or spectacle is then disclosed, as well as its scientific or historical significance, as though the fantastic is being rationalized, though it still retains a degree of mystery and potency nonetheless. To describe it in a similar but different way, the book is like a continuous magic show by a stage illusionist, who concludes each performance with a detailed description of the method behind each trick, yet the tricks aren't spoiled by the description, and still seem miraculous for their ingenuity. For a brief, randomly selected example, imagine encountering a gigantic radiant diamond, and within that diamond there is a luminescent fluid, and within that fluid there is a dancing woman who strikes a series of dramatic poses and executes a series of gestures and moves such that the strands of her hair, in passing through the fluid, produce music. Imagine a race between seven seahorses, each tagged with a different color of the rainbow, through this same fluid, tethered together and towing a golden sphere like the sun, in imitation of the horses of Apollo towing the sun's chariot. Then imagine an explanation that rationalizes this spectacle in terms of an elaborate science experiment. Now imagine a novel which consists entirely of such spectacles and their explanations. That's Locus Solus.
