The Nonesuch is a reread for me. It has long been a favorite with its comedy of errors, Regency era country setting, colorful characters, and even more colorful use of Regency Cant. I enjoyed revisiting this audio edition and James Lailey's narration work of characters and tone of the story. The Nonesuch defies convention and provides a nearly perfect hero to entice and beguile the reader. Waldo is perfection, but he is engaging and wins hearts by his very nature. He is all that and at the top of his game, but he is kind and giving as well as shrewd and worldly-wise. He guides his two younger relations and even a few others while attempting his first real courtship. He's the cool guy and the alpha male without all the draw backs. Meanwhile, the lady Waldo chooses to favor, Ancilla, is in great doubt of his perfections and manages to disbelieve or misrepresent him due to her own self-doubt. Ancilla is a superior lady, but she has fallen on hard times and must be employed as a spoilt young beauty's companion. It is the difference in their status and wealth that make her doubt the most and believe the worst. And, I get it, reputation is of great importance when you work for a living and are at the mercy of others. Heyer fills the story with a series of sparkling wit, laugh out loud comedic moments, but spares the reader some of the dashing about that can appear. Her focus is on a mature couple finding love, but also a gaggle of young people coming of age who need to be steered right. On the side, there is the story of a second cousin of Waldo's who is on the brink of ruin and must decide on which side he'll land. Side note, a second reading did not render little spoilt Tiffany any less noisome. She really did need a comeuppance and I had no sympathy for her poor little rich girl-only child- no one to guide her when she was young issues. I love this story, but if it has a fault, it's the abrupt ending. It literally just stops. The reader is left in no doubt about the main plot threads, but there is no denouement to appreciate it. But, as always, I come away with a smile and a happy sigh for another of the author's queenish works.
