Hi all :) Here's my script to my review of WWAAT. Feel free to check out the review here: https://youtu.be/mi-soWArT9Q ~~~ ~~~ ~~~ We Who Are About To… Introduction - “We Who Are About To…” was written in 1977 by one of the alleged greatest authors of New Wave science fiction, Joanna Russ. - Ever since starting this channel I have not DNF’ed a book. I’m just too slow of a reader to spend time starting and stopping books for the sake of finding ones I like, so I just kinda go with whatever I’ve picked, even if it sometimes feels like drudgery. - And this was the first book that I got 20 pages in and thought: I don’t know if I can do this. But I’ll get into why in a minute. What’s going on? - We Who Are About To… starts off by explaining that some people, the characters of this book, have become stranded on a planet. There was an error in their manipulation of spacetime. I kind of chuckled at the fact that they used that way overused example of traveling between two points on a piece of paper that was in Interstellar, but to be fair surely it wasn’t overused in 1977. - So who’s there. 5 women and 3 men crash land. It’s not spelled out super clearly, but the main character seems to be a woman around her thirties. She’s a vegetarian and a bit of a hippie. She’s got a lot of psychedelics on her, at least. - Other than the main character there are: - The Grahams: Valeria and her husband Victor and their daughter Lori. They’re a rich family and Lori is a needy, coddled child. - There’s also Nathalie and Cathie, some young women, and Alan and John, some young men. - Upon crashing they realize they are in a bleak state. On this planet, devoid of natural resources, they only have basic supplies and not enough food. - Things begin to get shifty as stress increases: people start punching each other, accusing each other, and the group devolves into a bit of an anxious mess. - While the survival instinct of the rest of the characters sinks in, the main character reflects on their situation, thinking that they all were essentially dead by the time they landed there. - Disputes arise over what best to do in their situation, one of the most contentious disagreement being that the group wants the main character to begin repopulating by having sex with Victor. - And that’s pretty much all I can say without giving away spoilers. The Good: Bleakness/Isolation - Let’s start positive. My favorite thing about this book, by far, is the eeriness of the scenery. The planet they land on is devoid of all life. With no animals scurrying around, it feels ominously quiet. And I think this is a hard concept to express in a book, but Russ does it expertly. - The big challenge of many sci-fi authors is to make a universe that feels alive. But it's also difficult to purposefully make something that feels uncomfortably dead. And that's what Russ does so effectively here. It’s like being at a school after hours or at a theme park with nobody in it. There is a ghostly stillness to it. - She adds in all these really clever worldbuilding elements like the fact that there are very few stars in the sky and these things add up to just an extremely melancholy reading experience. - This sense of deadness works to emphasize the bleakness of their situation. They are hopelessly isolated, and nobody is coming for them. And with limited resources, they are living out their final days. - On top of this, the main character battles some fiercely intrusive thoughts, highlighting a depression she’s had about this world long before she crash landed. Prose - I take pretty extensive notes when I read, though, and about 10 pages in I noted “I don’t like this prose, but I’m sure I’ll get used to it.” Let me tell you: I absolutely did not. - The main character is narrating this into a voice recorder called a “vocoder” and it is nearly unreadable. The sentences are choppy and written in a way that almost feels like shorthand. - The prose is nonlinear and sporadic. It’s often written as just train-of-thought audio journaling that would maybe be interesting for a page or two, but I hated it in long form. The book even literally just cuts off mid-sentence sometimes. It’s so frustrating. Like it’ll (bla bla bla bla bla) - NOTE: Say something after “Like it’ll….” but cut immediately after - There are moments where the narrator is connecting with other characters, and it's meant to be touching. There is humility and humanness in the acts, but it is completely lost because of the ridiculous way this is written. - I tried reading for extended periods out loud, and this helped a little bit but overall it was still just incredibly clunky to read. r/ImFourteenAndThisIsDeep - I really, really wanted to like this book. I am definitely an SSRI enjoyer myself, so the themes of the bleakness and depression and hopelessness felt really validating to me. - But a big issue I had with the dark introspection of the main character was that a lot of times it just came off as overly edgy rather than insightfully bleak. - And like I said I really like depressed monologuing, but the main character just went over the top and ended up sounding like a provocative teenager who just discovered depression. Let me give a few examples. - On burying people, she says, “I think they should be left about to rot, day after day, so we’d get used to it and stop being afraid of it.” and then later “dead people are like sandbags, but in odd shapes because they keep folding up, and because they [are] still warm” - And now listen to this penetrating life analysis. It’ll also give you a taste of this god-awful prose: “Next day, don’t know what day it is. Probably five. Who cares. If history were not fantasy, then one could ask to be remembered but history is fake and memories die when you do and only God (don’t believe it) remembers. History always rewritten. Nobody will find this anyway.” - It comes off as just overly callous and juvenile. All right so this is the point where I end spoiler free review. Honestly, I don't recommend this book so I suggest you just keep listening and don't read it, but you're free to do what you want. Spoilers: What Happens Next - So what happens next: as tensions arise at the camp, and Victor dies of seemingly natural cases, the main character decides to just flee. She goes far away and takes food with her. After a while, some of the people come and find her to try to bring her back. And what does she do next? She brutally slaughters every single one of them. - After doing that she goes back to the camp and shoots the remaining survivors, including the 12 year old girl. The best praise I can give for this is that it is hard to read so at least it causes some emotion in me, but the action makes no sense. She claims that if she didn't do this they would've raped her, but why did she need to kill all the women and the child then? - So let's say that you like all this ridiculous prose and insights about death and dying and loneliness of life. You're still getting it from a psychopath mass murderer. She honestly gives off, like, school shooter defeated and dejected energy. It's gross. - And the last, like, 40% of the book is just the narrator slowly going insane as she dies of hunger. She does show some signs of remorse, but the vast majority of her musings are not just how much life sucked but how bored she is. - And holy shit, if you think being bored is boring, try reading about someone taking about how bored they are. Like, listen to this, “Dull. Oh God, dull. Trying hopelessly to push the sun along. If you scream, will that move it? I can’t get through the next minute, I know I can’t. Count your fingers one way and then back (nineteen), assigning them metaphysical values or pictures: house, book, Byzantine Empire, salvation, orthodoxy, burnt bacon, play, and so on. Do it backwards; can you remember them? Clock watching. Sun watching. The sun doesn’t set directly in back of the cave but almost downstream. That’s why I can see it rise.” WHAT ARE WE DOING?? - The end is just ramblings, bro. She's a rambling, confused lunatic not at peace with her life or death. She dies alone, the same way she felt before crash landing. Conclusion - This book was a massive disappointment. The themes of this book checked every single box to a good sci-fi classic for me: it had a diverse range of characters, it had themes of the bleakness of humanity and the depressing nature and isolation of life, it had brutal violence, and I could not have hated it more. - It felt immature, it felt sloppily written, and not well thought out. - Every time I read it bad book I'm reminded of something though. Every bad book is someone's favorite book. Someone out there read this and it was their favorite book of all time. And well that's wild to me I do recognize that people have different interests and this could've hit the exact spot that someone was craving. But that was not me. - Thanks for watching
