The printing of this special twentieth-anniversary edition has been restricted to five hundred numbered copies, this is copy 363, signed by its writer Gerald Seymour. When a cabinet-ranking politician gets shot in London in front of his wife and children the Prime Minister decides that this will have consequences and he wants the killer. Enter Harry Brown successful in an earlier undercover assignment and utterly unknown to the fighting parties in Northern Ireland. He is prepared rather quickly for the job and released into a war in his own country he is not really prepared for at all. His is bound to fail in his job because of the situation he is being send into. We see the mess that is Northern Ireland in Belfast through the eyes of Harry who has to find his way through the maze without having one of the regular parties knowing about him and his goal. When they find out it starts a interdepartmental row that in the end leads to a shoot out in the streets. The writer has shown us an insight in the world of Northern Ireland and nobody in this book comes off looking good, it is perhaps the best mirror of the situation it was in the seventies when the terror and killing in Northern Ireland was destroying lives. Both sides in this book come off as calculating and offering men for causes. When I studied in Northern England I remember one morning walking out of the house where i rented a room and I ran into a man wearing a anti-bomb suit and was ordered back inside the house because there had been a call about a bomb. I was afterwards being questioned by the police about anything I might have seen. While for me the whole situation was somewhat outlandish I found the attitude and grim determination of the police in this case truly scary. It wasn't until later when I talked about it with fellow students form England, Ireland and Northern Ireland that I found out how much it wrecked their lives and the insanity they experienced because of this still ongoing conflict. A very well written book that does tell you about the troubles and actually does not take sides, well worth your while even if the book is now more than 40 years old.
