Would P.D. James have chafed as a Goodreads Author? She would surely have had little time for “Ask the Author,” which sternly limits the number of characters in a response almost as severely as Twitter does. James needs time (and space and characters) to do her work as she (if not all readers) would have it. To insert a telling, anonymous line (but not the first line) from a Michael Drayton sonnet—this is “literary fiction,” after all. Or to remake a (prophetically) incinerated Protestant “martyr,” Agnes Poley, out of an Agnes Prest , similarly incinerated on the same day, in the same year, for the same reasons, but as far west of East Anglia as possible, in Cornwall. James can be terse when she chooses: in the present mystery she wastes precious little time or text on acts of killing (stopping just short of the deed or taking up shortly after). When she chooses, she does not need line upon line of text, as when she lets just a few words hint at what festered behind the “new version of an old horror” in Alice Mair’s paternal relationship (“the shorts high-cut, showing as he walked the bulge of the scrotum, the white legs, matted with black hair from the knees down”). Or when she lets a three-word title, Devices and Desires , speak for more (“We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts. . . .” from the Anglican prayerbook) Indeed, that is what several “miserable offenders” in the present tale have done to create James’s latest story. Adam Dalgleish’s vacation in East Anglia turns into a busman’s holiday, as he struggles to remain an outside observer of multiple murders, involving, not one, but two killers (one a serial killer, the other a copycat). Dalgleish is eclipsed to some extent by Rickards, the local detective inspector, who totes along his own baggage and serves as an interesting foil to his former superior. Alone or together they confront the usual crowd of witnesses and suspects, all in the ominous shadow of a nuclear power plant, which looms large throughout the story, almost as a character in its own right. Unlike other characters, however, the power plant cannot indulge in the extended internal monologues that are so much a feature of James’s style. The plot unfolds in an individual sort of way. I cannot think of shelves of murder mysteries in which a perpetrator is killed off barely half way through. How many mysteries can you name in which a murderer plots the deed to insure that other characters will have credible alibis? I could have done without the unexpected intrusion of terrorists and MI-5, pretty much out of nowhere, but they beat it relatively quickly, allowing the remainder of the plot to untangle in very satisfying ways, as much because of the “how” and “why” as the “who.”
