Having recently read, and loved Shani Mootoo’s recently released novel Polar Vortex I wanted to read more of her work. I was able to borrow a copy of her debut novel Cereus Blooms At Night from a fellow Bookstagrammer so I could read more from her. The story opens with Tyler who is a nurse at an Alms House on a fictional Caribbean Island. The story is narrated by Tyler who is tells us the story is not about him (even though he inserts himself in the story lol) but about Mala Ramchandin and how she ended up being a patient at an Alms House in Paradise. I absolutely loved how endearing Tyler is and why he decided to tell the story of Mala Ramchandin who doesn’t interact with anyone, was held for the murder of someone but the judge dismissed the case because there was no body. Throughout the book we learn about Mala’s very traumatic history and what led to her ending up where she is today. We hear about her Grandfather who came all the way from India to carve out a better life for his son, Mala’s father. Her father ends up being adopted by a Catholic Missionary family, he lives with them and ends up falling in love with their daughter, which they forbid because that is basically his sister. Mala’s father becomes enamoured with the daughter which basically lead to the demise of his entire family. While I did not love this book I have to admit that Mootoo’s writing is phenomenal, from her first novel you can see her promise. A lot of very heavy themes are explored, rape, incest, trauma, grief and mental illness. What really overwhelmed me was the incest, it really broke me. I know it is a little narrowed minded of me but I kept wondering “why didn’t you just leave Mala”, I didn’t see her reasons for staying- and the author did not make a strong case for it… I find. We meet two non-binary characters in this book and for me, I liked that they were able to be their true self with little trauma or struggle. It was a little unrealistic they were met with little or no opposition especially from the family but even with it being unrealistic it worked for me. Overall I wanted to love this one a bit more but… I loved loved loved the first 150 pages but after it just went a bit downhill. Read it for yourself!
