3/4/24 - still four stars, glad to reread, I’d muddled this plot with another Heyer novel in my head, so this was a pleasant and refreshing surprise, fun to listen while knitting. 2/7/20 - back up to 4 stars for this Heyer; never a favorite, so I tried the audiobook narrated by the excellent Phyllida Nash this time. I guess it’s third time a charm, or just right book, right time, but I thoroughly enjoyed this reread! We’ve had some lively discussions in the Heyer group about the characters, and their motivations - and I doubt it’ll ever be an absolute favorite five-star Heyer for me - but it was great fun, and a delightful listen just when I needed it! 4/2008 - I really enjoyed this one, but had a hard time getting into it; I've read enough Heyer to know that when I reread it I'll enjoy it more. It was my fault for not just putting it aside and reading it when I was in the mood. Having said that, it had her usual hilarious dialogue, charming, quirky characters, and farcical situations, and I'd recommend it to anyone who enjoys a good comedy of manners in the Austen style, but funnier! 9/12/15 - upon rereading I've downgraded this one to 3.5 stars from 4; reading along with the Georgette Heyer group and reading the insightful comments of my fellow readers helped point out character and plotting flaws I missed when I first read the book several years ago. First, for a Heyer book, one of favorite authors, it sagged and slowed to a boring pace in the middle to the last third or so of the book and I almost didn't bother finishing! But I'm glad I hung in there, because in true Heyer fashion she ties up loose ends fairly neatly and I was satisfied for the most part. One of my biggest annoyances with the book was Amabel, mother to twin brothers Kit and Evelyn; the entire plot sprung from and revolved around the obscene debts she had accumulated for many years and the obligation felt by her sons to pay off said debts. I was appalled that despite her obvious deep love for her two boys she would hatch the plot to marry Evelyn (the eldest and heir to the earldom) off in a marriage of convenience so that he would seem "settled" enough to convince his uncle to wind up his father's trust that kept him from his full inheritance (his father obviously thought he was as big of a flake as his mother). Talk about selfish, and totally lacking in self-awareness at the same time (until the very end, when Amabel finally took steps to take responsibility in her own inimitable way and let her sons off the hook). Anyway, there are some marvelous and insightful comments at the Georgette Heyer readers group pages on this book if you care to read more. Two of the brightest spots for me (and definitely worth the .5 star!) was the delightful couple of Kit and Cressy - they were so much fun and so clearly meant for each other and never hesitated to jump in and support each other and work together to solve this ridiculous mess Amabel embroiled them in; and the other was Sir Bonamy Ripple, one of the funniest, most hedonistic and effortlessly charming side characters I've ever read in a Heyer book, and she's written some real winners! And the fact that he gets to be the knight in shining armor who (unwittingly and probably unwillingly) provides the means to a resolution that allows the young people to find their happiness in the end - priceless!
