Once again the spiral has shifted and the balance of power has tilted. The influence of the mask of Many Colored Crow has caused the current owner, Mica Bird to destroy the life around him as well as take his own life. His stunningly beautiful wife, Star Shell is terrified of the mask’s power and for her daughter, and secretly leaves on a mission to destroy the mask in the waters of Niagara Falls. With the help of the High Head Elder, Tall Man, a dwarf, they embark on the trip to destroy the mask. Tall Man has foreseen in a power dream what needs to be done and explains to Star Shell that he needs to be a part of the journey in order to make amends for all the wrong he has done in his life. Pursued by men who desire the power of the mask they flee for their lives. Down near the present day Mississippi River delta, the alluring Pearl has been promised for ‘marriage’ to the mysterious and terrifying leader of the Khota, a violent and aggressive people in Illini territory farther north. As she journeys north, she plots to escape her escort before she can be married to her betrothed. Mean while, Otter, a trader, is preparing to leave his clan grounds after his one time love marries his twin brother. But before he leaves power intervenes and brings the renowned warrior Black Skull and the Contrary Green Spider to his canoe landing and on a trip north, to save the very mask that Star Shell is going to destroy. Along the watery way, power once again intervenes and throws Otter and his odd party in the path of the Khota, who are bent on murdering Pearl after attempting to kill her new husband. As those in the south head north, those in the north edge ever closer to the falls and Star Shell faces the temptations thrown in her path by the mask’s power. Adventure on the fresh water seas, facing one’s fears, new love and of course the ever present fight for power, good versus evil, constantly striving to balance one another, all that and more can be found in this story of prehistoric North America. Find out if the evil mask is destroyed or if it conquers those against it, who finds love and who comes to know themselves in People of the Lakes.
