We all know there are plenty of "important" stories that don't get told, voices and experiences left out of history or even just the social conscience because "those" people aren't "the winners" or the gatekeepers of the self-justifying myths that let a society float along smugly. But here we get to hear voices of the experience of some of the Aborigines of Western Australia, the brutality and beauty, pain and shame, resilience and bravery. The author struggles against the silence of her mother and grandmother to uncover the story of her family. Like elsewhere, children of mixed race were treated as "lesser" - usually not accepted or acknowledged by the white men who sired them on native women. The pain that white men's sexual license has wreaked around the world is truly horrendous and they have a lot to answer for. One moment in the story has a white preacher berating a shop of native seamstresses (some very young) to "save themselves for marriage" when all of them had already "been taken" by white men. How could they feel nothing but shame? Of course anger or rage would only have to be swallowed. But of course we know where the shame should lie. The prejudices that the family felt wasn't only in society at large but within as well. The father was a white man whose experiences as a soldier destroyed him, the PTSD worsening over the years as he self-medicated with alcohol. But also his and his parents' own prejudice against the "black blood" of his wife and children is clear, and terrible. Black mothers were not allowed to keep children of white men if the parents weren't together, and his threat to take the kids kept Sally's mom from ever leaving him. On top of this, the various policies of separation and so-called schooling of black children were as awful in Australia as Canada and the U.S. The author's persistence on digging into her family story, the loosening up to get her uncle, mother and finally Nan to share what they can, (some secrets were just too painful or deep and one can only imagine what was withheld), leads us to really see and feel an important part of the Story of Australia, and really beautifully done. Apparently this was a groundbreaking work that opened up a new narrative thread in the nation. Highly recommended for anyone interested in stories of the aftermath of colonialism outside the lines that separate white skinned descendants of the colonists from the darker skinned natives. A nation's history and experience isn't just that of the white settlers and their white progeny.
