Prairie Embrace by Rosanne Bittner is an older Native American romance. Synopsis: Katie Russell is a 19 year-old girl who was forced to marry a much older man by her father. Her husband Ezra is very abusive to her and treats her like a slave. Her father and brothers treated her badly growing up, she was the only female so she had to do all of the cooking and cleaning and never knew kindness or love. Her new husband forces her to move to Nebraska to start a farm. She hates the big open land because she is very lonely and is forced to work herself to the bone by her husband. The only bright spot in her world is Tohave... Tohave is a half-Cheyenne, half-Lakota young man (he's 26) who chafes at being stuck on a reservation. He remembers his old way of life and wishes to go back to the days when he fought neighboring tribes and hunted the buffalo. He is restless and spends his time roaming near the reservation, occasionally playing tricks on the white settlers. He sees Ezra and Katie's wagon on the way to their homestead and decides to play with them. The first time he sees Katie, he is struck by how sad she seems and by her beauty. He starts spying on her homestead and sees the abuse her husband subjects her to. Katie and Tohave have a few encounters, where they realize they are both attracted to each other. Katie is amazed that Tohave makes her feel special and loved for the first time in her life. Even though Katie and Tohave love each other, there are quite a few obstacles in their way. She is married to a man she hates then finds out she is pregnant. They come from different cultures and know the whites would not allow them to live together. Tohave cannot kill Ezra because he would hang for the deed and he is afraid Katie would feel guilt the rest of her life. They plan on running away together but certain events occur to derail their plans. Eventually they do get their HEA, which is all the sweeter after everything they went through. My personal opinion on the book: I really enjoyed Rosanne Bittner's writing! This was my first book by her, now I am going to try some others. She has a way of including great historical detail without shoving it in your face. You can tell she has researched her time period, she really made the setting and time period come alive. She also did a great job with Tohave and the other Native Americans. I actually could tell Tohave was Native American instead of feeling like it was a regular white character with an Indian name. The story also includes events leading up to the massacre at Wounded Knee. The love story itself was very good. I felt the passion between Tohave and Katie. Katie really grows during the story, she finds her strength after Tohave's love and acceptence show her there is more to life than hardship and abuse. Tohave and Katie did make love while she was still married to Ezra, but I didn't mind because Ezra was an abusive animal who liked to beat and rape her. I was just happy Katie was able to learn that making love could be a beautiful act instead of a degrading one. If you like Native American romance, this was a very good one full of historical detail and good romance. Show more
