I've got at least one hardcover collection by Tiptree (real name Alice Bradley) and I remember quite liking her stories. So now I've got this got stack of old SF/Fantasy paperbacks that a friend gave me, and there are at least 4 Tiptree short story collections, and this is the first I've selected. The opening story was a humorous alien encounter story with a twist. A rather enjoyable start, followed up with a very short, sharp story Beaver Tears which manages to be both sad and funny at the time. And then the third story Your Faces, O My Sisters! Your Faces Filled Of Light! comes in with a massive punch to gut. Holy shit, what a powerhouse of story dealing with mental illness and skewed perceptions of reality and a world destroyed by uncontrolled technology. The ending is just terribly tragic, but utterly perfect for delivering Tiptree's message. I have a vague memory of having read this specific story something like 15 years ago, and I'm glad to have come back to it again. Only 3 stories into this collection and I'm already impressed again by her creativity. I had for some reason a vague memory of Tiptree's work being frequently humorous, but that must have been a confusion with some other author's work. Her stories are almost unrelentingly sad and tragic, and not in a hammy way. She is peculiarly adept at taking SF motifs and evoking deeply complex emotions from the wild speculations. The penultimate story Out Of The Everywhere is a heartbreaking examination of on utterly alien child intelligence being stranded in a human baby and the transgressive relationship with the human father, with a host of characters many of whom had their own outsider aspects. The final story With Delicate Mad Hands starts as a feminist examination and critique of male-dominated space exploration and warps into a violent murder/revenge tale and then finally into a hopeless and desperate love story that bears no resemblance to anything remotely romantic. And death always death. These stories have left me reeling, and I'm glad that I have at least three more of Tiptree's anthologies sitting on my shelf, waiting to be read.
