Many of my GR friends will know I have developed a penchant for reading nonfiction books about a niche topic. Here goes another! It's pretty decent history of the two chocolate giants, Mars and Hershey, and an examination of the chocolate industry (from innovation, to marketing, to company culture, etc.). I saw a review that said this was the most engaging nonfic they'd ever read. That's definitely not true for me, but it was pretty interesting nonetheless. A quick note: this book was written in 1999, so it's probably dated in some of its information. That's all I really have to say about the book, so let's take a look at some interesting things contained herein. ---------------MARS--------------- >> The Mars Family. Repressed. Obsessive. Kind of sad. No joy in their work. Founded by Frank Mars, but expanded by Forrest Mars, Sr., who was a rotten human. All he cared about was expanding, expanding, expanding. Not because he wanted the money or because he loved the business. He just liked building an empire for the sake of building an empire. He shouted and swore at his employees, and was an abusive, belittling dad. I’m pretty sure his kids—Forrest, Jr., John, and Jackie (who now run the company)—have PTSD from him. The sons (who are CEOs; Jackie is just a VP because she’s a woman) aren’t much better. To quote an executive who quit because of them, “They are the seagull management team: they swoop down, shit, and fly away.” >> Frank Mars got into the candy business because, having contracted polio shortly after birth, he spent much of his childhood hanging out in his mother’s kitchen instead of playing outside. >> Ethel Mars, the widow of Frank Mars and heir to the company, had a Thoroughbred farm called Milky Way Farm and actually raised a Kentucky Derby winner, Gallahadion (1940). (I’m a horse racing fan and I did not know this). >> Mars, Inc. asked the CIA for intelligence on chocolate imports in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in 1981. And they got it. However, they also have their own dedicated intelligence unit that keeps an eye on political events that might affect Mars sales (like the Persian Gulf War). >> The Mars family is psychotically secretive. If Mars needs outside workers to fix something in a factory, they blindfold the workers and escort to the place in question; when they’re done, they do the same on the way out. Furthermore, John Mars has not been photographed since college, and often wears disguises to meetings with outsiders. -------------HERSHEY------------- >> Unlike the Mars family, Milton Hershey was fun-loving, generous, enjoyed traveling, and was very in love with his wife. Wasn’t interested in making money, but loved experimenting with candy to see what he could make. >> When Milton Hershey asked someone’s opinion about his dream of creating a utopia town with his fortune, they told him, “My opinion would be that your friends should go into court and have a guardian appointed for you.” >> Thanks to Milton Hershey’s trust, the company funds the wealthiest orphanage of the world (it has literally billions of dollars). ---------MARS & HERSHEY---------- >> Hershey is a publicly traded company. Mars is private and family-owned. This is directly reflected in company culture. >> Absentee fathers are kind of a theme in Candyland. Frank Mars’s wife divorced him when he couldn’t feed her or their child, Forrest, and Forrest did not meet his father until he was an adult (they entered into business together shortly after). Then Forrest moved to Britain and was so misery that his wife, tired of having no food or heat, left and took their first child (Forrest, Jr.) to her parents’ home in the US. On the other side, Milton Hershey’s father was absent during his childhood, too. Though his parents were Mennonites and therefore didn’t divorce, his mother hated his father’s pipe dream-chasing (she wanted him to settle down and farm, like a good Mennonite) and kicked him out. Tl;dr: Apparently, growing up without a dad makes you want to make candy. >> M&M stands for “Mars” and “Murrie.” R. Bruce Murrie and Forrest Mars (son of Frank Mars, the founder of Mars, and father of John, Forrest Jr., and Jackie, who run the business now) created the candy together in 1940. Murrie was, strangely enough, part of the Hershey company (and the son of Milton Hershey’s best friend, William Murrie, president of Hershey). The candy was originally a collaboration between the two rivals (at the time they were actually business partners; Mars bought chocolate coating from Hershey’s to make their products), but Mars edged the out of the deal and did the candy by themselves. >> Mars is very much a global company (who hasn’t heard a Brit rave about Mars bars?) with international appeal; the appeal of Hershey chocolate and its slightly sour taste is pure American (even our close neighbors, Canadians, reject it in favour of British brands like Cadbury and Mars). ----------CHOCOLATE---------- >> The British like their chocolate sweeter, while Americans like “the harsher, grittier flavor popularized by Hershey.” >> That unique taste that Hershey’s chocolate has is a result of how they cook the milk—it’s slightly soured. Known in the industry as “cheesy” chocolate, it’s a purely American love. >> Chocolate is one of nature’s most complex flavors; unlike vanilla, apple, lemon, or strawberry, it can’t be synthesized despite decades and decades of research attempting to do just that. >> chocolate contains a “dash of a cyanide-based chemical” >> In 1662, catholic church decided drinking chocolate didn’t count as breaking a fast, since it was a medicine good for curing everything. >> Chocolate contains anandamide, which is similar to THC; it helps arouse emotions and heighten bodily sensation. It’s probably responsible for people craving chocolate, or eating it when depressed. It also contains phenylethylamine, or PEA, which occurs naturally in the body when good things happen (like falling in love). >> It also keeps dementors at bay. :)
