2024 Review the setup… There’s a serial killer at large in Minneapolis who calls himself maddog. He preys on attractive women with dark hair, the “Chosen,” and after brutally murdering them, leaves a note with one of his “rules” for eluding capture. Lieutenant Lucas Davenport, a seasoned investigator with unorthodox methods, is brought in to work with the homicide cops after the latest assault to find maddog and bring him down. But then maddog sees Davenport as a worthy adversary, turning his murderous behavior into a game of wits. the heart of the story… It’s not unusual to get the killer’s point of view but it sort of is when his perspective opens the story and we’re given his identity. We learn quite a bit about him throughout the story, especially when he sets his sights on besting Lucas who, though a bit ethically challenged, has a brilliant mind and sees beyond the obvious during the investigation. His dogged determination to pursue obscure clues that prove to be highly relevant payoff substantially, causing maddog to make his own mistakes. However, Lucas’s love life is an absolute mess as commitment and monogamy are foreign concepts. the narration… This is my second time reading the story, the first on audio and it was an entirely different experience, for the better. Lucas is a complex character and the narrator “gets” him. He’s also a great storyteller. the bottom line… The first time I read this story, I was so put off by Lucas Davenport’s behavior with women it clouded my view of everything else about him. This time I was able to put that in better perspective, understanding that the women in his life were using him back. He’s a brilliant detective with lots of flaws and has a high appreciation for others who are authentic and talented in their own rights. I will definitely continue the series but only on audio. The procedurals were excellent, the storytelling highly engaging and the enigma that is Lucas Davenport is highly appealing. Go figure! 2013 Review There’s a serial killer at large who calls himself maddog. He preys on attractive women with dark hair and eyes and leaves a note attached, outlining his “rules” for eluding capture when killing someone. Lieutenant Lucas Davenport, a seasoned investigator with unorthodox methods, is asked to work with the homicide cops to find maddog and bring him down. Maddog is actually pleased as he sees Davenport as a worthy adversary. I enjoyed this case and having the killer’s perspective as the investigation proceeded. It was a bit unusual to have maddog’s identity, or at least his name, revealed early on in the story but that still didn't tell you much about him. What you learn comes from his point of view throughout the book. Lucas Davenport is an enigma and somewhat ethically challenged, though he gets the job done. His love life, however, leaves quite a bit to be desired. I like the storytelling style of Sanford, which is brisk and to the point. I plan to continue the series though, for me, the jury is still out on Davenport. Posted on Blue Mood Café
