The second volume of Fire on the Water , an anthology of black Nova Scotian writing, brings together various works of prose, plays, and poetry by the following authors: Frederick Ward , Alfreda Smith , Walter Borden , Gloria Wesley-Desmond, Maxine Tynes , Sylvia Hamilton , Peter A. Bliss Bailey, Faith Nolan , David Woods , and George Elliott Clarke ... I made a Song with your Name Sort of Whined it and Cried it I made a Song with your Name - and when I Sighed it, I Put it, I Put a spell be- Side it what made a Song. I made a Song with you Name. I wore your Dress and apron in your Step I made a Song with your Name - and when I Tried it, I Bowed and hid my eyes to Hide it what made a Song. I made a Song with your Name. Tried to de- Fine it I Pined it I made a Song with your Name - it bore your Wrist lace and knitted Charm tied about your Face what made a Song. - Around 12 Bars in 3/4 Time , Frederick Ward , pg. 15-16 * * * When I plant a little seed, I know that God is there. I know that He will help me feed And water it so dear. I pray that He will send the rain, To moisten and help it grow. And when I go to check it out, I'll be glad to see it glow. - My Seed Will Grow , Alfreda Smith , pg. 28 * * * You must know that you are part of your creator, And hold within you power to create. Don't be afraid to fall At attempting mankind's scale, Perhaps you're not a singer - You are a song! You are a note of ringing spleandour In the universal anthem, Know your sound - Know your sound - You have a life of many pages To expand the book of ages, Take a pen, take some ink, And set it down. Be a sentence, not a word. Be of self, and not of herd, It is your right, You have the choice To be your spokesman, With your voice. Now step outside your cage And touch tomorrow. - Walk On , Walter Borden , pg. 40 * * * Children of darkness, Torn and battered, You have slipped the savage Bonds of slavery. Children of darkness, Full of courage, Strength and endurance, You have survived. Children of darkness, Facilitating equality, Rise up and take The reins of your destiny! - To Nova Scotia Blacks , Gloria Wesley-Desmond, pg. 68 * * * We are Africville and Preston, North and East We are Portia White singing to a long-ago king We are Edith Clayton weaving the basketsong of life Black and old with history and strong with the new imperative. We are Graham Jarvis bleeding on the road in Weymouth Falls. We are the Black and the invisible We are here and not here We are gone but never leave We have voice and heart and wisdom We are here We are here We are here. - Black Song Nova Scotia , Maxine Tynes , pg. 74 * * * Cocoa brown cattails standing erect asleep in fields of powder white snow waiting to be awakened by Spring. Birds pass quickly: no messages. - Untitled , Sylvia Hamilton , pg. 93 * * * I wrote one thousand words and thought ten thousand thoughts I have traveled mountains, valleys and rivers for years To find one single answer What a fool to write so much and think so long What a fool to fail for beauty Never quite knowing the answer never quite knowing the truth what a fool to wait for the final disappointment. - The Twilight Hour , Peter A. Bliss Bailey, pg. 111 * * * A blues expression of sensuality. Well, if the world's alright, I must be wrong, Cause I could jellyroll all day long. Mama told me my jelly wasn't right, but it fells so good, makes my life. Jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n... Upside down or rightside up any which way till I get enough. If it feels good, do it night and day, Helps you be happy, laughing all the way. Morning, evening, afternoon delight, Sweet tasting jellyroll makes my life. Jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n'jellyroll'n... - Jellyroll , Faith Nolan , pg. 124 * * * My father read the Bible Each night before he went to bed, Then he would down a shot of whisky That kicked like a donkey through his head. And to this day No word of a lie, No one's sure if it's the religion or the whisky, Keeping that old man alive. - My Father , David Woods , pg. 141 * * * seeking after hard things - muscular work or sweat-swagger action - i rip wispy, Help Wanted ads, dream of water-coloured sailors pulling apart insect wings of maps, stagger down saxophone blues avenues where blackbirds cry for crumbs. i yearn to be ulyssean, to roam foaming oceans or wrest a wage from tough, mad adventure. for now, i labour language, earn a cigarette for a poem, a coffee for a straight answer, and stumble, punch-drunk, down these drawn and quartered streets, tense hands manacled to empty pockets. - salvation army blues , George Elliott Clarke , pg. 150 Show more
