I was really looking forward to this book. I even found myself somewhat rushing through the previous 2 books just so I could start on this one. I already liked the hero (a lot,) much of the background for the story and pretty much all of the characters had already been introduced and developed in the the other 3 books, and the premises of the story was very intriguing to me. And you know, the beguining of the book did not disappoint. The h showed herself to be just as cunning, capable, haughty and every bit as interesting as the H. I loved their encounters and the almost duel like way that they dealt with their attraction towards each other with both of them using it for their own advantage. The chemistry was certainly there. So what went wrong? Well, his family and their meddling did. I'm all for the "let's all band together and teach him a lesson" plot device, and in fact was quite looking forward to Lucien having the tables turned on him. However the reason behind his family's actions and the thoughtless way they executed it, made me dislike the whole lot of them. Completly. As machiavellian and despicable as a lot of Lucien's actions wereboth in this and previous books, at the very least they were done out of love and concern for his siblings, and Lucien was always readily on hand to try to remedy the situation in case things went wrong. Not so in this case. His family's manipulations were done out of anger and revenge. They set things in motion and then just sat back. Not only that, but they prioritised their revenge over trying to help their little sister. To me they came across as whinging, selfish, self-righteous prats. They also showed no remorse or even a little bit of contriteness that their manipulations lead to the physical injury of Lucian, his wife's near death and the loss of Lucian's baby. Instead we end up with a book where the H takes the blame for everything and the supposedly good and kind sibling comes out with: "Lucien." Charles smiled, his heart full of what he'd just witnessed. He looked at his two siblings. "He has finally, I think . . . received his true comeuppance.” by this time I disliked his siblings so much that I was tempted to go back and remove a star from the ratings on each of the previous books. His family is what dropped my rating from what was looking to be a guaranteed 5 star book to 4. What made this a 3 star book, was how the h suddenly changed from such a cool headed, poised, intelligent and capable person to an irrational, clueless and unbalanced shrew. She turned up in England with the purpose of exacting revenge on Lucien, but didn't even seem to have any idea on what that revenge was, was supposedly a wealthy and highly independent spy, but found the need to depend on the hospitality and generosity of Lucian's brother, confided with people she did not know and who did not like her and then promptly let herself be easily manipulated by everyone. At the end of the day however it's still a pretty good book. Lucien is just the kind of hero I adore. Dangerous, intelligent and in control. He learned from his mistakes changed and grew into a better person, yet still retained all the characteristics that made him the alpha hero I love. Eva was self-confident, independent, very adept and for the most part unflappable and intelligent. She was the perfect match for Lucien and their interactions were filled with sexual tension and tussles for control. The story was filled with action, the sex scenes were pretty hot and the ending was suitably satisfactory.
