David Brin is one of those hard Science Fiction writers who know the art of writing stories. He has characters that are flesh and blood; he gives good details of the scene before us without causing anemia in the telling. One irritation of many books, especially many found in the New York Times Best Seller List, is that the story and characters are so skeleton, if you were to blow on the page, perhaps the words themselves would float away in the wind for what little story and art there is between the cover of the novel. But, David Brin does better on this account than many on those lists. Another thing he does well is tell the cautionary tale, a "prophetic" style of storytelling in Science Fiction that found its hight of popularity with the Cold War, and various writers visions of a world after WWIII and nuclear confrontation. After Glasnost ,Perestroika, the talks between Gorbachev and Reagan, this type of fiction began to wane, as we all breathed a sigh of relief. But new confrontations are before us, and a new series of the cautionary tale are needed in fiction to raise the conscience and awareness. Brin does this in 'Earth'. The huge strength of the novel lies not in the hard science, but in a population's reaction to and debating of, the changing of the Earth's environment. It will be people and policies that will change the course of the threat of killing the planet. But in a world with so many cultures and so many opinions and ideas, this will be a challenge. This Brin does especially well. His use of fonts is particularly interesting, as he creates tone, separate personalities, and tension in the use of various fonts and sizes. Adding to that a cyber community, which is much more advanced than ours, yet no more matured. There are a few things that detract from the novel. First, the central conflict is not the climate or the environment, but a black hole tucked deep inside the Earth. Add to that all the possible outcomes of a world "raped" (as Brin calls it in his book many times), and you have a jumble of ideas that challenges credulity for the reader, for which he admits to in his afterword. Also, while there is even a well liked and admired spiritual physicist in the novel, much of the portrayal of the religious community is relegated to the reader as simple-minded individuals and groups, even when at times they are thrown a carrot of admiration of sorts. Examples of this can be found on pages 451-52, where Mahayana Buddhism is relegated to a sound bite, and one that is superficial at best. There is also the “doomsday prediction” of an internet user (presumably Christian) on page 533. The Lord’s Prayer’ is given a Gain/New Age twist, and even there it is relegated with a sort of Agnostic twist “…Our Mother, who art beneath us, whatever thy name” (Earth, 535), where “whatever reads almost like an inside joke. There is at one point, an argument online of some rouge Catholic nuns whose argument sounds like the “angels sitting on the head of a pin” argument of the Middle Ages, as if though this type of thinking Catholics or other Christians are the only types of intellectualism they are capable of (at the time of this review, the reviewer apologizes that the citation cannot be found. Any assistance in finding the proper pages for this citation will be greatly appreciated). In fact, like any community, religious or secular, there are degrees to the talents and abilities of various thinkers in their respective fields. It is ridiculous to suppose that the only intellectuals are scientists. But in a sense, that is what one takes away after reading ‘Earth’. Some will admire the fact that Brin is acting the futurist here, by predicting certain trends, and most importantly the importance and increasing use of the internet as a means of gaining information, news, and a place to debate, though the realized world of the internet and Brin’s vision are somewhat different. There are, incidently, websites which lists the predictive achievements of ‘Earth’. These are fine and kudos to Brin for such insight. This reviewer confesses not to be conversant in science, and while reading hard science fiction is a pleasure, what is looked for in any book read are good narrative techniques, good characterizations, plot, and descriptions. In this sense, Mr. Brin has done a fairly thorough job at creating a novel of this magnitude, despite the over excesses and the anti-spiritual/religious bias he exhibits.
