the exciting conclusion of mary anne & the great romance ! the book opens with all the babysitters, plus logan, hanging out at mary anne's half-packed house, discussing the wedding. eventually everyone leaves, until dawn & mary anne remain alone to spend the night for the last time at mary anne's place. the next morning is moving day. mary anne cries over every person that stops by with a casserole or a platter of brownies, she cries over every stick of furniture as it is shifted into the moving vans, she is a human hosepipe, as it were. this starts to grate on dawn's nerves. has she never met mary anne before? at the farmhouse, tigger is confused & wanders the halls crying for six hours. dawn makes a fuss about how much tigger's meowing annoys her mother, but...i have a cat & it's not annoying when she meows. if i'm two rooms away, i can't even here her. get over it, sharon. mary anne also annoys the movers by jumping around, telling them not to step on tigger. that would be really frustrating. dawn & mary anne's room is really crowded. even though they tried to make space, there's just not enough room for all of mary anne's stuff. her dresser is in the guest room. "whoever heard of sleeping in a different room from your stuff?" mary anne asks. uh...me. at my last place in boston, we had a couch, some shelving, & a bed in the bedroom. our clothes were all in what we called "the dressing room" down the hall. it was kind of awesome. anyway. things are just not working out for the schafer-spier gang. every morning, richard serves sharon bacon, even though she doesn't like it. when they have a cleaning day, mary anne follows sharon around with a dustbuster because she thinks sharon isn't cleaning properly. mary anne & richard refuse to even try any of the schafers' health food meals. at one point, mary anne looks in the fridge & screams at some sprouts. she thinks something is growing in the fridge. dawn laughs at her, but i would have been pissed. these girls really do not have any respect for other people's diets & i find it really intolerant. i am not vegan, & find most vegans obnoxious, but i'm not going to categorically state that the food they eat is gross. jeff takes dawn aside before he goes back to california & tells her that he thinks the new family is going to have "trouble" & that he won't be coming back to visit any time soon. dawn & mary anne continue to fight. they argue over who will take a job with the perkins family, culminating in mary anne hilariously suggesting that dawn is fat. this scene also contains possibly the most famous BSC continuity error ever, when dawn narrates that she wants the job in order to buy mary anne a "now we're sisters present," since mary anne got on for her in the last book. even though it was actually dawn that got mary anne the "now we're sisters present" in the last book. fail! mary anne & dawn fight over having music on when they're studying in their room. dawn gets mad because mary anne says a bunch of patronizing shit about dawn not having a boyfriend. dawn notices that richard tends to side with her & sharon tends to side with mary anne--their parents are trying to win the new stepkid's favor. finally dawn talks things out with kristy, & kristy is really helpful. dawn realizes that she needs mary anne to have her own room...but she doesn't want to admit that sharing a room was a bad idea. so she conferences with jeff & ends up concocting a scheme using the secret passage to scare mary anne out of wanting to share dawn's room. it goes perfectly & mary anne moves out that night. problem solved. the whole family also has a talk about some of their differences. sharon suggests that they all make their own dinners since they can't compromise, dawn asks everyone to stop cleaning up after sharon, etc. everyone agrees. though i can't really imagine being in this family. the constant sense that i was disappointing or smothering someone would be too stressful for me. also in this book, dawn states that all four of mary anne's grandparents are dead & mary anne & richard are alone in the world. even though later in the series, mary anne goes to iowa to stay with her mother's parents for a while. love the continuity errors!
