I know Bob Slocum. I hate Bob Slocum. I am far too often too much like Bob Slocum. What do you make of 550+ pages of internal narration, with no discernible plot, no character growth, no catharsis after reading the darkest, most selfish, most petulant and childish and sad and real meanderings of a middle American mind? You get Heller's Something Happened , and you get one man's view of what has happened to the American dream. I find it hard to write about this book without knowing when and how it came about. I try to divorce my art from my artist; I hope (usually in vain) to separate the work from all the ephemeral bullshit behind the book, the breakup that spawned the album, the life-story that crafted the novel, etc. I like the work to stand on its own. But in Heller's case, it's impossible to not look at his book as his follow-up to Catch-22 . And if Catch-22 is his scathing rebuke of war, then this is his comment on his own generation. (I'd by lying if I didn't find Kurt Vonnegut's review of this novel very insightful.) And Heller's Bob Slocum returned from World War II and gave in to the illusion of picket-fence happiness, of safety through the suburbs, of wealth as a worthy end. This has left Slocum in more than just a middle-age malaise; it has crippled his life, wasted his energies, reduced him to shattered nerves and pointless worrying; in short, he has achieved all the material gains promised in the American dream, and yet he is hollow, miserable, and always wanting more. The novel is not specific, but it certainly spans at least a decade in Slocum's mind, with constant flashbacks to his youth. Ah, and that youth, that pre-war awkwardness where skinny little Bobby Slocum is still tasting life for the first time, where women and handwriting and possibility lay enticingly in front of him. We don't hear much about his time at war, other than his hearty appetite for prostitutes, but upon his return, he finds himself working for a company (whose business is hilariously and purposefully vague), and from when the novel begins to its ending, we realize too late that something has happened; that Slocum's attempts at material happiness have been mere distractions, and slowly, as he looks back constantly at his withering past, does he see the life he could have, should have, led. A central metaphor involves the files of deceased people Slocum archived during his first job with an insurance company. So many lives, reduced to scraps of paper, filed away in a dank basement, forgotten forever. Slocum's youthfulness fears this anonymous oblivion, and yet that is exactly what he achieves. Instead of living the life he wanted, instead of sleeping with Virginia and being his own person, he has opted for bigger houses in Connecticut, three-minute speeches, meaningless affairs with a huge cast of faceless nothings, higher salaries, and an endless striving for some kind of solace. Put that solace never comes. Everything Slocum has built is hollow, ashes to his touch, repugnant to him. The few things he can love - his wife, his daughter, his son - are so alien to him, so much a burden, that he rarely feels anything but rejection and spite. The job that has gnawed his mind and soul was ostensibly to provide for these people, and while he certainly does provide materially, he is absolutely absent in every other meaningful way. And he wonders why his daughter hates him and his son has stopped talking to him? Like everything in his life, Slocum tries to buy their love, to purchase their happiness, without risking anything real, be it material or personal. When at the end of the novel something truly horrible does happen, Slocum does what he has done his entire life: he pities himself, he smothers, he refuses to let go as he thinks only of him self ... and he pays the ultimate price. What did I learn from this novel? That the world is full of Bob Slocums, full of people who (Vonnegut notes) live lives that, "judged by the standards of the people who live them, are simply not worth living." If there is one thing I take from this novel, it is to embrace life. Dare to live. Do not settle. Do not follow the path of least resistance. Do not follow the highway to America's suburban destiny, do not let some unnameable thing happen that sees you working a job you hate to buy worthless things for a family you don't know. Do not become a Bob Slocum; make the story of your life one where something truly amazing happened.
