As controversial today as it was when it was published, whether you agree or disagree with Velikovsky's conclusions his work is still an enthralling read and he supports his conclusions with evidence which while not always compelling is present. If you're going to read Velikovsky go in with an open mind, he may not convince you of all, some or even any of his ideas but none the less he makes a good read. Which will at least make you think about the possibilities of what could be and that's what a good scientist should be open to not just what is known but questioning what could be. Personally I don't agree with everything he proposes across his collection of books however there are elements that should be given better consideration by the scientific community just because the ideas don't agree with mainstream science doesn't mean they're wrong. The first theory that proposed the idea of "Hot Jupiters" that large gas giant planets could exist closer to their sun than the orbit of earth was proposed several decades ago and was disregarded by mainstream science yet with the discovery of exo-planets in recent years this is exactly what we started finding. Opponents often state Velikovsky disregards other theories e.g. common myths occurring across cultures by diffusion of ideas. Yet the appropriate answer to this is 'of course he does' after all his central idea is that these myths have a common origin in an actual even remembered by cultures across the world is at odds with this theory. Given the distances and the belief of mainstream historians that many of the Earth's ancient civilisations didn't interact that the similarities exist because of an actual event remembered by cultures across the world shouldn't be such an unusual possibility that invokes such hostile response. It may be wrong but surely it isn't that surprising of an idea? While Velikovsky has ideas about what actually drives planetary systems that may be incorrect many of his conclusions are not at odds with Newtonian physics, they may be incorrect but they are not impossible. Has Velikovsky disregarded evidence that contradicts his ideas, possibly but he'd hardly be alone in doing so over the history of science. Over the years many scientific ideas have been proposed, considered, some proven, some disproved. Quantum mechanics now an established science was at it's inception considered nonsense by some contemporary scientists, it's the cause of one of Einstein's most famous quotes "God does not play dice with the universe" and he never accepted that the fundamental ideas of Quantum Mechanics were correct. Yet these ideas were debated considered and eventually accepted by science. We still haven't managed to reconcile them with Newtonian or Relativistic Physics to the satisfaction of science but we do accept them all as true and still look for the link or the next bit of knowledge that Correct or Incorrect Velikovsky's ideas should have been treated similarly with rational reasonable debate yet saw once of the most unscientific reactions of the modern era, this alone almost makes reading them worth it just to see what the uproar was about.
