How do you prefer your literary sex scenes? 19th century: all suggestion - words and phrases like "prolonged gaze, unchaperoned, hidden copse, straightening clothing, flushed countenance, besmirched reputation"? Romance novel: focused on thoughts, heavy breathing, items of clothing coming off, sensations, fireworks images? Post-modern: detailed, unhurried, slang anatomic terms, dirty talk, position changes, lively post-coital banter? John Updike's sex scenes are different still - his are hyper-anatomic, with descriptions of minute physical details that can become repulsive. TMI!, we might say. I'm not sure why he likes doing that, but it's been a characteristic of his writing for 50 years. I'm hardly a prude, but the sex in his novels comes across differently than it did when he was a younger man and when his protagonists tended to be younger, too. I know it's the way of men, even old men, but when the narrator ogles nurses, office assistants and even his daughter-in-law, and has sexual encounters with a young teenage girl in the woods, it is uncomfortable. Does he want it to be? Updike wrote "Toward the End of Time" in 1997, when he was 65. Its protagonist and narrator, Ben is 66. He is a remarried and retired financial consultant living on Cape Ann, Massachusetts in the year 2020 - coincidence that I picked the book up to read now. Less than ten years earlier, there was a global nuclear war, primarily involving the U. S. and China, and large areas of our country are desolate wastes. There is no federal government. (I hear cheering somewhere - stop that!). Strangely, Ben does not talk or think explicitly about the war, we just pick up bits and pieces of the puzzle as we go along. The economy has collapsed. The area of the Great Plains is a "radioactive dustbowl". The ocean's fish populations are in trouble. Mexico has reclaimed the Southwest, and Americans are going into Mexico, which is considering building a wall! Primarily, the story is a journal of Ben's year, from Spring through Fall. I've noticed that the changing seasons hold a continuing fascination for Updike. A number of odd things are happening, related to the literal disintegration of society after the war. Also, the structure of the novel is likewise discombobulated by sudden interpositions of history into the narrative. These include tomb robbers in ancient Egypt, the first century travels of the apostle Paul in Asia Minor, Ireland being invaded by Vikings during the Dark Ages, and a World War II concentration camp in Poland. They float among the stream of events, out of place in time and location - perhaps that is Updike's way of representing the tears in the fabric of Ben's life that are occurring. I found these outtakes poetic, but difficult to assimilate, and unwelcome distractions from the story. In addition, Ben's wife Gloria is suddenly gone from the house, for about a month, and he doesn't know or particularly care where she is. Huh? Overall though, I am always blessed to listen to Updike's mind work. His writing is always special. One can't help being thoroughly impressed with his intelligence and curiosity about how the world works - there's hardly a science he doesn't touch on. In "Toward the End of Time" he spends a fair amount of energy discussing both subatomic- and astrophysics, and the nature of time itself, especially that time isn't necessarily linear in the way we think it must be - this is not your average beach read. And, as usual, his main character shares his thoughts on faith and God with us. Mixed in with teasing about our silly beliefs there is a sense of awe there, too. Of course Updike is most interested in how people think and act - that's what gives his books their weight. I liked the Miami Herald's comment on the back cover: "A book aimed not to resolve but to arouse a reader's wonder. Vintage Updike: marital angst worked out against the chilly backdrop of privilege, rendered with a lyricism and insight and eye for detail reminiscent of the work of Jane Austen." The book contains plenty of references to the themes and settings of his earlier books, and although he continued to write after this novel, it felt at times as if Updike intended it as a sort of magnum opus. In the small scale of sentences and paragraphs his writing here is as good as ever. But when taken as a whole, the novel, with its odd diversions, seems less like a unified whole, and more like a jar of pretty marbles. In the final section of the book, Ben is dealing with a health scare and understandably becomes preoccupied with death. But then in the final pages, regardless of his unknown prognosis, his attentions return to all of the glorious life around him - a most optimistic Updike ending.
