"It was real 'heart of darkness' music in the classic Kurtzian sense and a lot further down the river of no return, sonically speaking, than their debut." This is the kind of writing by Nick Kent, talking here about the Stooges' second album Fun House, that makes me enjoy this collection more than the previous collection of rock oriented essays I read by Lester Bangs. As much as he is music man, Kent is also a literary man, with writing that surpasses self-obsession that I felt tripped up Bangs work. But, of course, they are totally different writers. Bangs wrote of his thoughts on music, Kent interviews musicians. Much like Bangs collection, I jumped around here from artist to artist as they interested me. His subjects are wide ranging and include Syd Barrett, the New York Dolls, Lou Reed, Elvis Costello, the Smiths, Iggy Pop, Kurt Cobain and Prince. The essays were thoroughly conducted and entertaining, spanning the decades from 1974 to 1999. More often than not, this collection amalgamates various Kent interviews from various periods, so we get to hear Iggy Pop in his own words (for better or worse) both from his drug induced stupor of the 70s (which eventually sent him to a mental institution) to his relatively clean and sober period in the 90s. What keeps me from liking this collection as much as I would otherwise though is Kent's attitude toward his subjects. He is less than sympathetic toward rock n rollers proclivity to alcoholism, drug abuse, suicide and other forms of tragic deaths, particularly in his brief article about Cobain. Kent also suffers from what I feel many music writers suffer from. They don't want to write about musicians, they want to be musicians and as such there are many flippant passages of Kent expressing his unwavering coolness, or the lack of coolness of those he is interviewing. It is interesting to hear the artists in their own words, and we have Kent to thank for asking the questions, but is is however less interesting to hear what he has to say about it. If you're a fan of any of the artists mentioned, it is worth a shot.
