4 – 4.5 stars I am still something of a newcomer to the Icelandic Sagas, having only read a handful so far, but I would be surprised if Egil’s Saga was not the best of them. It’s certainly my favourite thus far, eclipsing even the fantastic Njal's Saga . This saga makes central to its story what was perhaps the primary catalyst in the formation of Icelandic culture: the tensions between Iceland and Norway which led to the creation of the younger nation. These tensions were ultimately embodied in one man: Harald Fairhair, who rose to supreme power over a united Norway in the ninth century. Those who fought against his rise to power, or who found themselves unwilling to bend the knee and live under the authority of a single despot, and who managed to avoid being killed for their troubles, found themselves driven from their homes. Many of these refugees ended up being the founding families of the newly settled Iceland. Amongst these families was the one headed by Skallagrim Kveldulfsson, the father of our titular hero Egil. As with most sagas this one begins a generation or two prior to the main action and we are introduced to the powerful landowner Kveldulf and his two sons Thorolf and Grim (soon to become ‘Skallagrim’ or ‘Bald Grim’ due to early becoming follicly challenged). Kveldulf and Grim both want nothing to do with the rising power of Harald Fairhair and do their best to retain their independence in Norway while neither taking sides for or against the newly minted king. Thorolf, on the other hand, sees an opportunity for fortune and glory and becomes a stalwart partisan of the new king. Thorolf proves to be an effective vassal, perhaps a bit too effective, as he gains his own following and becomes very rich…rich enough to make a king jealous and be willing to bend an ear to those who would speak ill of Thorolf. In the end ill-will prevails and Thorolf finds himself on the wrong end of a sword from Harald, earning Thorolf his death and Harald the undying enmity of Kveldulf and Skallagrim. Skipping ahead somewhat Skallagrim becomes one of the founding fathers of Iceland, owning huge tracts of land which he partially parcels out to his bondsmen and family. Skallagrim has two sons, Egil and Thorolf, who both maintain a tenuous hold on some properties in Norway when they are not raiding the north as vikings. Thorolf, apparently not having learned from his namesake uncle, attaches himself to Harald’s son (and the new King of Norway) Eric Bloodaxe. Egil instead allies himself to the English King Athelstane. Many adventures ensue in which we see Egil’s misanthropic character display itself. He is definitely not a typical heroic figure: dour, avaricious, and prone to bouts of temper, he is also a pre-eminent skaldic poet and brave warrior. In the end his brother Thorolf dies in battle and Egil manages to become a favourite of King Athelstane at the same time that he earns the undying enmity of King Eric (and his perhaps even more dangerous queen Gunnhild). The saga follows the adventures of Egil as he traverses the North: whether fighting for his family rights in Norway and walking a knife’s edge with the various Kings there; harrying the islands and coastal regions and carrying off “great fee” in treasure; fighting in England for the king (or trying to avoid the newly placed under-king Eric Bloodaxe of Northumbria, formerly King of Norway); or seeing to his rights and family holdings in Iceland. As readers we are granted a front row seat to pivotal events in the foundation of Iceland, as well as the development of the Kingdoms of both Norway and England. We also get to witness the life of perhaps one of the most interesting figures in the sagas (a literature chock-full of intriguing personalities, many of whom we come across in cameos in this saga) in the form of Egil Skallagrimsson. As noted above he is hardly a typical hero, though this is of course what makes him so interesting. Egil is definitely a hard man whom you would not want to meet on the wrong side of a battle (or a lawsuit) who is usually looking out for his own best interests, though we do see the glimmers of loyalty and more personable human feeling in his devotion to his lifelong friend Arinbiorn, his heart-felt lament for the sons whom he loses early, and his fierce loyalty towards his family. In the end the picture of Egil’s life is fascinating and we see him grow from a precocious (though somewhat ill-starred) boy, through being a fierce and high-handed man, to his ultimate decline and old age, lamenting the lost years and loved ones of the past. My translation of Egil’s Saga was the one done in the 1930’s by E. R. Eddison, a man perhaps better known (though even then fairly obscurely) as the author of the fantasy works The Worm Ouroboros and the ‘Zimiamvian’ series . These works are perhaps most famous for their archaic diction, complex philosophical foundations, and ultimately ‘difficult’ nature. I for one am a big fan of them and knew through them that Eddison had a great love for the myths and stories of the North. What I didn’t know until picking up this volume was how extensive his learning was in this area. Far from being simply a dilettante or dabbling aficionado, Eddison appears to have been very learned in the field. His translation was very enjoyable and while it does contain its fair share of archaisms it is nowhere near as ‘flowery’ in its diction as his fantasy works and in his essay on his principles of translation he goes a long way in defending this choice. Eddison also provides copious notes throughout the text (in addition to mini-essays devoted to specific topics of interest to readers of the sagas such as berserkers, shape-changing, and skaldic poetry) that display his deep love for, and learning in, the culture and geography of Iceland as well as its myths, sagas, and poetry. In this latter area Eddison goes so far as to translate the skaldic verse attributed to Egil which copiously peppers the text into English verse (as opposed to giving a more prosaic direct tranlsation), an endeavour fraught with peril. Luckily, given the complex and even opaque nature of skaldic verse, he provides copious notes on the original text and the meanings of the various kennings that make up the poems and while any poetic translation is generally dubious at best, it at least gives an outsider something of a view into the rarefied world of skaldic verse. I’ll be curious on my next reading of the saga to try a more modern translation to see how it differs, but I was certainly happy with my choice in Eddison as my first guide through this saga. Perhaps I should tackle Eddison’s re-imagining of a saga in his novel Styrbiorn The Strong soon. I certainly have confidence that he will have done his material justice based on this text.
