I've found it a good discipline to read biographies of American First Ladies alongside the ones of U.S. Presidents, since the latter genre (unfortunately, at least to this point in history) consists solely of men (and almost entirely white men at that). It's good to also take in some of the experiences of women. This biography, written by the Truman's lone child, Margaret, brings a more family-oriented perspective. She draws mostly from letters and other correspondence between the first couple, along with correspondence from other significant people in their history. So it's good primary material that she's dealing with. She also draws a lot from her own experience, all of which makes for a distinctive flavor in contrast with the more conventional biographies. You hear about the house at 219 North Delaware Street (in Independence, Missouri) a lot more than you would in, say, the detailed biography of Harry S. Truman by McCullough. (See my previous review of that one.) This book is presented as a biography of Mrs. Truman. (It should be noted that Margaret also wrote a separate biography of Harry Truman which she mentions a few times. I have not read it; it would be interesting to read for comparison.) But to a great degree this is a biographical take of the whole family experience, in politics and otherwise. I suppose that's just the nature of the topic when you have spouses that are as close as these two were. It does give a good and unique glimpse into the personal side of Bess's experiences - particularly in going over (and sometimes returning to) the aftermath of her father's suicide when she 18. It also covers the details of Harry and Bess's drawn-out courtship, her preferred lifestyle as a U.S. Senator's wife, and her dread of inheriting her place in the "great white jail" (to use Harry Truman's words for the White House). One nice part of this is the author's commentary on her mother's facial expressions in the inserted pictures. It makes for some revealing details. Of particular interest is her mother's involvement in conversations about national and international issues, the boundaries on what she could and couldn't do, her contrasting approach of being First Lady from that of Eleanor Roosevelt, her frustrations when she felt left out of conversations and/or cut off from her husband - and all this overlapping with Harry Truman's emotional attachment and his frustration when things became tense between them. Some of the content of their post-presidency life was interesting as well - including their general dislike of the Carters, their favorable attitudes toward the Fords, and their contrasting experiences with the Nixons. Some of it seems petty in hindsight, though it was no doubt genuine at the time. Perhaps the reason it troubled me was because I was reading about it right at the time when Jimmy Carter passed. Some of the episodes are not as well-detailed, particularly with the years after Harry passed away (from 1973 on.) But overall, it's a very good book to compliment to McCullough's popular biography. It definitely gives you a deeper sense of things because it's a well-done family record.
