'Albion' is a tricky text. It purports to be an account of something called the 'English imagination' (mostly literary but also nodding to the artistic, theatrical and musical) but it is equally a partial mythologisation of its subject matter. Is this really what it is (or was) to be English? It is certainly plausible but plausibility is not something to be confused with the truth. The book, however, still represents a truth of the matter if not necessarily being the full truth of the matter. Once this accepted, then the book can be enjoyed as highly intelligent, suggestive and indeed creative. What is striking is that this English imagination is positioned well within an Anglo-Saxon origin story and a Catholic medieval past which are seen as providing very strong continuities, at least compared to literary histories that have privileged the half a millennium from Shakespeare onwards. The book devotes nearly half its length to the world before Shakespeare and then peters out somewhere around the mid-Victorian era. This is the Matter of Literary England presented in a new way as something that it is not hard to see as having been lost even by 2002 (date of publication). Not that Ackroyd says any such thing. He not making any judgements here that are 'contemporary' or polemical. He just embeds himself in the mythos and gives us well over 50 finely tuned essays on different facets of the English imagination that he weaves around a framework of shared ideas. Summarising that framework here would be pedestrian and not very helpful. The journey through the book has to be made in good faith by the reader. The investigation of Ackroyd's judgements has to be an impressionistic one where, by the end, you feel that you think you understand. Still, the individual essay-chapters can be fascinating in themselves. The anger of the classic female novelists, the continuity of gardening in English culture, forgery as at the base of English romanticism, English literature as a literature of appropriation and borrowing from outside ... Each chapter represents an interpretative truth of the matter but is one persuaded by the whole? Less so perhaps. The late chapter in praise of the fraudulent Macpherson (not English at all) and Chatterton gives us a clue. This is a book of fact where facts build up to a useful and noble fiction. With that caution, the book remains a strong recommendation precisely because the specific interpretations constantly open the mind to new possibilities and angles about a distinctive tradition, exposing a past far deeper than the usual Chaucer, Milton, Shakespeare origin story. There is no chapter that is not useful, educational and/or thought-provoking. The thought is left that, twenty years later, this mythos is already looking as if it is entirely located in the past and no longer represents the present, that this book is (without that being the intention) a cultural swan song. This review is written after a week in which an African-origin leader of the 'conservative' party announced 'reforms' that her party briefings (though not her directly) suggested would end support for degrees in certain subjects with the performing arts and English high on the list. Not that English studies in the age of intersectional and anti-colonial studies has had very much to do with the approach to the English imagination evidenced in this book. She may be right. Maybe the pass on cultural Englishness was sold a long time ago in a 'trahison des clercs'. So be it! Perhaps the English imagination always was a bit of a forgery as Celtic and all other nationalisms are ultimately forgeries. Perhaps it always was the imagination of cosmopolitan appropriative elites trickling down the products of their leisure time to the great unwashed for a livelihood. Perhaps this educated Englishness - a shared literary culture - only exists now in past texts and that this particular text is merely preservative of what it once was to be English and educated. Perhaps a future civilisation will study English as the English once studied the Classics - as the honoured dead.
