Bill starts by saying this is his last abstract and he ends the book by explaining why. I have only read the last three but it is easy to see that it was a monumental effort to put this much thought into the subject every year. What made the series so enjoyable is that you get interesting analysis on almost every page and it helps you analyze conventional wisdom not just in baseball but elsewhere in life. These books make you ask questions that might not make you popular but will be satisfying to yourself and those who want to get at hidden truths. The 1988 essays include the Bill James gem, game scores, which gives a numerical value to starting pitchers for their performances. Using a pretty easy formula you can rate any pitcher from his box score line. It's something that baseball reference cites in their box scores of historical games. A big essay near the beginning addresses the change in strike zone in reaction to the offensive output of 1987. Bill James gives us the history of the 1960s when baseball changed the strike zone to start the 1963 season and the outcome leading up to the year of the pitcher in 1968. The section is a reminder that Bill James is a great explainer of data but not exceptional as a predictor of future outcomes. The history here is great, but his predictions are hit and miss. He's not sold on the Dodgers or the A's although they would wind up in the World Series against one another. There is an essay on how we think of Kirk Gibson as a great player but he has never won an MVP award or made the All Star Team. He would go on to win the MVP in 1988, which would really be the last good year. In the next 8 years he would play over 100 games just twice. Also, we were just beginning to enter the steroid era so although the new strike zone should have made it tougher for hitters more runs were actually scored in 1988. Bill predicted the opposite not knowing the reasons behind the offensive output. I'm about 30 years behind in reading these, but the series is just as worthwhile now as they were then, especially since you already know how the careers of these players turned out. You forget how much promise Don Mattingly, Darryl Strawberry, Phil Bradley, and Eric Davis had coming into the 1988. Mattingly tops the list of players who have the best chance at 3,000 hits. Rickey Henderson, who would reach 3,000, is given a 7% chance. He writes about the mistakes of the Braves and even mentions the Doyle Alexander trade but no mention of the then obscure John Smoltz who was acquired from that trade. He ends the book by predicting someone else will take up the mantle and continue to write the abstracts but it never really happened. These were the product of a particular mind who is also a great prose writer. He is clear, concise, and even funny. I'll buy any of the older ones if the prices drops below $10. Last I saw the 1983 book was $70 used. I wish James and the Publisher would get together and release them cheaply for the Kindle.
