Like most projects that end up lasting half a lifetime, this started out as idle play at the fringe of my work and preoccupations. I had read an interview with William S. Burroughs ( Paris Review, 1965 ) and, as a result, had played with the 'cut up' technique, making my own variant (the columnedge poem) from current copies of the New Statesman. It seemed a good idea to push these devices into more ambitious service. I made a rule; that the first (coherent) book I could find for threepence (i.e. 1¼p) would serve. Autin's the furniture repository stands on Peckham Rye, where Blake saw his first angels and along which Van Gogh had probably walked on his way to Lewisham. At this propitious place, on a routine Saturday morning shopping expedition, I found, for exactly threepence, a copy of A Human Document by W. H. Mallock, published in 1892 as a popular reprint of a successful three-decker. It was already in its seventh thousand at the time of copy I acquired and cost originally three and sixpence. I had never heard of W. H. Mallock and it was fortunate for me that his stock had depreciated at the rate of a halfpenny a year to reach the required level. I have since amassed an almost complete collection of his works and have found out much about him. He does not seem a very agreeable person: withdrawn and humourless (as photographs of him seem to confirm) he emerges from his work as a snob and a racist (there are some extremely distasteful anti-semitic passages in A Human Document itself). He has however been the subject of some praise from A. J. Ayer for his philosophical dialogue The New Republic, and A Human Document itself is flatteringly mentioned in a novel by Dorothy Richardson. However, for what were to become my purposes, his book is a feast. I have never come across its equal in later and more conscious searchings. Its vocabulary is rich and lush and its range of reference and allusion large. I have so far extracted from it over one thousand texts, and have yet to find a situation, statement, or thought which its words cannot be adapted to cover.[...] - "Notes on A Humument " by the author - pg. 6 - pg. 15 - pg. 18 - pg. 27 - pg. 28 - pg. 33 - pg. 36 - pg. 50 - pg. 55 - pg. 71 - pg. 79 - pg. 81 - pg. 142 - pg. 142 - pg. 159 - pg. 200 - pg. 206 - pg. 229 - pg. 305 - pg. 326 - pg. 335 - pg. 361 - pg. 367
