If ignorance is bliss, then we can blame Joe McGinniss for spreading cynicism across America. In 1969, the release of The Selling of the President both shocked and sobered the nation. The truth was out. American voters have been conned. The man sitting in the White House—entrusted with the fate of their country—was sold to Americans like a tube of toothpaste. Today, 40 years removed from the book’s original release and in midst of another public duel to the White House, Joe McGinnis’s book reaffirms what today’s voters already know—that politics is a con game. Yet time and again, we the voters allow ourselves to get swept up in the gimmick. We talk about how politicians are of a dishonest and deceptive breed; and yet somehow, sometimes, they can tug right at our heartstrings. Voters may have hardened since 1969, but we cannot help but be the sentimental and emotional creatures that we are. We know that the issues are important, but we are more easily moved by how the candidate makes us feel. This is why The Selling of the President continues to stand the test of time. In a captivating and accessible fashion, McGinnis gives an insider’s account of the 1968 Nixon campaign. McGinnis’s focus, however, is not on Nixon, but on what then appeared to be a new phenomenon: “the marketing of political candidates as if they were consumer products”. No one political party is less guilty than the other—both campaigns hired the biggest names in advertising to craft and disseminate a winning image of their candidate. The book happens to be about Nixon because McGinniss was able to gain access to his campaign, and not Humphrey’s. McGinniss tracks three of Nixon’s most influential campaign advisors: Henry Treleaven (the ad man with 20 years of experience at one of the nation’s biggest ad agencies), Roger Aisles (the PR guy who was a former executive producer of the Mike Douglas Show), and Frank Shakespeare (who came into the campaign after 8 years of working with CBS television). None of these guys were Washington-insiders. Treleaven and Aisles were political outsiders. But the three of them knew how to make things sell. It was this trio that magically—or rather, quite scientifically—took an uncharismatic, out-of-touch, stereotypical politician, and effectively sold him to an unsuspecting populace as their next President. Treleaven, Aisles and Shakespeare could only do so much about Nixon the man, but what they sought to craft and mold was Nixon, the image. As Nixon’s most prominent speech writer Richard K. Price explains, voters’ opinions are a product of “the particular chemistry between the voter and the image of the candidate…It’s not what’s there that counts, it’s what’s projected—and carrying it one step further, it’s not what he projects but rather what the voter receives.” Politics have changed little in this respect—it’s still about which campaign can sell the winning image. And in 1968, that was the Nixon campaign. They had it boiled down to a science. Just about every clip and glance that voters saw of Nixon during the campaign season was carefully constructed and regulated. The more natural and amiable he looked, the more work and craftsmanship that went into it. The Selling of the President opens with Nixon at a television studio recording and repeatedly re-recording the same commercial to a point of perfection. The process was long, controlled and detail-oriented. Everything was thought through and accounted for—the angle of Nixon’s head, the beads of sweat above his upper lip, the pauses between his sentences, the exact time it takes him to recite his script, the angle of the camera, the lighting and the kinds and colors of furniture on the set. Style, presentation and image was prioritized; substance and ‘the issues’ were left on the backburner. If readers find it difficult to differentiate politics from show business, it’s because it’s all the same thing. The 1968 presidential campaign crystallized the union between the politician and the adman. They have been inseparable ever since. Upon Nixon’s victory, Aisles accurately pronounced that “this is the way that they’ll be elected forever more”. Since the rise of television, the politician has become a performer, judged by how well he can handle himself; how good he looks; and whether he can make the audience laugh or feel warm inside. As McGinniss writes, “Style becomes the substance. The medium is the massage and the masseur gets the vote.” Television was Nixon’s saving grace, at least that’s how Shakespeare saw it. He credited Nixon’s victory to television because, at the time, it was the only tool that could get Americans to discard their old and more lucid view of Nixon as a grumpy, cold and aloof salesman from Wall Street; and transplant that with a renewed image: “Nixon, the leader, returning from exile. Perhaps not beloved, but respected. Firm but not harsh; just but compassionate. With flashes of warmth spaced evenly throughout.” Television gave Nixon want he needed to make a good sales pitch—distortion, control and shelter. In his second-run for presidency, Nixon was able to play television to his strengths and weaknesses. No better is this illustrated than in his campaign’s then-novel approach of using still photography in 60-second television spots. It was used as a mean to create and instill a winning image of Nixon to the American public without actually having to film Nixon himself. The message was to be conveyed through a series of carefully selected images played to a voiceover of Nixon. The words used in the ads were neither novel nor of substance—they were the same words taken time and again from Nixon’s acceptance speech. But that didn’t matter. The viewers weren’t expected to listen, and substance does not sell. According to McGiniss, the series of images played to the background music of Nixon’s voice were intended to “create the impression that somehow Nixon represented competence, respect for tradition, serenity, faith that the American people were better than people anywhere else, and that all these problems others shouted about meant nothing in a land with the tallest buildings, strongest armies, biggest factories, cutest children and rosiest sunsets in the world. Even better: through association with the pictures, Richard Nixon could become these very things”. Since then, photography stills have been used widely in campaign television ads. This election cycle is no different—we have watched and listened to countless ads of this type from both candidates, most likely without any consideration of its ingenuity. The value in revisiting McGinniss’s The Selling of the President, in part, lies in its ability to make readers reflect upon some modern practices of campaign advertising—where they come from; how the ads are made; and what message they are intended to convey. Politics is the same game today as it was in 1968. It’s always been about who can make a better sales pitch. But American voters have changed since the last four decades. They are less trusting in the political system, and more cynical and skeptical toward politicians. From experience, they have discovered that the man that they elect to the White House is not necessarily the man that gets delivered. Yet, the American voter today is no less susceptible to a seductive sales pitch. We may be less trusting and more cynical, but a part of us holds out for the possibility that we will be proven wrong—that maybe this time around, the promises and the heroic aura being projected are not mere fabrications but realities. Politicians are deceptive; but according to McGiniss, the voter is hardly an unwilling victim. The Selling of the President was written at a time when a substantial shift in how political campaigns were being conducted was taking place. Today, four decades later, we are witnessing another shift. Television continues to play a pivotal role. But with the introduction of technologies like TiVo, the rise of cable pundits, and the increasing popularity of political spoofs and satire, the “TV” that McGinniss’s refers to is no longer the same thing it is today. Television may have carried the Nixon campaign, but it wouldn’t be able to do so in the modern context. Today, there are a gazillion—well, a lot—more channels than there were forty years ago. Why would the average voter care to tune into a telethon staged by a political candidate, when Chris Matthews, Bill O’Reilly or Dancing with the Stars are all on at the same time? Today’s politician is not only competing with his opponent for attention but also with American Idol’s Simon Cowell. In addition, many new mediums of communication have opened, starting with the World Wide Web. It would be near impossible for a campaign today to exercise the same amount of control over a candidate’s image as the Nixon campaign did in 68’. When a camera phone recording of President Bush saying “Wall Street got drunk” got uploaded onto YouTube and disseminated to the masses, we are reminded of how much more difficult it is to control and contain a public figure’s image—but not necessarily impossible. Politics today is still the same game that Treleaven, Aisles and Shakespeare played forty years ago, except with a few rule changes. McGinniss’s The Selling of the President reminds us that the winning campaign is the one who can best play these changes to their candidate’s advantage.
