I first read this collection almost 40 years ago when it was first published. I hadn’t realised I still had it until I stumbled across it in my overstuffed bookshelves, and decided a re-read was in order. I’ve recently posted separate reviews for 3 of the individual stories. The longest story in the collection, more of a novella really, is Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Beach of Falesa, which I have reviewed elsewhere on here. https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... For me there are two standout stories in this collection and I’ll return to them later. The best of the rest was The Tax Gatherer, by the Caithness writer Neil M. Gunn. I’ve read a few of Neil Gunn’s novels and they haven’t always resonated with me, but I liked this story, which featured a dispute between the titular taxman and a woman from a travelling family over the payment of a dog licence (something that used to be required in the UK). It’s in effect a meeting between people from two different tribes, albeit they live in the same country. It’s a theme that often appeals to me. A rather sombre tale. Muriel Spark’s The House of the Famous Poet, set in wartime London, is a puzzling story that takes an unexpected turn. It does leave the reader thinking, and I don’t mind stories like that. Elspeth Davie’s story Pedestrian is an amusing tale that looks at the modern world and the situation of the outsider. One feature of this collection is that there’s a disproportionate number of stories with a supernatural theme, maybe reflecting a preference by the editor? There are around twenty stories in total and I’m not going to go through them all, as I found most of them to be average. An exception is the last story in the book, Iain Crichton-Smith’s Survival Without Error, from 1970. A lawyer defends two thugs who have beaten up a homeless man, and whilst in court he is distracted by the memory of an incident that occurred during his period of National Service 15 years before. This story has a powerful impact, but it’s delivered in an understated way that, in my opinion, makes it all the more effective. It’s worth a read if you ever come across a copy. My other favourite is Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s comic story Smeddum . The title is a dialect word from Scotland’s north-east, that equates to “spirit”, “grit” or, as the author puts it “guts”. Smeddum introduces us to the character of Meg Menzies, the formidable matriarch of 9 children raised on a farm. (In Scotland the name Menzies is traditionally pronounced “mingis”). It’s a great story. There’s a reading on YouTube by the Scottish actor/theatre director Matthew Zajac, which is about half an hour long. I would recommend it, although I should say that much of the story is in local dialect, so it might not be easy for someone who has English as a second language.
