Originally Reviewed For: Bodice Rippers, Femme Fatales and Fantasy Outlaw Hearts was first released in the early 1990's and I am sorry to say that I missed it. Rosanne Bittner writes what can only be called an epic saga. A story that spans a lifetime and tells of two totally mismatched individuals who fell in love, then walked through fire to remain together. It was an emotional journey through the lives of Jake and Miranda Hayes. Not the kind of romance I usually read and I will admit when I first opened it up I couldn't get into it, I set it aside and waited.. and waited.. I kept looking at it on my kindle, then skipping over it for something else. I even met Ms. Bittner at RT and told her I would be reviewing it but still I waited.. Then when I finally sat down to read it, I couldn't put it down. Outlaw Hearts is what true romance should be. These two didn't have it easy but they fought to be together. Forever meant something.. Ok, Miranda "Randy" Had to sometimes mentally smack Jake upside the head because he was afraid of ruining her life.. but I digress. Miranda Hayes was a simple widow, getting ready to sell her ranch and head for Nevada to find her brother, when misfortune hit. A known killer/rapist/robber was in town, standing right in front of her. Startled she shot him. I don't think anyone was more surprised than Miranda, well maybe Jake. Somehow he escaped town and found a nice little place to hide out in before he bled to death. Yeah it was Miranda's place and this poor woman felt so guilty she nursed him back to health. Slowly learning just who the man was inside. Jake Harkner was a truly bad man. He ran guns for the confederacy, guns he stole from the Union, which often ended up with someone dead. After the war he rustled, robbed and yes killed a few people. But the worst thing ever said about him was he murdered his father. He was most certainly the hardened criminal he was reported to be. Until he found himself nursed back to health by the woman who shot him. How insane is that?? Forced to remain with a woman of true spirit and compassion Jake found himself opening up. We discover that maybe he wasn't such a horrible man.. not misunderstood but lost. Pushed in a direction at a young age, he had no clue how to get out. When Miranda left for Nevada Jake knew she needed him and found a way to be by her side.. Life's trials were not easy for these two. Miranda was definitely the stronger of the two characters. Jake was hard and embittered but Randy had a belief in them that could not be shaken. And believe me there was plenty that could have shaken things too far.. Ms. Bittner writes such rage and passion into this book that it comes alive. I understood Jake's fears, his anger and his desire to make a better life for him and Miranda and their children. I was brokenhearted when his past kept coming back and ruined what he had built. And I cheered when they once again triumphed. This is a long book but it seemed too short when I had read the final word. A True gift to the romance world. Do Not Forsake Me, A Sequel is coming out July 7, 2015 and I find myself already screaming because it's not here yet. Because believe me when I tell you, Romance doesn't get any better than this! Shauni This review is based on the ARC of Outlaw Hearts, provided by netgalley and is scheduled to be released on June 2, 2015
