My copy of LOST IN THE CITY is a reprint, opening with a 2012 introduction* by Jones, and if you can, find a copy with this intro (bear in mind there's a case to be made for not reading introductions until you've read the main work). There are many things to love about this essay, which I suspect Jones may have given as a speech...AWP? Consider this passage: In my first months at Holy Cross College, I found an inordinate amount of ignorance about the city where I was born and raised, about a place that not even the crudest of maps could fail to acknowledge. Young men who came from towns that some maps cared not to acknowledge would share stories of how these places had taken them and shaped them and taught them life. They found it hard to believe that in Washington, DC, the capital of what I came to call the "unfree world," black human beings lived full and valued lives, lives that had all the grandness of white life in small, nowhere towns. These young men could envision the fullness of white life in Washington because those people who ran the "unfree" world were all white, were their relatives in that respect. The descendants of slaves remained as invisible as their ancestors. Sometime in my early years at Holy Cross, Professor Maurice Geracht pointed across the ocean to the east where dwelled James Joyce's DUBLINERS. I had no desire to be anybody's writer, but I admired Joyce's bold and evident love of his Dublin people; I knew all the people in that book because they weren't doing anything different than what black people in Washington, D.C. were doing. The secret rooms of a mind are working away even as the body and the rest of that mind piddle along. It is probably true, then, that the ignorance of the whites at Holy Cross and the discovery of something as grand as DUBLINERS took up significant space in one of my secret rooms so that when I laid aside thoughts of being a mathematician or a lawyer or journalist and took a place at the very back of the long line of those thinking of perhaps being somebody's writer. I had two things with which I set it off. I didn't care to bring the world of poor and working class people in Washington to the ignorant masses that could never think of black people as human beings anyway. Let them simmer in their ignorance and be eaten by educated savages. But I knew there was a tragic and wondrous and often perfect glory about those black people and I had-- in the last months of college and the first years afterward--a growing desire to sing their song if I had the ability. Even if only to hear it again, remember again. Even if no one else in the universe wanted to hear it again. I had read a small library's worth of books before DUBLINERS, but it was the one that planted a molecular seed of envy in me, made me later want to follow Joyce's example and do the same for Washington and its real people. Many of those who run the unfree world lack souls, so I had no desire to write about the Devil's people in Washington.... *** Reading is full of happy accidents, and the fact that I'm re-reading Malcolm X while, um, LOST IN THE CITY is one such happy accident-- the two books complement each other so beautifully. I felt Malcolm X' presence so deeply in the passage above, and in the stories that fill the book. Jones, like Malcolm X, is relentless in his insistence on telling the truth about the suffering of his people and the evil of white racism; he even uses the phrase Malcolm X used for white racists: devils. But both men are equal opportunity truth-tellers-- they have just as much, if not more, to say to Black people about the role they play in their own lives as well as their own communities. As first generation Irish, I can't help but be moved by Jones' feeling for Joyce and other Irish writers, and what African Americans and Irish have in common, not only as as writers and artists but as people who have been exploited-- although, God knows, the Irish have had more advantages than African Americans have (and Jones' story of Holy Cross is a testament to that-- how the more assimilated sons are unable to appreciate Jones' humanity and significance, either as an individual or as part of DC's black community. And yet Jones has the vision to embrace DUBLINERS, not only as a great work of art but as a compassionate portrait of a marginalized people. In BAD NEIGHBORS, another Jones story, there's a shout-out to the Irish writer Mary Lavin-- a writer few Americans even know. BAD NEIGHBORS is a rambling, gorgeous and devastating story from Jones' collection ALL AUNT HAGAR's CHILDREN, a book that contains perhaps the most exquisite Jones story of all (so far!), A RICH MAN. But I'm getting off track. What Jones does, aside from write stories that are great on their own terms, is to bring lives that have been devalued into glorious living relief. His prose is beautiful and evocative. He uses the specifics of Washington DC to tell universal truths. As with Joyce and Dublin, Cheever and Shady Hill, Chekhov, O'Connor, etc etc,. he triumphs by making the particular universal. Above all, Jones is a truth-teller. I have the impression, in spite of all the prizes, that Jones isn't as widely read as he should be. It's my devout hope to be proven wrong about that. Anecdotally, I don't hear many writer/reader friends talking about him. And I kept expecting to hear Jones' novel THE KNOWN WORLD as a deeply relevant work when people talk about 12 YEARS A SLAVE -- but I never do. Maybe I just missed those articles. In the meantime, I'm working on a piece about the visionary synergy between Jones and Steve McQueen-- two truth tellers dealing in similar territory. Enough. Read LOST IN THE CITY. evelyn. ps A RICH MAN is included in this edition, to promote the HAGAR stories-- it was also included in my copy of THE KNOWN WORLD. Bonus!
