First I want to thank Michael for suggesting I read this book. I really did like it. A definite four star read. Who doesn't know about the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1803-1806, and of Sacajawea?! Years ago I had read Sacajawea , which I loved! Yeah, it is a door-stopper, but you don't want it to ever end. The two books did tell the same story about the expedition, but they focus on different people. Anna Lee Waldo ’s book is historical fiction. It focuses primarily on Sacajawea and the expedition, Ambrose’s focuses on Lewis and the expedition. I put off reading Ambrose's book since I thought I would learn nothing new. Wrong, wrong, wrong. You have to read this book even if you know about the expedition, because you have to get the full picture. What happened to Lewis AFTER the completion of the expedition? This is just as fascinating as the expedition itself, and it is not in the other book Maybe you think Ambrose’s will be boring because it is non-fiction? No, no, no! It isn't. It reads like fiction, just as Michael promised me! Undaunted Courage is stuffed with facts, but interesting facts, particularly if you like natural science. History too. All the birds and animals they identified for the first time! The book is a compilation of so many other earlier books on the topic, but it is written with talent so it is never dry. (Except that I grew tired of hearing about how many words Lewis or Clark or another used to describe an incident or a discovery. Tell me, is 50 or 350 or 500 a lot of words? I don't know?!) You definitely come to know the personality of Meriwether Lewis. I don’t want to give any spoilers. He is the central focus of the book - him and the expedition. Both! I wish there had been more time spent on Sacajawea and on Lewis' black slave who followed him on the trip. Some things are simply not known; some of the journals are lost, but I feel more words could have been spent on these topics. (50? 100? Ha ha I am joking…) Also I want more on the whys of what happened afterwards, but I still think this is a marvelous book. I listened to the audiobook narrated by Barrett Whitener. He reads the book in a way to increase the listener's excitement. I didn't like this, but the author's words are exciting so how can I complain? The narrator kept the tone of the writing, and I didn't want a dry recitation of facts, so maybe I am simply too hard to please. Don't get me wrong - the narration isn't bad! It just could have been a teeny bit better. You must have a good map if you listen to the audiobook. With a map you can find exactly where they are all along the whole trip! Maybe the paper book has maps and pictures of the nature specimens encountered. Pictures would be good, but I don't know if the paper book has them. Of course you can also turn to Google and Wiki. Have you seen a black Lewis Woodpecker? Take a peak: https://www.google.fr/search?q=Lewis+... Or Sitka Spruce or the Native American dress of the tribes encountered. As I said, the details are fascinating! There is so much more I should tell you about this book. Jefferson's role was primary. What was the goal of the expedition? Purchase of the Louisiana Territory, what significance did thishave? What was achieved and what failed? How were Native Americans viewed in comparison to Blacks? The Republicans and the Federalists, how did their views differ? Please, read the book – EVEN if you already know about the expedition.
