This book has been on my to read list for a while no, along with “A random walk down Wall Street”. I was pretty excited to read this book but it ended up being a bit of a let down. Shiller’s arguments are not factually wrong about markets being irrational but the book was academic and repetitive. He listed things that can go wrong in the market but in the end it comes down to probabilities. The edition that I read was from the late 90s when the market was at its peak at the dot com bubble, but the arguments that Shiller made are still relevant, even more so now in the age of crypto craze and meme stocks mania. A little story for everyone that I learned from “The rise and Fall of Nations”: Each year on the Mara -Serengeti plains of Kenya and Tanzania, more than a million wildebeest walk a nearly two-thousand-mile loop that they have traced and retraced for generations.The cycles of market euphoria and despair often produce cliches about "herd behavior," but even in jungle life is more complicated than that stereotype. A certain "swarm intelligence" guides the wildebeest, ensuring the survival of the group even when it means an early death for many individuals. The wildebeest's circular migration has been mocked with the old proverb " the grass is always greener on the other side," but the herd is right about where the grass will be greener. It follows the rains, north into Kenya in the sprint, back south into Tanzania during the fall. The critical dangers appear twice a year at "the crossing" of the Mara River, which the herd must ford while traveling both north and south. Normally, to avoid predators, the herd heeds an ancient warning system - the shrieks of baboons, the harsh calls for jungle babblers. But this system fails on the banks of Mara, where the wildebeest mass by the tens of thousands, with danger in plain sight: floating crocodiles, rain-swollen waters, lions in ambush on the far side. Heads down, the wildebeest appear to be talking all at once, their distinctive bellows like so many Wall Street analysts on a conference call, plotting their next move. The herd waits for one member to go. If this animal takes a step and retreats, fear paralyzes the multitude, but memories are short. Within minutes another will try, and if it plunges in, the mass follows - many into waiting jaws and deadly currents. An estimated 10 percent of the wildebeest population perishes each year, a large number of them during the crossing. People working in the global markets can get sucked into a culture that is programmed, like the wildebeest, to remain in constant motion. Every day research reports bombard these financial capitals, urging the crowd to chase the next Big Thing or to run from the next Big Correction. Humans just can’t help themselves. Give it a read to check it off your reading list.
