Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy (1974) is #5 in the George Smiley espionage series by John le Carré. Graham Greene, after reading le Carré’s The Spy Who Came In From the Cold, said that it was the best spy novel ever written, but I think he just might have changed his mind after reading this one, which I think is the best spy novel I have ever read. I first read it when it came out, in 1974, and now again in 2026 (though he had personal reasons for possibly not doing so--I’ll say more about that later). When I first read it I knew little about Kim Philby, one of the most infamous double agents in MI6 during WWII, but I later read non-fiction accounts of him, read of his fifty-year friendship with Graham Greene (who somewhat defended him in places, thus maybe not fully agreeing with le Carré’s fictional condemnation of him), and read Greene’s depiction of him in various fictions, including his screenplay for The Third Man, and his sympathetic portrait of a good man who became a double aent for Russia, in The Human Factor. I found out that it was Philby, a long time associate and friend of le Carré’s, who was in part responsible for the end of le Carré’s career in MI6 (igniting his subsequent career as a writer). I guess it may be fair to say that le Carré’s entire Karla trilogy (Tinker followed by The Honourable Schoolboy in 1977 and Smiley's People in 1979) focusing in part on Philby, is actually seen as the masterpiece of the genre by many, though I still think Tinker is the best of the bunch. The novel is beautifully written and is filled with a kind of anguish, as le Carré depicts Philby (named Bill Haydon in the novels) as a charming and popular man, a perfect example of old world British charm and polish. Karla in these books turns out to be Smiley's KGB nemesis, who recruited Philby. The point for le Carré is that Haydon, at Karla's urging, betrayed his country, his friends, MI6, democracy, all of it. Greene was a little more sympathetic about Haydon’s principled dislike of the USA, as Britain's reputation as a world power declined, and understood his embrace of communism on some level. On another level, the book is about the related betrayal of Smiley’s habitually unfaithful wife Ann, so these two betrayals work in tandem. Who can you trust? As with Haydon, Smiley was loyal to Ann, and was ultimately betrayed by both of them. Of course, the idea of duplicitous multiple identities is key to all the damage done in this book to relationships of various kinds, to the reputation of MI6 specifically and the Western intelligence community in general. Oh, and there is another betrayal, a queer betrayal: between Bill and his forever faithful friend and lover Jim Prideaux. But in the end, integrity wins out, and Smiley, who is most central in this book of any thus far, emerges as a kind of hero. I had seen the tv series based on this book, but in mid-May 2026 I finally saw the 2011 Gary Oldman/Colin Firth film and thought it was great. PS: An article on the relationship between Graham Greene, John le Carré and Kim Philby follows. Greene wrote a sympathetic introduction to Philby's memoir of his defection. In it he said you should always choose the love of friendship over the love of country, which did not gain him any friends in Britain, especially in MI6. As for le Carré, he was categorical in saying he wouldn't trust Philby to take care of his cat, much less anything else. https://spyscape.com/article/graham-g... .
