In that moment Guillam felt not merely betrayed; but orphaned. His suspicions, his resentments for so long turned outwards on the real world - on his women, his attempted loves - now swung upon the Circus and the failed magic which had formed his faith. This may be the third time I've read this but it's still tense, gripping and impactful all over again. Le Carré is especially good at revealing the way the Circus is mostly a washed up service run by old, white men (almost all men) still trading on heroic WW2 records even though that was thirty years in the past, outdated ideas of the British Empire and delusions about the voice that Britain might have on an international stage. From that point of view it's fascinating to see that le Carré's more recent post-Brexit books are essentially continuations on a theme. This time around I was especially fascinated by Smiley: his impotency in relation to a serially unfaithful wife, and his unnerving bond with Karla that makes them mirror reflections of each other. Is it precisely his continued love for Ann that is both Smiley's weakness and his moral strength in a world driven by less salubrious motives? A bleak, moody and cynical book. ---------------------------------------------------- Le Carré's world is perhaps as far from the glamorous cosmos of James Bond and his followers as it's possible to be. There is bureaucracy instead of wild flights of individualism, brown cardboard files instead of new-fangled gadgets, and gloomy offices in places like Acton and Brixton. Yet, for all that, the labyrinthine plot grips relentlessly - even on a re-read or for those of us who know who the mole is. It's a testament, then, to le Carré's craft that this is about more, so much more, than simply a race towards that final revelation. Be prepared, I'd say, to not know what's going on at the start - and trust le Carré to pull it all together, in all its complexity, by the end. Ultimately, this is a book which is bleak, filled with lonely, wounded, betrayed sometimes mean, greedy and egotistical characters. There's little to uplift - but gosh, this is gripping! And as part one of the Karla trilogy, it sets out the terms upon which Smiley and his Russian counterpart will continue to cross swords.
