Took me over a year to finish this book but finally managed it! Their cold, loveless and sterile marriage was a big put off. I just couldn’t carry on - it was so depressing. But I'm happy I finished it - a difficult but unforgettable book. So, the story’s about a couple who were thinking about getting divorced as their marriage seems unsalvageable but then the h gets in a life-threatening accident, loses her memory of around 2-3 months prior to the accident and is hospitalized for almost a year as she slowly recovers and now is discharged into the care of her workaholic husband as she has no one else, and he agrees reluctantly to take some time off (horror!) to help her. The idea is to let her heal completely before they proceed with the stalled divorce. They retreat to Bethlehem (outside Buffalo), a small town she adores and also the place of her accident. Her memory loss is, of course, significant. *Major spoilers* The H is one of the most difficult characters I’ve read about. Okay, it’s Christmassy, angels drop by and forgiveness is the name of the game but it took me my everything to even consider him a H, a man worthy or deserving of love. So, his cheating was a no-shocker. I knew about it but the complete lack of warmth and regard for his wife, the h is chilling. Over the years, he has almost de-humanised her and reduced her to no more than an object in his life. His work, office, employees and social life take precedence over his wife. And his way of dealing with her has been to ignore her or not respond to her. And his employees take that attitude from him - so utter humiliation and loss of dignity for her. Imagine knowing that she loves decorating and not allowing her to change a thing in his upmarket but sterile condo and make her live there - a place he knows she detests - for 5 years? Or that she loves to cook and host parties for him but contracting professional catering as it’s beneath his wife to do such things? So, making her completely redundant. And they began with love - lots of love. Poor but completely in love and happy. She worked 2-3 jobs so that he could finish college and pursue his dreams. He does that, joins the rat-race, becomes obsessed with success - more and more of it- and leaves her far behind. I forgot how long they were married - at least 15 years and while he’s out doing whatever, he even denies her her deepest desire - children. In a moc, I would have understood it but how can you do this to someone you once professed to love, one who sacrificed so much for you. Her mother broke all contact with her for marrying the H. So, she leads a lonely and purposeless life. Now, as their present/post-accident conversations make us walk back to what has happened to them, along with his many flaws, she’s also shown as a wife who gets angry, nags and refuses to let go. But I couldn’t fault her for that. What woman/man wouldn’t fight to hold their head above water when their whole person, worth and life is being submerged to a zero? Also, in all these conversations about their past, as his fault becomes evident, his reaction is a shrug and like ‘So, what do you want me to do now?’ He’s frustratingly cold, uncaring and remote. *SPOILERS* But as slowly, they come close (takes time!), he hopes she never recovers her memory. The hateful man has another sin notched up on his soul! He 'left' their marriage long ago - first emotionally, then physically - and they weren't having sex for some time but she had an unshakeable belief that whatever else he maybe, he'd never cheat on her. Gawd! So, his cheating destroyed her completely. And so, the accident. But, yes, why does the h never ask for her ‘best friend’ after the accident? Never asks him about her whereabouts. That person and her husband just disappear. I, so wanted to know what happened to them and their marriage! The small town and the people are super annoying, as in boring. I skimmed most of the filler bonhomie events. But, the rest of the book and the h/H dynamics are actually riveting. 'Miracles' are okay as the H definitely needed one to get her forgiveness,
