If you want a glimpse of Salinger as a quirky and very flawed human being, rather than a mythic literary wizard who continues to beguile new young readers—mostly through Catcher in the Rye— daughter Margaret almost enthusiastically rips the curtain away. Doing so fails to diminish his literature, but this lengthy memoir doesn’t read as an attempt to destroy the man or his books, neither those in the past or those to come. Rather, it appears that Ms. Salinger was attempting to come to terms with a father she idolized as a child made into a sidekick on rural adventures until he dropped her from the pedestal he’d put her on and mutual disappointment set in, ultimately leading to estrangement. She’s a good analyst and a rather good writer herself though not a fan of her father’s literature—which could be the impression she wants to give. This, after all, is a daughter’s, not a literary critic’s book. Its story is both moving and revealing as we follow Margaret Salinger’s own discovery of that traumatized being so many young followers thought was actually Holden Caulfield in place of the legend that a prep schoolboy having a nervous breakdown made him. Among a rich panoply of biographical details Margaret Salinger gradually unveils, at a pace to mirror their being shown to her, Salinger’s suit on behalf of his character Holden is a fascinating tidbit and Margaret Salinger’s research into the writer’s war career lends weight to the idea that a long and tortuous stint overseas marked him for the rest of his life, much as it contributed to a literary subtext easily missed in examining Catcher as a cultural artifact about teenage angst. Yes, daughter “Peggy” takes up “the other books,” those spinning the family Glass saga, here too offering some biographical information that gives us a context for their eccentric cast. Although she does not wax laudatory about any of her father’s works, she whets our appetite to review past stories and to await what could be the literary event of several centuries when her brotherMatthew, executor of Salinger’s literary estate, finishes preparing the manuscripts deliberately and carefully left behind to end (by the time they are published) over sixty years of silence. As much as “Dream Catcher” is a portrait of a man and his famous books, it is the story of a multi-faceted and talented daughter who, privileged as she was, had the guts and curiosity to enter diverse worlds including that of indigenous peoples and the working class she found as a truck mechanic before she studied at Oxford and became a volunteer chaplain. I was kept interested throughout. Strangely, I came away with more, not less admiration for Salinger as a literary force, and as a complicated person, but also with respect for this stubborn, insightful, and intrepid daughter who refused to play the part of one of his characters or to be cowed by his charisma and single-minded dedication to “the work.” Like many of us, she went to some pains to individuate herself from both parents, while coming to appreciate their psychological hardships, their multiple failings on multiple fronts, but as well, their accomplishments. I highly recommend Dream Catcher as a source for understanding Salinger and his writing, but just as strongly, for its recounting of a daughter’s journey into her own power as she struggles with a damaged, but unbowed father who happens to already be a literary legend.
