Started strong and fun to read about all the predications of future HOF and greatness that did and did not come true. Skipped most of the WS sections as most series were forgettable at this point. “It’s not a destination. Baseball is, as much as anything, a lifelong conversation amongst friends. The game is our excuse to talk. This book continues our lengthening chat.” P.x “And the relentlessly boring spinning contest between baseball labor and baseball management, the silk destructive purpose of daily journalism is to administer even handed beating to all parties on a regular basis. They expect. They know they deserve it. Still, if we step back, we sense that it’s all foolishness that will pass.” P.x “For many, baseball cards are the last toy as well as the first position. You fall in love with them as a child, and then leave them behind a puberty. They link the blue-water, lazy-day joy of childhood summers with the pride blossoming maturity.” P.4 “Like most families, we had arguments and painful, and perfect reconciliations. Don’t bother listening for melodramatic theme music here: I’m talking about the usual family stuff that bors everybody else but rips you apart at the time. People gain distance on their childhood and their parents as they grow. But independence has a cost. “I’d never understood the degree which my memories of growing up and been diminished and sweetness, and intensity, by all those is the adult understandings and demythologizings. I hadn’t realized very from my use still is it had had back then. Until the baseball cards came back.” P.12-13 “Baseball’s illusion of permanence, in a century of inexably accelerating change, is a teddy bear for adults to lay at the foot of their beds. A sport was such an image is it curse to all the Chicken Littles of our media age who can’t wait to discover some new piece of the sky falling. That’s why Howard Cosell hated baseball. It ignored him. It knew he would be gone soon. The sky is always falling. Play ball.” P.47 “Anything can be enjoyed so long as the wound is not salted with hope. The Orioles won’t have that problem for at least another year or two... In a sense, a season without expectations is a less obsessive and, perhaps, more gently enjoyable experience than the nightly agony is following a team that’s “in” contention. Naturally, being human, we much for agony. Still, if wisdom and serenity are going to be shoved down our throats, maybe we can stand it for a little while. The sanguine baseball fan knows, of course, that his game, more than most, it’s not about the final score. It’s about the stories along the way. Yes, just like life, where are you know the final score before you start. Death wins. So what? Let’s play.” P.156
