I chose this book because I love History, American History, World History, whatever kind of History you name it I am on board. I love history because of learning about what our ancestors and past figures have done to create and progress the world, our country, and our lives. I had recently started to learn about Andrew Jackson when choosing what new book to read and this book caught my eye. My teacher told me he had a fascinating life and there is so much he could talk about for his life and decisions, but It would take multiple weeks. I thought why not give it a shot because I love History and was interested to see what exciting things he did in his life. I was not disappointed this book provides an amazing and accurate depiction of Andrew Jackson, the seventh president of the United States of America. This book starts with the beginnings of Jackson presidency in 1828 to 1829. It talked about the harsh and bitter election Jackson was able to win against past president John Quincy Adams. This book is 500 plus pages long, and there is so much detail of how each major event happened. It starts with his first term as president where he inspires from the third president of the united states. Andrew Jackson is a very controversial and energetic president. He even threatened to kill JQA after his wife died because he was that sad and mad. His first act was to create more land for American settlers, so he proposed the Indian removal act which forced many native tribes and people in the south to move west paste Mississippi river. This action caused many native people or ⅓ of their kind to die along the way. The book then goes onto his time of the tariff of 1828 where he brings back the tariff of 1818. For all of you that do not know a tariff is a tax. This tariff taxed Americans for buying non-made American goods. South Carolina and much of the west was outraged. South Carolina threatened to break away from the United States if the tariff was not taken away or lifted. Jackson threatened to go down to South Carolina with the National Army to stop this, and he would hang the governor in front of them if actions were made. South Carolina ended up halting the, and slight changes were made to the bill. It also talks about the many actions of his that changed the power of the presidency and how each president after did just like him. For example, he used a total of 10 vetoes against laws which no president before had done. Another example is he fired all of the members in the previous cabinet which had never been done before and hired his team. There is so much more detailed view of his life, but the last significant action he took was the destruction of the National bank. Andrew Jackson hated the National bank as he thought it corrupted politicians and was not being used for anything important. He taxed the bank out of business leaving smaller state banks to fight for power. This caused inflation and imbalance in the economy. This was called the panic of 1837 which was an economic depression. Then this bookends with his life after his time as president and gives a detailed view of his reflection and times after the presidency. This book had a few bad parts or cons. The first thing was the language was outdated and old. There was a lot of sophisticated language but from the 1800s. Many of the words we would know in a regular sentence, but the way they structure these sentences can make it hard to understand and get the true impact of what is happening at that moment in the book. This book was also substantially long. It was over 500 pages as there was a lot of information to cover. The book also does not do a good job setting the stage as it just gets right into the story without many contexts behind it. The book jumps around a lot from a different story to story or idea to idea so it can be hard to follow at times. For a person that is not interested in history or presidents, I do not suggest this book as you will find it to be boring or dull and it will feel like your back in a history class in school This book, however, has lots of pros or good things about it. There is a lot of information, and the author does a great job of describing in detail each major event. It makes it feel realistic and like you are with Andrew Jackson right there and then. The information also was told in an exciting and suspense type way that kept you on your toes. The sources that the book used were top tier and from some of the best colleges and real hand account which gave the book credibility and gave it an edge on other Andrew Jackson books. This man had a lot of interesting person struggles along with his time as president, and the book does a fantastic job talking about them. This books also did an excellent job of putting in his controversial side. As many may or may not know Andrew Jackson was a little crazy and a controversial president. He did many horrible things like the Indian removal act, and this book does a good job contrasting his good and bad moments. This overall was a credible and well-written book about the life of Andrew Jackson.
