Re A Woman to Remember - Miranda Lee concludes her Affairs to Remember series with this utter Typhoon of Tackiness Trainwreck of a book. Methinks Miranda Lee listened to a little too much Heart's "All I Wanna Do" back in the 90's. Cause while I love Ann Wilson's voice, even she hates that song. So huge spoiler coming up! Do not read if you don't want to know. This opens with the former model married h tarting herself up, complete with white stretch g-string, to go have a one night fling to get pregnant to please her dying husband. The h supposedly feels horrible about this and considering she is pretty neurotic throughout the story, I guess she does. But that doesn't compare to the angst the H goes through when he realizes that he had unprotected sex with an unknown woman who disappeared before dawn and also realizes that he fell head over heels in love. ML makes a big issue of the unprotected sex thing, AIDS was very much a public awareness campaign in the late 80's and 90's and ML is doing her public service duty by pushing the protection. For the public service awareness of our story, the H and h do use protection the first time, but subsequent events that same night were excused by an excessive author application of the Lurve Force Mojo - our hapless H couldn't help himself, but it is HPlandia so it is okay - do not try this in the real world. The story then picks up 18 months later. The Australian photographer H, who usually lives in Los Angeles, is taking a long sabbatical with his mum back home in Australia. He sees the h's picture in a magazine from four years earlier, announcing her retirement from modeling to marry her geneticist husband. The H is livid that he got cozened into a one night stand with a married woman, but that doesn't stop him from hiring the h when he needs a model for a photo shoot. The h tries to pretend she doesn't recognize him, but the Lurve Force Mojo is bothering them both. After the h's admission of widowhood and some evasion tactics by the h, they wind up having another lurve club extravaganza in ML's typical overblown style. The h figures she will just have a brief fling with the H and then kick him to the curb again. Then the H learns that the h has a son and he is very suspicious that the little boy is his own. He asks the h outright and there are MANY moments where the h flat out lies to the H about who the little boy's father is. First she claims she was pregnant when she slept with the H, but actually her son was born premature, so the timing is right. Then she lies and claims that she had a DNA test done and it proved that her late husband was the father. (Based on the sheer number of times the h lies, the H should have demanded his own DNA test right away. 'Cause really anyone who lies about something that much is hiding the truth, but the H was too besotted to realize it.) The H doesn't really care if the little boy isn't his, he is massively in love with the h and his mum hints that if he does the home handyman routine and fixes stuff in the h's house for her and her mother in law, (who lives with the h and her son), the h will like him more. So the H grabs a toolbelt and does his very best to help the h by showing her he is trustworthy and nice and can fix a leaky faucet. Then he buys a mobile for the h's son and the h has a hysterical meltdown and throws the H out. The H goes home and his mother is really concerned about him. The H is having a huge mopey moment and is in tears and then the h shows up. In the meantime, the H's mother has taken a look at the H's photos of the little boy and realizes right away that the child is her grandson, he looks just like his dad at that age and the H's mum has the pictures to prove it. The H's mum gives the h the third degree for a minute, then she lets the h go see the H. The h explains that her marriage wasn't very great. Her own mother pushed her to get married after she started modeling and met a few losers, so when the geneticist proposed, the h thought she was in love and agreed. But really the h's dead husband was all about the h being prime genetic material to have his offspring. He was getting irate that she wasn't getting pregnant right away, so he insisted on fertility tests. The fertility tests picked up on his leukemia and so the husband stored his motilators and made the h go get inseminated every month while he was on chemo. On one of the insemination attempts, the desperate-to-please-her-husband h had a fling with the H, cause he had brown eyes, then the h got preggers and her husband died. The h did not want to confess what she had done because her son is the only family her mother in law has left in the world and plus the h was a lying tramp and she knew it. But now the h is overwhelmed with the force of her feelings, plus the H is really rich and famous, so she has come to declare her love and the H is so overcome, he declares his love, again, right back. The two of them decide to marry and keep the h's former mother in law as their children's future other grandmother too. The H's mum is happy to welcome the h to the family and we leave the two of them lurving it up in Purple Passion ML style for another HP outing HEA. I wasn't too impressed with the h's utter lack of integrity and character in this one. ML tries to play it off as a desperate h and has her cry a lot, but this woman was a gold digger bimbo who needed to get herself sorted. It is one thing to have a fling and have a baby or get dumped and have a baby, but it is entirely another thing to go out and steal a man's motilators cause you want to keep your preferred lifestyle. I did not get the feeling that this was an in love woman trying to fulfill the dearest wish of a beloved husband, I could have tolerated that. This h's acts were all about keeping herself safe and secure and I wasn't admiring that. The H was very nice and so besotted I felt bad he had to get stuck with an h like that. The story is mostly in his POV too, so we get lots of H insight about his feelings. The writing is well done and the plot twist is very unusual, so I rated this at about a 2.5 rounded up to three for the H's very nice mum bonus. Give this one a go if you have a taste for the extremely unusual HP voyage. But if continually lying, amoral h's are not your cuppa, you will be better off with another HPlandia adventure. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
