We know this from the cover blurbs and from the first few pages: Edward, the main character is a young man, a college student, living in London. He gives his best friend a sandwich laced with LSD as a joke. The friend falls to his death from a window. Edward’s guilt comes to shape his whole life, plunging him into a debilitating depression worsened by weekly letters from his friend’s mother cursing him as a murderer. Edward’s mother is dead, and he returns home where he lives with his father and a younger brother. Their lives are complicated too as his father is having an affair with a married woman (the wife of Edward’s psychiatrist) and his brother is socially and intellectually withdrawn from the world, shunning sex and alcohol. His brother is dedicated to somehow doing good and helping people, becoming like a priest or a monk, but without believing in God. That brother takes on Edward as a kind of “project.” People tell Edward he has to learn to live with his responsibility for his friend’s death, but he thinks “…but I can’t live with this, I can only die with it, except that I don’t die.” The reader may think that both young men need a good woman to help straighten them out, but how will they attract anyone in their current situations? The blurbs tell us, in so many words, that Edward is seeking redemption and his brother is seeking salvation. With advice from a psychiatrist and a fortune teller (!) Edward goes off to find his biological father, at one time a somewhat famous artist. Edward finds his father’s wife and two half-sisters he never met living almost in isolation in a cult-like four-person commune. His father is “away and will arrive shortly.” So weeks later, where is he? There’s a heavy dose of philosophy in all this. (Murdoch was a philosophy professor at Cambridge.) In the course of one dinner conversation we can touch on everything from the ancient Greeks and geometry to nuclear war, terrorism, pornography and artificial intelligence! There are many good lines and humor. Just a couple: “As Edward found these words emerging from his mouth he felt a thrill of fright as if the words were actually little animals which had leapt out of his mouth and were now running about.” “The head waiter had noticed the incident….His contempt for his clients was impartial.” The social network portrayed in the story is so dense that touching it anywhere affects everyone else. So when the couple having the affair is found out and the wife says, “Let’s not get in a muddle –“ her lover can say “That’s your funniest remark yet.” The affair occupies almost as much of the book as Edward’s incident. Watch what you wish for. Can a woman fall head-over-heels in love with a man for just two weeks? And I’m reminded of a book by Anita Brookner, can you really fall in love with someone you almost despise? There’s a wonderful love letter from the man to the woman, trying to win her back, that is a classic. There are many surprising plot twists and several amazing coincidences. (Murdoch has been dinged by some critics for her “bizarre plot twists.” You get the impression that the author is toying with us because the coincidences aren’t all necessary to the plot – someone could have called and said “I’m coming to town and I’d like to see you” rather than running into someone by accident. But the coincidences are the author’s way of showing the real-life impact of chance. Just a few pages from the end of the book, Edward reflects: “In a way it’s all a muddle starting off with an accident: my breakdown, drugs, telepathy, my father’s illness, cloistered neurotic women, people arriving unexpectedly, all sorts of things which happened by pure chance. At so many points anything being otherwise could have made everything be otherwise.” I’m reminded of a quote attributed to Joseph Conrad: “It is the mark of an inexperienced man not to believe in luck.” There are also some shocking surprises. And, just as in real life, some things that people predict come true and some don’t. That’s another way the author toys with the reader: contrary to theater parlance, the loaded gun shown in the first act may never go off. There’s also a bit, almost, of the supernatural. Hallucinations (perhaps due to Edwards past drug use), the fortune teller, poltergeists. (In one of Murdoch’s books she has a flying saucer appear in the distance.) Somehow the author gets away with it and leaves us with a great read. It’s a dense, complicated plot and it’s fitting that the end of the book is a series of letters resolving everyone’s status and straightening out loose ends. (It’s also a fairly long book – the paperback edition I read had 520 pages of small font, without which, it would have been a 700-page book.) The Good Apprentice was nominated for the Booker Prize in 1985. The critic Harold Bloom listed The Good Apprentice in his 1994 book, The Western Canon, as one of the books important and influential in Western culture. Murdoch can be considered an Irish author even though she grew up in and went to school in England. (And all of this story is set in England.) She was born in Ireland and both her parents were Irish. I’m adding it to my favorites. I’ve enjoyed many other novels by Iris Murdoch and below are links to my reviews of them. GR ratings for all these novels are remarkably similar: all between 3.8 and 4.0. I listed them in order of how I rated them. I rated the first 3 books as 5.0; the next 4 as 4.0 and the last one as 3.0. The Sea, The Sea remains my favorite by this author. The Sea, the Sea The Sacred and Profane Love Machine The Good Apprentice (this review) The Black Prince The Time of the Angels The Nice and the Good The Bell Under the Net Photo of London streets from unsplash.com The author from curtisbrown.co.uk
