I am finally, finally, *finally* done reading this darn book. After years of it sitting on my "currently reading" shelf, half read, I decided to make a big push and finish it. And I did. And boy, did I remember why I put it down in the first place. I firmly believe that the only way you can read this book is to read it for a few hours every single day until you're done. Otherwise you'll put it down and never pick it up again. This author completely lost the forest for the trees. I mean, he decided to categorize and label each tree so carefully (almost like an IBM employee!) that he got lost in the forest--and his main goal in the first place had been to create an accurate portrait of a forest. In other words, this book is filled with minutiae, details, and lots, and lots of carefully cited facts. That's good. Accusing a major international corporation of corporate malfeasance on this scale--that should be very carefully documents. He did that. Good job. However, this author's issue was NOT the research. It wasn't the topic. It wasn't the timing, or the history, or any of that. The author's issue was that he simply didn't know how to translate these details into a readable format. This book was a slog. It was very difficult to read. Frankly, it was boring at time. There were many places where examples could have been trimmed and the writing simply made more accessible. Each sentence on its own was fine. Taken together... sheesh, you need a lot of coffee and an awful lot of determination to make it through this book. I suspect many readers did not make it through this book. When I had only about a hundred pages left earlier this week, I started looking at some of the reviews on Goodreads. A lot of people, especially those with not-positive reviews, were quoting lines from the first couple chapters. Not that many from later chapters. I found that telling. Okay, writing style aside. The content was important. I am very glad that I did, in fact, finish the book. It tells a very, very important chapter from our recent world history, a chapter that we would all do well to learn from. Sometimes, censuses are terrifying things, and in the wrong hands, they can lead to disastrous consequences. Corporations need to have morals, too. My favorite chapter of this book was "France and Holland", a later chapter that explained how IBM functioned in occupied Holland v. occupied and Vichy France. Essentially, Holland's bureaucratic systems had already fully integrated IBM into their own population census bureaus, their railway systems, their transport and police and army. The Reich also appointed an exceptionally dedicated, enthusiastic, and organized public servant to organize the gathering of data on the Jews and their transport to the camps in Holland. In contrast, in France, there was little prior dependence on IBM's or any other punch card technology, it was sporadically used and often not used at all, with much bureaucratic resistance to punch-card technology. Also, the person the Reich appointed to run France's data gathering and transport of the Jews was a man, who, it turns out, was very high up in the French Resistance and actively sabotaged whenever possible. Holland managed to murder some 75% of its Jewish population. France: 25%. The story of those two occupied territories juxtaposed was one of the most moving and interesting chapters in the entire book. The author made an excellent point in this foreword: the Holocaust would have happened regardless of IBM. That is true, undoubtedly. Genocide happened in Rwanda fifty years later with machetes. However. The Holland/France chapter made it clear that without IBM's assistance, the Reich would have had a dramatically lower "success rate" in their genocide. It was a slog of a book written about an exceptionally interesting and important topic. I would not proactively recommend it to anyone based on its inaccessible language, but I also wouldn't tell someone NOT to read it. However, if you can find a really good summary of it, you should read that.
