The Canning Season Some spoilers This book is very odd with themes of love, bad parenting, and dark humor. Ratchet Clark is sent to stay with her two aunts (Tilly and Penpen) for the summer while her careless mother does her own stuff. Growing up Ratchet was never allowed to have friends or do any sporting events because her mother was poor, and her father left. Later on in the story Harper was dropped off where Tilly and Penpen agreed to raise along with Ratchet. Together all four people form a family-type relationship. Ratchet’s and Harper’s life have changed from the neglected kids, to being loved by two old twins. The most important aspect of this book is love. All of the main characters in this book, Tilly, Penpen, Ratchet, and Harper experience difficult times in their lives with love. Tilly and Penpen had an extremely strict dad, who drove their mother to commit suicide by decapitation.Then their father died leaving them on their own. Ratchet and Harper also had very irresponsible parents who did not care about them. But in the end they all found love. Another important aspect of this book is how dark it is. The characters in this story are always talking about death and other dark things. “She killed herself in a particularly brutish and horrible way..” This quote shows one of many times how dark this story is. In the quote Penpen was telling Ratchet about her mother and how she commited suicide because of their father. “How long do you think you are going to stay?” asked Harper one day out in the field. “I was hoping no one would ask that question,” said Ratchet. “Me too,” said Harper. In this quote we see Harper and Ratchet wanted to stay with each other having a good friendship. Before this quote too, Penpen allowed Ratchet to stay for even longer showing their friendship. This book is a rough ride through tough times for the main characters. The characters have been through alot and we see how they cope with their situations. Many themes are present through the story like dark humor/themes, bad parents, and love. My opinion about this book is that if you like reading about weird things then you will like it. Death is really common throughout this book even though the book is about littler kids. Personally I did not like the book, because of the weirdness. I do not read many books, but I can say that I have never read a book like this in my life. Usually I like fantasy books with interesting characters that go through exciting adventures. This book is pretty dark and weird even though the book is for kids. So, personally I do not know what other books in the world are similar to this one. My rating for this book is 4/10. My reasoning behind it is because I just did not like it. I like stories with action, plot twists, and big finales. Shows and books like Game of Thrones are what I like. This book is pretty easy going with no thrilling plot. Nothing in this book strikes me with the “read me,” message. Review done by: Kian Harris.
