this is my first time reading this book! wow. well done, ann. the main plot in this book is that claudia's grandmother mimi keeps getting sicker and having to go back into the hospital only to have the doctors clueless about what's wrong with her. finally, she dies. in the subplot, claudia and mary anne start an art class for some bsc charges including new kid corrie addison. corrie's mom basically wants nothing to do with her (and is always really late picking her up from the art class), and corrie and claudia develop a really close, almost codependent relationship really quickly based on their neediness. highlights: -this book is not fun to read, but it is handled SO WELL. from claudia's feeling like mimi's death isn't real, to alternating between blaming herself/blaming mimi/blaming the doctors for the death, to snapping at her friends, to withdrawing from everything, it's just all so real. -kristy's speech to claudia about how to responsibly be there for corrie addison is so good. kristy is concerned that though they both need each other right now, once claudia starts to feel better she is going to "drop corrie." kristy is so emotionally smart and human interaction-savvy here, and I just really love it. -nanny (kristy's grandmother) moves in to care for emily michelle. we will hear so much more about the pink clinker (her ratty old pink car) from here on out. -claudia's painting is a "stop action" - like you pressed pause in the middle of an action movie. this is such a good idea and I want to see this painting. -they test mimi for toxoplasmosis "which you get mainly from cats" -- this is t gondii! I wrote a huge piece about it in my zine poop matters! I love t gondii. incidentally they've been researching using t gondii to fight cancer, so it's really not all bad. lowlights/nitpicks: -mrs. addison makes me so upset because I have lived this. when I was in 7th grade, my stepmom was an hour late to picking me up from school almost every day, and there was no schoolbus that would go to my apartment. I remember befriending all the folks who worked in the office after hours, and knowing that they resented me because they would have been able to go home if I wasn't there, and knowing that they pitied me too. it's an awful position to put a kid in, and nobody should ever do it. -kristy spells mary anne's name mary ann. she knows better, and you should too, ann. -claudia tells a story where mimi is an ambulance chaser. huh? was mimi a lawyer and no one ever told us about it? claudia outfit: - "At the moment I'm wearing lavender plaid cuffed pants with suspenders over a green shirt with buttons down the front, a matching lavender beret (and not just because I'm at my easel), and fleece-lined, high-top sneakers which I must admit are uncomfortably hot, but they look great . Also, I've got on earrings shaped like Christmas tree lights that actually blink on and off." snacks in claudia's room: -double stuf oreos in her hollow book -cheetos under her bed
