Rereading the F&SF essay collections by the Good Doctor (who in one of the essays calls himself the Bob Hope of Science Fiction) is always a pleasure. Although a bit disturbing because I realize how little I remember. So, for example, what exactly is the tragedy of the Moon Asimov refers to in the title essay? It is because of the moon that a heliocentric view of the universe was hard to accept. Since the moon rotated around the Earth it was hard to imagine that Earth and Moon together would circle the sun. If he were a Greek, he says, he would have voted for a geocentric view. And from the geocentric view, all evils emerge. So "the average person is geocentric, anthropocentric, ethnocentric, and egocentric." On the other hand, if there were no moon, or better yet Venus had a moon the size of ours the heliocentric view would have necessarily emerged earlier. People would have seen it (it would have the brightness of Saturn) circling Venus (in apparent Sun’s diameter distance). The identity of morning and evening star would have been apparent etc. And "Aristotle would have been perfectly capable of doing Newton’s work." "Experimental science and technology would be perhaps two to four thousand years further advanced than they are now." And we would have our Galactic Empire now. Maybe Asimov let himself get carried away a bit here. But surely a fascinating thought experiment. The next chapter on the Triumph of the Moon is rather boring in comparison. Well, without the Moon and tides life would probably not have reached the land and so there would have been no mankind. Second without the Moon no concept of other worlds and certainly no Space flight. The Clock in the Sky is the story of how the speed of light was established. Then there are a couple of essays on Carbon. All of them good, but maybe not of prime importance. Next brilliant one The Cinderella Compound tells us the story of how it was found out that it was nucleic acid that was the important factor in the chromosomes, not proteins. And the unsung hero Oswald Theodore Avery not even got the Nobel prize, "a miscarriage of scientific justice". In Lost in Non-Translation Asimov delivers one of his most effective sermons. It is the story of Ruth (later expanded to a whole book). What is lost in non-translation is the meaning of Moabite woman. We do not really grasp the Biblical story if we do not know the meaning. So he suggests we should read the entire story substituting "black" for "Moabite" to get the meaning. Only then the essence of the story a plea for tolerance becomes really clear. Very good one. Next Asimov tells us about The Ancient and the Ultimate . The book. It starts with a very funny talk he gave once about the future of (video) "cassettes". At the time (the early 70s) the ultimate gimmick. And pointing out how this device could be advanced (make it lighter, without the need for charging, mind-controlled, etc.) he comes, of course, to the conclusion, that it is in fact the book that is the most advanced model of a cassette. Nice but not extraordinary. But Asimov goes on the paint a pretty gloomy picture of society. On his rather pessimistic view, only about 1% of the (US) population can be considered literate. That is being able to read a book, not being able to decipher a No Smoking sign. That surprised me. And he says that instead of reading single letters and putting them together to words and connecting words to sentences he would glance at a line of print to get the meaning. I wish I could do that. (I am only a word reader. Sigh.) By the Numbers I consider being the best and most important (and surely most controversial) essay. And when I said that I did not remember anything about the book, I am sure that my personal view on "digitalization" goes back to this essay. Asimov talks about hypocrisy here. It is an old argument but it needs to be retold again and again. If we talk about the good old days, we are thinking about Roman senators or Southern Gentlemen, not the slaves. And the way to establish equality is through digitalization. "I want to see every man receive a long and complicated code of identification, with symbols representing age, income, education, housing, occupation, family size, hobbies, political views, sexual tastes, everything that can conceivably be coded." Would that be an invasion of privacy? Of course. But "we lost that fight long ago." And to those who want a simple society, he says "Hypocrite! You just want to be comfortable and to hell with everyone else." It is, of course, a tiny bit more complicated, we do not want to live in a Chinese society. But in the end, I do agree. It is a scandal that we can not even get ourselves a Corona App that does a decent job. On a lighter side, we get The Cruise and I about him watching the launch of Apollo 17. And it is very, very funny. The 'ship of fools' running gag alone is worth getting this book.
