*****WARNING THIS IS A GRAPHIC ADULT REVIEW NO KIDDIES PLEASE.***** ”I knew that Vaughan could never really die in a car-crash, but would in some way be re-born through those twisted radiator grilles and cascading windshield glass. I thought of the scarred white skin over his abdomen, the heavy pubic hair that started on the upper slopes of his thighs, his tacky navel and unsavoury armpits, his crude handling of women and automobiles, and his submissive tenderness towards myself. Even as I had placed my penis in his rectum Vaughan had known he would try to kill me, in a final display of his casual love for me.” Albert Camus was tragically killed in a car crash in 1960. A crash of particular interest to Vaughan. I can see how a writer would need to immerse himself into this writing experience. He needs to stay close enough to get splattered with semen and blood, and drink the erotic cocktail of sex, cars, and pain. J. G. Ballard certainly added an extra kink to the perversity of this novel when he elected to give the narrator his own name. Vaughan a “former TV-scientist, turned nightmare angel of the expressways” is obsessively planning a head on collision with the actress Elizabeth Taylor. He has a police scanner in his car and every time there is an accident he appears on the scene with his cameras whirring and his penis stirring. He is there when Ballard has his own accident. A head on crash that kills the driver of the other car putting both Ballard and the wife of the dead man in the hospital for a lengthy recovery. Ballard has always had symphorophilia or car-crashsexual fetishism, but after his crash and meeting Vaughan it becomes more than just an obsession, but a full time addiction. When someone suffers from a depraved obsession they quickly learn to hide those tendencies from everyone around them, but when they meet someone with the same affliction it fuels the fire. The synergy of mutual interest escalates the need to go further, to do more, to cross all boundaries. ”Vaughan excited some latent homosexual impulse only within the cabin of his car or driving along the highway. His attraction lay not so much in a complex of familiar anatomical triggers--a curve of exposed breast, the soft cushion of a buttock, the hair-lined arch of a damp perineum--but in the stylization of posture achieved between Vaughan and the car.” The emergence of a new sexuality born from perverse technology. Jackson Pollock was tragically killed in a car crash in 1956. I wrecked once. I was checking the map and looked up just as a deer stepped out into the road in front of me as casually as if he were John Steed going for a walk in a London park lacking only the hat and a fine walking stick. I made several tactical errors. I was on a dirt road recently coated with pea size gravel so it was still loose and slick. I hit the brakes and swerved to avoid the deer who just watched me fly past him as casually as if this was an everyday occurrence. Maybe he did this regularly for entertainment. I went into this rather elegant spin slewing sideways up the road. I tried a steering correction to keep myself on the road, but I still had too much speed. As I’m writing this my heartbeat is speeding up. My back tire went off into the ditch which unfortunately was not at the most convenient place in the road. In fact it was right beside a very steep ravine. I tilted off the road. Everything slowed down. I’m one of those guys that has to have his eyes open on a roller coaster. I’m fine as long as I can see what is coming. A tree branch went through the side door window behind my head. I can remember thinking close your eyes for just a second because there is going to be glass. I rolled completely over once and then twice. Debris was rolling around in the car like clothes in a dryer. The Jeep Cherokee came to a stop on the driver’s side. Seatbelts are very difficult to get off when adrenaline is doing a tap dance with your hands. I crawled up the seats and opened the passenger door, not really a door anymore, but more of a hatch. I felt like I’d just wrecked a dune buggy on the moon. The back wheel was still spinning. I can remember thinking this could have been worse, lots worse. The slope was steep enough that I had to angle my ascent sideways to climb it. I stood on the road. The deer seemed to have had better things to do. He was gone. Two cars with Kansas tags slowed down to look at me, but didn’t stop. One guy in a truck with Kansas tags sped up when he saw me. Finally a little guy in a small Toyota pickup with a camper on the back with Minnesota tags stopped to see if I was alright. Thank goodness there was someone from out of state. He walked back down the slope with me and between the two of us we tilted the Jeep back up on it’s wheels. (Adrenaline was more useful for that task.) There was not a single panel that did not have a dent and the tree limbs had scraped some red paint off in lurid grooves as if a wild animal had attacked. We stood and looked at it for a moment. “I’m going to try and start it.” I remember saying. He shook his head, but didn’t say anything. I could tell he didn’t think there was even a chance. It started on the first turn of the key. I drove out of the pasture until I found a gate. I then drove it home, about a hundred miles, keeping an eye locked on the gauges waiting for, expecting, some kind of trouble. As I drove down the road looking like I’d just escaped from a demolition derby I did receive some long stares. I’m sure there were many discussions about that fool driving that junker. The Jeep was totalled. It was the first vehicle I had ever bought brand new. :-( James Dean was tragically killed when he crashed his Porsche Spyder in 1955. They reach a point where sex is only good in a car. Vaughan has sex with Ballard’s wife an experience more intense than she expected. Ballard has sex with the wife of the man he killed in his accident. They find places close to where the accident happened to consummate their mutual need. ”I knew that she was about to enter that period of unthinking promiscuity through which most people pass after a bereavement. The collision of our two cars, and the death of her husband, had become the key to a new sexuality.” Vaughan gathers an entourage of car crash survivors, all of them unable to get past the traumatic event and many of them desiring another crash. They worship their scars, the calligraphy left behind by the steering wheel, dashboard, glass, and objects of impalement. They pick up hookers and have sex with them in the positions of famous car crashes. ”Vaughan’s semen ran down her left thigh on to the black vinyl of the seat. The ivory globes searched for the steepest gradient to the central sulcus of the seat.” This is a madness that becomes all consuming. Ballard starts to see Vaughan as someone out of control, but at the same time he wants to remain a spectator for the final gruesome scene. Vaughan is the Mad Hatter incapable of escaping his own self-imposed deranged destiny, but for it to be truly beautiful his final exit must involve Elizabeth Taylor the most alluring, most desirable woman on the planet. This is a very disturbing book. I have been contemplating if I’ve ever read a book more disturbing. Henry Miller was a thought because of the detailed sexual situations, but really he is pretty tame in comparison. The only one to compete is Naked Lunch , but there is something inaccessible about the Burroughs book. One can still hold it all at arms length. The way this book is written the reader is in it. I could feel it altering my view, skewing my vision of what is prudent and what I desire. An obsession with automobiles and sex are twisted together liked conjoined twins and all of it is laced with a steady dose of pain. I finished reading this book a few days ago and I am finally starting to feel like myself again. Though I do wonder if this book left behind a few nuggets of unhealthy desires in the corners of my brain. They might be waiting like hidden sleeper cells for a vulnerable moment to waken. David Cronenberg made a film back in 1996 which I plan to rewatch in the near future. I wouldn’t really recommend this book to anyone, but at the same time I have to admit it is probably a masterpiece. If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com I also have a Facebook blogger page at: https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten
