mary anne doesn't pass on an eeeevil chain letter and eeeevil starts happening around her. coincidental bad luck happens, especially to mary anne . when she receives a ransom-style note (individually cut letters) saying that she needs to wear a bad luck charm (really a mustard seed necklace OR ELSE, she does it. eventually mary anne realizes that cokie mason and grace blume are sending the eeeevil ransom notes (because grace has a crush on logan), and the bsc humiliates them before they can humiliate the bsc. highlights: -when the note tells mary anne to wear the bad-luck charm "or else" the baby-sitters aren't sure about what "or else" means but claudia is afraid it could mean the end of junk food. oh, claudia. -the baby-sitters are convinced that they need to cast a counterspell (if only they were playing a blue deck ! hyuk hyuk hyuk) so they go to the library to get magic books. there is a chapter where they just read the books and suggest hilariously elaborate spells from the book (one includes "scrapings from the underside of a sea snake") to one another. -when they go to the library for the magic books, mary anne is expecting the old library/old librarian stereotype: finding a white-haired librarian and asking her for books on witchcraft, at which point she takes them to "some musty old corner of the library (maybe even to the basement) and shows them these big, scary, dusty books that are older than she is. the books are weird, a little too helpful, and no one seems to know where they came from." I love this trope. what I love even more is that ann turns it around--mary anne can't find a white-haired librarian, and all the shelves are metal and well-lit. BOOM. that's what libraries are actually like, suckers. -mary anne and logan dress as cats, inspired by Cats (did I just accidentally make a kittens inspired by kittens reference?) when mary anne is wearing her full costume, tigger is terrified of her and hides. this is so cute and reminds me of the time I was wearing a furry hat with ears and my cat leroy was scared and spent the whole day hiding. -when grace says there are other girls at stonybrook middle school (trying to get him to date around), logan says he knows. "and when I see anyone I like as much as mary anne and her friends, maybe I'll do something." lowlights/nitpicks: -when describing the bsc offices, mary anne says, "I'm the secretary. I suspect that this is motly because of my neat handwriting." no, actually, it's because you said you wanted to be secretary, dumb dumb. -a "bunson" burner at school is destroyed and mary anne thinks it's part of her bad luck. it's actually bunsen burner, named after the dude who invented it. -claudia surprises me with the library visit. she doesn't want to go, which makes sense, but HER MOM IS THE HEAD LIBRARIAN THERE. she must be comfortable going there since she has been before. I don't remember when, but I swear in later books the bsc goes to the library and claudia is comfortable and knows exactly where they should go. in this book they don't mention that claudia's mom even works there at all. consistency, ann? -"the first time logan and I went to a dance was a disaster. now we've been to several together." really? in early september through late october, their school has had "several" dances? -how did mary anne not notice that cokie called the necklace a bad-luck charm? as if it wasn't already obvious that cokie and grace were the ones who orchestrated the whole thing, cokie totally blew up her own spot! -the bsc all lie to their parents in order to go to the graveyard. this seems weird and out of character, because they are all such goody two shoeses. -logan is a JERK at the end. he laughs at cokie and grace for being scared (when if the bsc hadn't figured out the mystery in time, they would have been the ones getting scared instead). honestly, it kind of reminded me of how at the end of scott tenorman must die radiohead actually come and actually laugh at scott for crying. it's sort of outlandishly manly and obnoxious. screw you, logan! one claudia outfit: - "it was her vegetable blouse: an oversized white shirt with a green vegetable print all over it--cabbages and squashes and turnips and stuff. under the blouse was a very short jean skirt, white stockings, green anklets over the stockings, and lavender sneakers, the kind boys usually wear, with a lot of rubber and big laces and the name of the manufacturer in huge letters on the sides. wait, I'm not done. claudia had pulled the hair on one side of her head back with a yellow clip that looked like a poodle. the hair on the other side of her head was hanging in her face. attached to the one ear you could see was a plastic earring about the size of a jar lid." kristy's description of school lunch: - "if I took a bunch of these old wilted peas and put them in the mashed potatoes--evenly spread out--and then took my fork and smushed them all down, my lunch would look almost exactly like--" mary anne stops her and says, "I don't want to know what you think it would look like," to which kristy replies, "do you want to know what I think it would smell like?" jackie disasters (all things considered, this is fewer disasters than usual so I don't know why dawn thought this was bad luck) -knocks over a mountain of cartons -knocks over mrs. rodowsky's sewing chest, spilling all the organized contents -cuts himself while cutting armholes in boxes (while making a robot costume) -knocks over a jar of blue paint snack in claudia's room: -tootsie rolls (in her desk drawer)
