Illuminating Passiveness: the Ultimate Wisdom in Nature William Wordsworth is universally known as a great poet whose poems played a tremendous role and was one of most influential and leading figures in the emergence of Romanticism. He published his collection of poems, known as the Lyrical Ballads, in 1798, which was around the beginnings of the Romantic era of the British literature. One of his poems in the Lyrical Ballads is called Expostulation and Reply, in which Wordsworth emphasizes on themes of the Romantic movement through his asserting on the importance of contemplating nature and harnessing imagination to derive feelings, stimulate senses and therefore gain wisdom in life. Wordsworth’s poem was visionary that it is also strongly related to the modern life in the twenty-first century in the aspect of how people nowadays place knowledge and science above sentimental feelings and spiritual development. Wordsworth is considered a quintessential romantic poet because he created poetry that championed imagination and valued nature along with simple language that is easily understandable by the general public to generate various feelings in readers’ hearts of his time and until this day. In his poem, Wordsworth says, “Why, William, on that old grey stone/Thus for the length of half a day/Why, William, sit you thus alone?” (1-3). One can quickly notice how Wordsworth is using uncomplicated phrases to state the opening of his poem, in which he is sitting alone on a stone for lengthy periods of time and his friend is questioning him about the reason behind what he think is a useless action. Wordsworth replied with a response that reflected his philosophy in life and his belief that his musing in nature is what is most essential to a human soul. In his poem, Wordsworth succeeded in describing what is mostly known about Romanticism and that is valuing emotions over rationality. He began his poem with an expostulation, which is using reason to turn someone away from his/her course of action, made by his friend Mathew about his long daydreaming beside the lake, which in Mathew’s opinion is a waste of time, useless and not beneficial for a human being, “Why, William, sit you thus alone/And dream your time away?…Where are your books?—that light bequeathed/To Beings else forlorn and blind!” (2-5). Mathew believed that books contained wisdom and that those who do not read and absorb knowledge are “Blind,” and deprived from the beauty of life. However, Wordsworth rejected what Mathew, in addition to the classics before the Romantic period, valued, which was trying to understand life only by reasoning and rationality. Wordsworth was a romantic poet, and therefore, he had a different perspective in life than did Mathew. His inner intuition and deep emotions derived through human senses; seeing, listening and feeling, that are stimulated due to the tranquility of nature, were a guiding force to him that was stronger than reasoning and rationality that would be other way gained from books. “The eye—it cannot choose but see;/We cannot bid the ear be still;/Our bodies feel, where’er they be/Against or with our will” (17-20). Wordsworth is giving freedom to his senses to explore the world the way the world wants them to see it. He did not explain his thoughts and ideas about the importance of utilizing senses in a very complex diction because that was his whole concept; that these powerful feeling that he is having need not be explained in the same way books do, that they are very simple and at the same time, they are so powerful that they can give him a whole new way in gaining wisdom. He said, “That we can feed this mind of ours/In a wise passiveness” (23-24). He believed that wisdom in life can be gained in techniques different from the physical effort path that most people pursue. Wordsworth glorified nature and its importance on the human soul. Nature spoke to Wordsworth, and he understood the unspoken language in a very profound way that made him wise, calm and sensitive, which can be interpreted from his peaceful response to his friend’s provocative questions. Wordsworth popularity among modern literature readers is due to his visionary poems that still relates to the modern life in the twenty-first century. In his poem, Mathew represents the modern life in its assumption that the only way of developing oneself is by learning from books in its variety, and that spending time looking at nature would be considered a waste of time and not beneficial to improve the person’s knowledge of the modern world and life in general. Wordsworth relates to modern readers who appreciate the view of a fading blue sky diving under a navy blue ocean or a clear lake reflecting the white clouds above in the sky, and are willing to spend hours looking at it and turning on their imagination to live in different worlds where life is happier more beautiful than this modern-life routine that is full of burdensome activities. “You look around on your Mother Earth,/As if she for no purpose bore you” (9-10). This is, up to a certain point, the way people nowadays see life; that one should learn and become more intelligent to produce more because that is the purpose of life, to just give Earth the most of what one can do. But in his poem, Wordsworth comes again to save those like him, who believe in nature and its beauty, by asserting that if people just look around them calmly and wisely without the modern-human rush, they can capture the whole idea without their endless seeking of truth. He says, “Think you, ‘mid all this mighty sum/Of things for ever speaking,/ That nothing of itself will come/But we must still be seeking?” (25-28). Wordsworth is now questioning his friend (the readers): do you think that people must always seek knowledge in books even though the totality of nature and intuition are always speaking to them? However, the implied answer is no. Only if people listen to nature and appreciate it by feeling every breeze of air that land on their faces, every sunset scene their eyes receive, then they might replace reading countless books by lengthy contemplation to gain wisdom and inner satisfaction. Another message Wordsworth is giving for the modern-life audience is stated in the last four lines of his poem. He is telling those who feel out of place in their society and unable to convince others around them of their distinct actions from the general public, to keep on doing them as long as they believe and feel that it is benefiting them and giving them pure relief and happiness, even if it seems unwise and useless to everyone else. “Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,/Conversing as I may,/I sit upon this old grey stone,/And dream my time away” (29-32). Wordsworth is asking his friend to leave him alone and, what he ironically described as, “…Dream my time away” (32).
