Imagine what else may lurk in monkeys, bats, and rodents, just waiting to unleash the next zoonosis, possibly in a country with an already severe health crisis in the Southern hemisphere, AIDS and multiresistant tuberculosis, and hepatitis epidemics. It wouldn´t even matter that Ebola can´t be transmitted by air. Still, looking at you, secret black biological warfare program project. It´s the way of dying that makes it even more horrible than other illnesses, being liquified with blood coming out of all your body and knowing what the virus does, that the chances of a normal life, if having the more or less luck of surviving, are minimal, as the long term damage and health problems are immense after having been literally goo(ed). Next to the black vomit and the more and more severe inner bleedings, there are the frightening final stages, being a zombie who turns in a living corpse with the skin changing color, before dying after series of epileptic shocks. What a convenient coincidence for the virus that dying persons covered in their own blood have epilepsy and spread the death by splattering the blood with their last moves, possibly infecting anyone who gets in direct contact with the blood. There are different sceneries described, each one with the potential to get zero patient started. „The Shadow of Mount Elgon“ lets one ask how easy a tourist, field scientist, biologist, or, most possible, a poor worker, may be infected by direct contact in nature without recognizing it. In the case of the privileged group, the malady will possibly soon be found and detected, but the rightless worker might carry it into slums where it can spread until it reaches the richer areas and travels all over the world from there. „The monkey house“ shows the problem of everything legal and illegal around trading animals, zoos, research, and conservation. It´s not as if any zoo or pet store might be the potential initiation point for the next armageddon, but with people having pets and millions visiting zoos, with all those different animals, especially birds, primates, and cats, not even mentioning the factor of pigs in agriculture, there are so endlessly many possible combinations for zoonosis that it blows one's mind. „Smashdown“ comes closer to my favorite optimistic ending for such books, the ultimate bioweapon, as it describes the real life example of a virus spreading by air. I am not sure about this one, as Ebola is known to not be able to spread via air and there seems to be a misunderstanding in the descriptions in the book (or I misunderstood it), but just because it isn´t, that doesn´t mean that nature doesn´t find a way. Or the umbrella corporation. Fiction and reality are coming closer together, as both the good and bad technological options and the contact with the rest of the wildlife humankind still hasn´t exterminated are increasing and these 4 stories are just a tiny part of the possible ways it could happen, such as lab accidents, biological warfare secretly used in real life (harming the population of an enemy state without being detected), and the human factor of someone, let´s say a diplomat, billionaire, or a leading scientist, in a biohazard level 4 lab, becoming insane or extremist without others recognizing it and going on her/his last world cruise while seeding the pandemic. Heck, it would already be enough if she/he just infects himself and walks around in the neuralgic points of a megacity such as airports, shopping centers, train stations, metro, and the one or other huge event, having used a genetically modified strain of a smallpox measles flu plague Eastern equine encephalitis SARS rabies ebola HIV hybrid with an extra long incubation period while already being infected, giving himself doses of a cure or too small shots of a vaccine (I absolutely don´t know if this is possible) that don´t kill the virus, but keep him contagious without showing symptoms for weeks or even month. Because nobody knows the DNA of the virus, it´s undetectable and because it´s flu season, nobody is alarmed about more and more cases that are engineered to have exactly the common cold and flu symptoms before killing everyone infected. If tech is far enough advanced in 10, 100, or 1000 years, I would deem nothing impossible anymore. We don´t have exact knowledge about the microbiological abilities of smallpox as there is no official research possible outside the Russian and US military, euphemistically called research, labs, except infection and replication rates extrapolated from old data, and measles is the closest real life example of immense destructive strength and potential. The best real life example are elevators, toilets, any small closed room with relatively less air circulation ( or air circulation, without filters because they would cost money, spreading it everywhere) where a person with measles could still passively and indirectly infect persons who enter the rooms up to half an hour after leaving thanks to the extremely high developed ability of measles to stay alive in the air. The only advantage is that ebola can´t spread like measles or influenza, but has the same extreme fatality as smallpox and biological warfare could do nothing more effective than creating an ebola smallpox measles, etc. hybrid that mutates so quickly that finding a vaccination is impossible. A wiki walk can be as refreshing to the mind as a walk through nature in this completely overrated real life outside books: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebolavirus https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emergen... https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categor... https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosafe... https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of...
