Written in 1897, The War of the Worlds is one of the earliest stories about mankind and aliens. Many consider this book to be the inception of the science fiction genre. This story is relatively straightforward: An unknown man is going about his life in jolly old England when aliens invade, causing chaos and destruction. How will this story end? Will humans overcome the aliens or will they all be captured, killed, or enslaved? The War of the Worlds starts off smashingly. HG Wells doesn’t need a 100-page warm up. The action starts flowing from the start. Also, there are some very humorous bits. It is quite easy to see how with the humor amplified, this could turn into The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. The War of the Worlds seems so realistic in many ways. In fact, on October 30, 1938, there was a radio broadcast that adapted The War of the Worlds, changing the invasion point from England to New Jersey. People who listened on the radio actually thought that it was real! Although the story started strongly, I became bored around the halfway point. Some of the sentences and paragraphs were way too long. We can only store so many words in our short-term memory. If you write an extremely long sentence, people will forget the beginning by the time they reach the end. Modern guidance suggests 15-20 words per sentence. It appears based on my Google Search, that around the time of Wells the average sentence averaged 20-30 words. However, Wells has sentences which are greater than 100 words! This style of writing is difficult to read, and I appreciate how literature has evolved (Philip Pullman, Neil Gaiman, Blake Crouch). Additionally, Wells gets a little too far off the path with the copious descriptions of the aliens: the organs and the clothing. As Philip Pullman warns, the author must not leave the path. “The reason for this is simple: if you leave the path, the readers put down the book.” With this, I wholeheartedly agree (especially combined with the massive paragraphs). Overall, I admire HG Wells for his inspiration into future works of science fiction. Of course, the Flesch Reading Ease score had not yet been developed at the time that Wells authored The War of The Worlds. 2025 Reading Schedule Jan A Town Like Alice Feb Birdsong Mar Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere Apr War and Peace May The Woman in White Jun Atonement Jul The Shadow of the Wind Aug Jude the Obscure Sep Ulysses Oct Vanity Fair Nov A Fine Balance Dec Germinal Connect With Me! Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango
