An Angel for Emily by Jude Deveraux My favorite parts: (no particular order) “I had nothing! Do you hear me? … You’ll never understand. Never. Donald gave me – ” Emily shouted. “I know what he gave you!” Michael half-shouted. “For all that I’m an angel, right now, in this body, I’m first of all a man. Do you think it’s easy for me to see you like this and not touch you? I had one night with you and now I must pay for it for all eternity. But it was worth it. Yes, holding you was worth all the punishment in the world.” For a moment Emily stared at him, “Michael, I can’t love you. I can’t. You’re not real. You’ll disappear.” … “Emily, you will never be alone, you never have been, never will.” <3  “What is it?” the archangel said. “I want to be with her” Michael said. “You will be in the next thousand years – ” “No! – I mean that I want to be with her here in this life and now. On earth. In human form.” – Michael insists. “Do you know what are you saying?” the archangel said. “Yes I do. Yes, I know exactly what I’m saying.” “And you saying that you’d give up being an angel for her? You would give up Heaven for her?” the archangel said. “Yes,” Michael said without hesitation. “She gave up her life for me so I will give up all for her… I love her. I have always loved her, I know that now. I’m not good as a guardian angel… I even manipulated Emily’s lives because I could not bear to see her with other men…” “And then,” the archangel said, “But you must not understand that if you give up Heaven you cannot change your mind.” “No, I won’t. I have loved her for centuries so my mind’s not likely to change.” Michael replied. <3  “You seem to have all my smiles,” she said, clinging to him. “I just want them for all eternity?” “And how long is eternity? “Until I stop loving you, which will be never.” Michael said. <3  Captivating. Amusing. Romantic. Suspense. Sexy. Enchanting. I like Emily. At first, she seemed to boring and so unfortunate when it comes to men. However, in the later part of story, Michael revealed that he manipulated her past two lifetimes because he, can’t bear anymore to witness Emily with someone else. I, in some ways, too, unfortunate with guys. They seemed to admire me, like me then a day, week or barely a month Poof! gone. Funny isn’t it? Anyhow, maybe, somewhere out there my guardian is manipulating also my life. haha… (laughs) Back to the story: Emily and Michael portrays that nothing is impossible especially when it comes to love. If you were really meant for that person, love finds it own ways for you and your soulmate to be unite. In the beginning, Emily seems to hate Michael, she thinks that Michael is nothing but a nuisance, she sent him away and even cursed him, but still there’s something in Michael that made her calm when she’s angry, nervous and even frustrated. It’s like there’s an alluring force in Michael that hinders herself not to leave him – which eventually, makes her to fall for him. I also like the way Michael loves Emily. It was completely endless. He had risk everything just for Emily, even if it was selfish in some way. But it was because he can stand to witness Emily with other men, that’s why manipulated Emily’s past lives. Nonetheless, they still end up together and had a happy life, after all the trials they have gone through. Emily fulfills her dreams of having a family with the man of her life, Michael. I love the ending!
