If you consider reading this book, be warned. When John and Elizabeth Sherrill wrote the memoir of Corrie ten Boom, they clearly had an agenda. The first half of the book was okay. That's the reason I gave it 2 and not 1 star. The second half, set during the war years and Corrie's imprisonment in Ravensbruck, was all about worshipping God and Jesus, praying, miracles and prophecies. Even for all the cruelties that happened, there was a higher divine plan. At some point, In Ravensbruck, they were thanking god for being naked (in front of SS guards) because Jesus was naked on his cross too. And they thanked god for the fleas and the lice, so the guards wouldn't enter the barracks and they could read the bible and worship god. Obviously they were ignorant of the diseases caused by the vermin. There was also a miraculous, never ending bottle of vitamins, that allegedly was smuggled into the camp by Corrie, together with her bible. The authors made saints of Corrie and her sister Betsie, instead of writing a believable memoir. And in the appendix to the book, you can put this book to work in your own life. I can only recommend this to deeply devout people. This is not a biography, it’s a hagiography. There are over 7.000 reviews of this book and I have never seen that much 5 star ratings. But only a handful of reviewers understood the ultimate purpose of the book : "it's rather insulting to the millions of Jews and others who died that fervent prayer to Jesus is all that was necessary to avoid death" ; "made me feel the tone was rather subtly supremist" https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... "Just one of many examples of how this book turns a story about World War II into a platform for evangelical tripe." https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... "The unspoken theme is that they were saved because they were Christian, unlike the Jews. This is definitely the Disney version of WWII." https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... "Its problem is that throughout it pushes religion. Honestly, when an author expects me, as a reader, to actually believe that any religious doctrine is the truth I feel like my intelligence is being insulted and it is downright offensive." https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... "it seems to be a bit whitewashed in the veil of faith in Jesus to solve all, in prayers that constantly come through and in the miracle of the never ending vitamins. Call me a sceptic, but I found the constant references to Jesus annoying." https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... 4/10
