Technological deus ex machina removes all tension from an already slow plot-line. The characters are hollow and emotionally disengaged from their own story, which had the futile makings of something original. The ending is atrocious, preceded by wastelands of chapter-length explanation, and a fairy-tale misinterpretation of “neurolinguistics” written solely to remind us that not everyone is cut out to be a scientist, since some people grow up to write pop-fiction. Yet all these criticisms are nothing in light of Snow Crash’s totally insipid action scenes, the following of which is my favorite. ”The businessman reaches across his body with his right hand, grips the handle of his sword just below the guard, draws it out, snaps it forward so it’s pointing at Hiro, then places his left hand on the grip just below the right.” “Hiro does the same. Both of them bend their knees, dropping into a low squat while keeping the torso bolt upright, then stand up again and shuffle their feet into the proper stance—feet parallel, both pointed straight ahead, right foot in front of the left foot.” Stephenson just has this inimitable capacity to make anything, even samurai sword fights, sound dumb AF. I love how he clarifies the position of the right foot and the left foot. And the squatting and shuffling imagery is especially *chef's kiss*. ”The businessman turns out to have a lot of zanshin. Translating this concept into English is like translating fuckface into Nipponese, but it might translate into emotional intensity in football lingo.” “He charges directly at Hiro, hollering at the top of his lungs. The movement actually consists of a very rapid shuffling motion of the feet , so that he stays balanced at all times. [...] Emotional intensity doesn’t convey the half of it, of course. It is the kind of coarse and disappointing translation that makes the dismembered bodies of samurai warriors spin in their graves. The word zanshin is larded down with a lot of other folderol that you have to be Nipponese to understand. And Hiro thinks, frankly, that most of it is pseudomystical crap, on the same level as his old high school football coach exhorting his men to play at 110 percent. Hiro doesn’t have any zanshin at all. ” Omg, Hiro has no zanshin at all?! Can you believe it? “The next time the businessman sets up his ear-splitting screech and shuffles toward Hiro, cutting and snapping his blade, Hiro parries the attack, turns around, and cuts both of his legs off just above the knees. It takes a lot of practice to make your avatar move through the Metaverse like a real person. When your avatar has just lost its legs, all that skill goes out the window. 'Well, land sakes!' Hiro says. 'Lookee here!’ He whips his blade sideways, cutting off both of the businessman’s forearms, causing the sword to clatter onto the floor. 'Better fire up the ol’ barbecue, Jemima!' Hiro continues, whipping the sword around sideways, cutting the businessman’s body in half just above the navel. Then he leans down so he’s looking right into the businessman’s face.” Anyway, yes. Imagine that but for like 500 pages.
