I am back to historical based GGK works, and this time a much less talked about book. Despite it's lack of fame A Song For Arbonne was still brilliant. This is a book set in a fantasy version medieval version of France. It is largely focused on an upcoming conflict between Gorhaut and Arbonne, which are both smaller nations in a setting that is basically France. The setting of this book is based around the french court, and romance, and troubadours. Given that Guy Gavriel Kay is normally a author who uh....does not shy away from sex scenes, I was expecting this to be even more horny. However shockingly this was probably the least horny GGK book I have read. This also did not follow the pattern of one of my favorite starts to a story, a kinda weird middle section, and then and out of this world fantastic ending. This did not hit the highs in my opinion of Tigana or Al-Rassan, but kept a steadily improving quality throughout. Also worth noting that this is for lack of a better word less Malazan esque than Al-Rassan was. It has a clear protagonist, and a clear antagonist. Anyway, the rest of this is just the normal GGK praise you will see for all his books. His writing is absurd. He sets scenes like a sniper, using the smallest amount of words, but building just as vivid of a picture. I normally write down page numbers with quotes I like, and I have maybe never noted as many pages as this. If I read this on kindle and highlighted stuff, I would have highlighted half the book. His characters feel like they live in the setting, they develop naturally, and by the end you get the feeling 15 people could have been the protagonist due to how they are the heroes of their own story. His plotting is so underrated. The scheming is fantastic, it is paced surprisingly well, the setup and payoff is on point, and he brings things together in a way that doesn't feel contrived. Thematically he doesn't hit you over the head, but slips a stiletto through your ribs. This book is no exception, he trusts his readers, and weaves themes in a story like few authors can. I just...I love this mans writing, I love this mans stories. It is annoying in this book that people don't have head trauma from the amount of casual knockouts, but whatever. 9.4/10 for the most consistently steady in quality GGK book I have read so far, but not hitting the highs of The Lions of Al-Rassan
