Perhaps I would have liked this book better if I had known what to expect ahead of time. First and foremost, this book is not the fast-paced adventure story of the Lewis and Clark expedition that I was hoping to read. It is an academic biography of Meriwether Lewis, with particular focus on the expedition (likely because that is the best-documented part of his life). Academic: The narrative is good in places, but lacks rhythm overall. Ambrose relies far too much on extended, direct quotes from the journals of Lewis and (to a lesser degree) Clark. The part of the book I enjoyed most starts around page 320 until the end, which somewhat coincides with the portion of the journey to the Pacific during which Lewis wrote nothing in his journal as well as Lewis's life after the expedition ended. Further, Ambrose seems to have felt compelled to include exhaustive detail at the great expense of flow. I don't really care what you ate for lunch and dinner if it doesn't contribute to the story. And if such details derail the story it's a less forgivable sin. Biography: Don't expect Clark or any other members of the expedition to be given equal (or fair) treatment. The focus of the book is Meriwether Lewis. And in the interest of making this a "complete" biography of Meriwether Lewis, the expedition does not even begin until page 140. So you see, perhaps my disappointment in this book stems largely from the desire to read an adventure, not an academic biography, and the adventure did not even begin until nearly 30% of the way through the volume. And even then, as described above, the adventure was robbed of much of its excitement due to the writing style. Seriously, how can you make an adventure of this magnitude boring? A journey thousands of miles across the continent into the unknown with but meager provisions and stout hearts. It shouldn't even be possible. Ambrose found a way. The story is in there, though, and for better or for worse it is a simply incredible tale. The telling may be lacking, but I find the accomplishment of Lewis and Clark and the Corps of Discovery fascinating and it stirs my imagination. Perhaps there is a book out there that tells the story I was hoping to read. Undaunted Courage has merit, but it is not without its significant disappointments.
