Book Review Burning Angel , for me, didn't quite meet up to expectations in terms of story line. The ending does not address certain questions raised in the mind of the reader as the story progresses. In this, the 8th in the series, I also felt like the thing that I love about these Robicheaux books - the glorious, descriptive passages as can only be seen through the eyes of James Lee Burke and normally nicely balanced alongside a strong plot line - seemed to overwhelm the story so that the descriptions began to feel repetitive in the absence of a strong plot. Therefore the 3 star rating. The dawn was grey and there were strips of mist in the oak and pecan trees. The sun was still below the treeline in the swamp, and the trunks on the far side of the bayou were wet and black in the gloom. You could smell the fecund odor of bluegill and sun perch spawning back in the bays. Having said that, this is but part of a series and I suppose allowances can be made if one instance of this series concentrates more on characterization than it does plot. Burning Angel presents us with a feast of complicated character motivations swirling in a tornado of Robicheaux's feelings of loyalty and guilt. Vietnam lives inside Dave like a parasite rearing its ugly head at the most unfortunate of times and is made explicit in the return of some rather unsavory war buddies to New Iberia; guilt ravages Robicheaux's soul as he sadly ponders the plight of black homesteaders and realizes "How well we've taught them." Here, Batist, an illiterate black man, has a little tete-a-tete with Dave as to an unwelcome black visitor at the boat shed in back of Dave's property. [Batist] used a half-mooned Clorox bottle to scoop the ashes out of the split oil barrel that we used for a barbecue pit. I waited for him to continue. "What was his name?" I said. "What kind of car did he drive?" "He didn't have no car, and I ain't ax him his name." "Where'd he go?" "Wherever people go when you run them down the road with a two-by-fo." "Batist, I don't think it's a good idea to treat people like that." "One like that always work for the white man, Dave." "I beg your pardon?" "Everyt'ing he do make white people believe the rest of us ain't got the right to ax for mo' than we got." Burke raises the question of charity, not as a means of helping others, but as a means to assuaging one's own guilt. But as I watched her walk with labored dignity toward her car in the parking lot, I wondered if I, too, had yielded to that old white pretense of impatient charity with people of color, as though somehow they were incapable of understanding our efforts on their behalf. Fusing together a string of events that involve the mob, Vietnam war buddies, police officers, his family and black homesteaders Dave Robicheaux attempts to balance his personal life with his failing career in the New Iberia police department - all while searching for answers in several killings (historical and present day) and the mysterious purchase of land by a nefarious corporation, land that for generations has been populated by black homesteaders. Clete, his former detective colleague turned legit PI, returns to stand by Dave in all matters. Clete, a man not averse to violence, was created by Burke to be Robicheaux's tempered conscience when guilt and anger force their way into Dave's psyche. For Clete, the need to protect his friend's affinity for compassion, even at the cost of Clete's own well-being, is paramount throughout this series. Clete knows he has a bad streak in him, that he is in many ways the stronger of the two, and his struggle to prevent Dave from being defeated in the same battle that has already been lost by Clete is fierce and a testament to his loyalty. He smiled. His face was round and pink, his green eyes lighted with a private sense of humor. A scar ran through part of his eyebrow and across the bridge of his nose, where he had been bashed witha pipe when he was a kid in the Irish Channel. "Dave, I know what my old Homicide podjo is going to think before he thinks it." We are introduced to Helen, a police colleague in the department. At first not very likable but as Burke explores her life Dave begins to understand her motivations and forgiving as always, an unlikely friendship develops between the two colleagues. Bootsie and Alafaire (Dave's wife and his adopted daughter, now 14 years old) form the last leg on which loyalty stands. They are at the core of Dave's life and show they are willing to go to extraordinary lengths to protect Robicheaux. Bootsie, a former mob princess, and Alafaire, a Salvadorian refugee nearly killed in a plane crash before Dave rescued her, form the triumvirate around which the novels revolve. All readers know that were this trio to fall to harm, Dave Robicheaux would never forgive himself. He would destroy himself. Clete knows it. Bootsie knows it. Alafaire knows it (she requests training on how to handle a gun). And, a former Vietnam buddy who surfaces in this novel. He knows it too. The Robicheaux property is like a revolving door through which protectors come and go, always watching Dave's back. Hades, is not just a river. -------------------------------------------------------------- Series Review James Lee Burke was born in Houston, Texas, in 1936 and grew up on the Texas-Louisiana gulf coast. He attended Southwestern Louisiana Institute and later received a B. A. Degree in English and an M. A. from the University of Missouri in 1958 and 1960 respectively. Over the years he worked as a landman for Sinclair Oil Company, pipeliner, land surveyor, newspaper reporter, college English professor, social worker on Skid Row in Los Angeles, clerk for the Louisiana Employment Service, and instructor in the U. S. Job Corps. He and his wife Pearl met in graduate school and have been married 48 years, they have four children: Jim Jr., an assistant U.S. Attorney; Andree, a school psychologist; Pamala, a T. V. ad producer; and Alafair, a law professor and novelist who has 4 novels out with Henry Holt publishing. His short stories have been published in The Atlantic Monthly, New Stories from the South, Best American Short Stories, Antioch Review, Southern Review, and The Kenyon Review. And, in case you're a write and often get discouraged, listen to Burke when he says: "My advice is to never lose faith in one's gift and to never quit. An artist must ignore the naysayers and not be discouraged by rejection and never, under any circumstances, give up submitting one's work." His novel The Lost Get-Back Boogie was rejected 111 times over a period of nine years, and upon publication by Louisiana State University press was nominated. Has he won any awards? In 1988 James Lee Burke Burke was awarded a John Simon Guggenheim Fellowship for Creative Arts in Fiction. [1]. Burke received the 2002 Louisiana Writer Award for his enduring contribution to the "literary intellectual heritage of Louisiana." The award was presented to him by then Lt. Governor of Louisiana, Kathleen Blanco, on November 2, 2002, at a ceremony held at the inaugural Louisiana Book Festival in Baton Rouge, LA. James Lee Burke has been recognized three times by the Mystery Writers of America (MWA). The MWA awarded its Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Novel of the year in 1990 for Black Cherry Blues. In 1998 the MWA again awarded its "Edgar" for Best Novel of the year for Burke's Cimarron Rose. Then in 2009 James Lee Burke received the MWA's Grand Master Award. It is rare for a mystery novelist to win both an "Edgar" [Edgar Allen Poe] Award and a Guggenheim Fellowship. Which of JLB's books have been made into movies? TWO FOR TEXAS starring Kris Kristofferson and Tom Skerrit was produced by TNT. HEAVEN'S PRISONERS starred Alec Baldwin, Terri Hatcher, Kelly Lynch, Eric Roberts and Mary Stuart Masterson. IN THE ELECTRIC MIST WITH CONFEDERATE DEAD, starring Tommy Lee Jones, John Goodman and Mary Steenburgen. What else is on the horizon for the Dave Robicheaux series? After two so-so attempts to adapt James Lee Burke’s Dave Robicheaux terrific mystery novel series into features, the New Orleans-based crime saga is being redrawn for cable TV. Fox-based producer Hutch Parker has optioned Burke’s books and is packaging the series. After how well FX and Graham Yost did with Elmore Leonard’s U.S. Marshal Raylan Givens character in the series Justified , cable sounds like just the place for Robicheaux if you're still a believer in cable (personally, I think cable is so 20th century and I would guess it won't be around in ten years given Netflix and Hulu's move as of late into developing their own exclusive series. I've been seriously considering shutting down cable. Primarily known for his Dave Robicheaux series (with his Billy Bob Holland series rapidly catching up), Burke is known for marrying literature with crime-fiction while simultaneously standing at the forefront of crime-fiction authors with his second-to-none character development across a series. In case you haven't noticed, there's a marked increase in "regional" crime fiction of which Burke is a pioneer (for example: the Cork O'Connor series set in Minnesota, or the Walt Longmire series set in Wyoming). In this series, Burke exposes America to Louisiana and specifically to New Orleans and New Iberia. Having traveled quite a bit both within the United States as well as outside of it, it is my opinion that Louisiana is one of those states that most resembles a foreign country. Its French ancestry, its Napoleonic law, its parishes, and its Creole and Cajun population infuse this series with a decidedly exotic slant, a perspective that is really driven home when one listens to a competent audio book reading (preferably read by Mark Hammer). Every novel in this series delves into moral uncertainty, the menace of uncontrolled human behavior, greed and sloth and violence all delivered via a careful juxtaposition of Louisiana's coastal natural beautfy and its dark underbelly. If that were all there is to this series, it would be a fabulous read. But, Burke doesn't stop there. His novels are a study into the deep recesses of love and loyalty; Of family and compassion and in this sense his resembles the work of William Kent Krueger who explores a similar vein in his crime series featuring Sherriff Cork O'Connor . It is James Lee Burke who stands out as one of the true pioneers in American crime-fiction (much as his counterparts do by rote in Scandinavia) by seriving up a devastating expose of the sociopolitical issues that exist in our nation today, and more specifically within the region for which he writes. Unlike Craig Johnson's Walt Longmire series, who delivers a hero rather than an anti-hero (to the delight of his romantic literature fans), Burke has engaged the help of a decidedly flawed anti-hero, Dave Robicheaux, to accomplish his mission on earth. It is a calculated move that allows his readers to experience a harrowing journey through the former Napoleonic waters of New Iberia and New Orleans. You will not be disappointed and if you're like me (New Orleans and its French Quarter is a former home of mine), you will find yourself willfully putting the book down...not because the book's no good, but because it's so good you will want to savor every moment.
