An utterly fascinating and fundamental work of anthropology on the origins of culture and the flow of life. Granted, a bit too much theory and a bit dated, as this is a work from 1977. Therefore, some parts have surely been more extensively covered since then. Yet this has clearly been influential and left its marks on the field. This is a fast (292 pages, the rest is bibliography) and easily digestible read with chapters being short and limited in terms of tangiality, and furthermore not too academic in its embrace of quotations and footnotes. (it's all there at the end) Yet it was presented in a thoughtful and structured way. It clearly shows that Harris was an expert in the field, the way he summarised literature and compares, sometimes refutes other theories, is seemingly done with ease yet inserted with care. Overall, this makes for a good introduction to the field and more popular readings such as Guns, Germs and Steel. Some memorable quotes: “My purpose in this book is to replace the old onwards-and-upwards Victorian view of progress with a more realistic account of cultural evolution” (Harris, p. x). “The question uppermost in my mind is not whether the gains of the last 150 years are real, but whether they are permanent” (Harris, p. xi). “Cultures on the whole have evolved along parallel and convergent paths which are highly predictable from a knowledge of the processes of production, reproduction, intensification and depletion” (Harris, p. xiv). “The world is full of moralists insisting that they have freely willed what they were unwittingly forced to want, while by not understanding the odds against free choice, millions who would be free have delivered themselves into new forms of bondage. To change social life for the better, one must begin with the knowledge of why it usually changes for the worse. That is why I consider ignorance of the causal factors in cultural evolution and disregard of the odds against a desired outcome to be forms of moral duplicity” (Harris, p. xiv). “Even if there was 50 percent infant mortality due to “natural” causes, another 23 to 35 percent of all potential offspring would have to be “removed” to achieve zero growth population” (Harris, p. 21). “The best method of population control available to Stone Age hunter-collectors was to prolong the span of years during which a mother nursed her infant” (Harris, p. 23). “Raids, routs, and the destruction of settlements tend to increase the average distance between settlements and thereby lower the overall regional density of population. One of the most important benefits of this dispersion - a benefit shared by both victor and vanquished - is the creation of “no man’s land” (Harris, p. 56). “I propose that without reproductive pressure neither warfare nor female infanticide would have become widespread and that the conjunction of the two represents a savage but uniquely effective solution to the Malthusian dilemma” (Harris, p. 60). “The Oedipus complex was not the cause of war; war was the cause of the Oedipus complex (keeping in mind that war itself was not a first cause but a derivative of the attempt to control ecological and reproductive pressures)” (Harris, p. 96). “Once the prisoner has been brought back to the village, the treatment he can expect is determined largely by the capacity of his hosts to absorb and regulate servile labor, the decisive difference being that between pre- and post-state political systems. When prisoners are few and far between, their temporary treatment as honoured guests is not surprising. Whatever deep psychological ambivalences may exist in the minds of the captors, the prisoner is a valuable possession - one for whom his hosts have literally risked their lives. Yet there is usually no way to absorb him into the group; since he can’t be sent back to the enemy, he must be killed. And torture has its own gruesome economy. If to be tortured is, as we say, to die a thousand deaths, then to torture one poor captive is to kill a thousand enemies. Torture is also a spectacle - an entertainment - which has been time-tested for audience approval down through the ages” (Harris, p. 156). "The trouble with dogs as a source of meat is not that they are contemptible but that they thrive best when they themselves are fed on meat" (Harris, p. 181). "The great advantage of the Old World domesticated species is that they are herbivores and ruminants and thrive best when they feed on grass, stubble, leaves , and other plant foods which human beings cannot digest. Because of the Pleistocene extinctions, the Aztecs lacked such species. And it was this lack, together with the extra costs involved in using carnivores and birds as a source of animal protein, that tipped the balance in favour of cannibalism. Of course, the meat obtained from prisoners of war is also costly - it is very expensive to capture armed men. But if a society lacks other sources of animal protein, the benefits of cannibalism may outweigh these costs" (Harris, p. 182). "Cultures tend to impose supernatural sanctions on the consumption of animal flesh when the ratio of communal benefits to costs associated with the use of a particular species deteriorates." (Harris, p. 196). "Pig raising incurred costs that posed a threat to the entire substance system in the hot, semiarid lands of the ancient Middle East. And this threat increased sharply as a result of intensification, depletion and population growth" (Harris, p. 197). "There is nothing about the list of species interdicted in Leviticus that runs counter to the ecological explanation of the pig taboo" (Harris, p. 203). "The late Vedic-early Hindu Ganges Valley kingdoms had a priestly Caste analogous to the Levites among the ancient Israelites and the Druids among the Celts" (Harris, p. 213). "I do not believe that we are endangered by despotic traditions that have acquired a life of their own and that are transferred from one mode of production to another or from one ecosystem to another" (Harris, p. 246). "After a society has made its commitment to a particular technological and ecological strategy for solving the problem of declining efficiency, it may not be possible to do anything about the consequences of an unintelligent choice for a long time to come" (Harris, p. 247). “I hold it perniciously false to teach that all cultural forms are equally probable and that by mere force of will an inspired individual can at any moment alter the trajectory of an entire cultural system in a direction convenient to any philosophy. Convergent and parallel trajectories far outnumber divergent trajectories in cultural evolution. Most people are conformists. History repeats itself in countless acts of individual obedience to cultural rule and pattern, and individual wills seldom prevail in matters requiring radical alterations of deeply conditioned beliefs and practices. At the same time, nothing I have written in this book supports the view that the individual is helpless before the implacable march of history or that resignation and despair are appropriate responses to the concentration of industrial managerial power. The determinism that has governed cultural evolution has never been the equivalent of the determinism that governs a closed physical system. Rather, it resembles the causal sequences that account for the evolution of plant and animal species.” (Harris, p. 290) “While the course of cultural evolution is never free of systemic influence, some moments are probably more “open” than others. The most open moments, it appears to me, are those at which a mode of production reaches its limits of growth and a new mode of production must soon be adopted.” (Harris, p. 291)
