A fantastic bunch of short stories featuring Poirot. I've linked longer reviews for each of the stories if you're interested. The Adventure of the Western Star A movie star and a Lady both get letters threatening to steal their supposed star-crossed jewels. And they both go to Poirot for help. Poirot investigates. The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor A man with financial troubles dies and leaves his much younger wife with a fat insurance policy. Was it really natural causes? Poirot investigates. The Adventure of the Cheap Flat A young couple finds an amazing flat at a deal that looks too good to be true. Is it? Poirot investigates. The Mystery of Hunter's Lodge A wealthy uncle dies, a housekeeper disappears, and the nephew and his wife ask Poirot for answers. Poirot investigates. The Million Dollar Bond Robbery When a young English bank employee is entrusted with carrying a million dollars in bonds across the ocean to extend credit to an American bank, only to have the whole shebang disappear into thin air. His fiancée thinks he needs help. So, Poirot investigates. The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb Several men die after opening a supposedly cursed tomb. A frantic mother calls the Belgian detective in the hopes of saving her son from the same fate. Poirot investigates. The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan A very highly insured jewel disappears in a locked room scenario that points to the lady's maid as the only possible suspect. Poirot investigates. The Kidnapped Prime Minister The Prime Minister, his secret service chauffeur, and his close friend all disappear. High-level political talks hinge on the PM being able to speak, and now he's gone. Poirot investigates. The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim A very important banker walks toward town and disappears. Japp bets Poirot that he can't just sit in his armchair and solve the case. Poirot investigates. <--and wins five pounds The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman A Count is poisoned after a contentious dinner party at his home. He phones a doctor for help while Poirot and Hastings are at his home. Poirot Investigates. The Case of the Missing Will When Violet Marsh's wealthy uncle threatens to disinherit her if she furthers her education, she heads off to school. But when he dies, he decides to test her wits against his. And she was clever enough to call in Poirot to...investigate. If you're looking to dip your toes into the water and check out the vibe this famous detective gives off in his full-length books, this is a great place to start. Highly Recommended.
