The second volume of The Years of Lyndon Johnson tells the story of LBJ's rise from a mere Congressman – with little hope for significant advancement – to his unlikely election to the U.S. Senate. The majority of the pages describe Johnson's relentless, ruthless, expensive, and dishonest campaign against former Texas Governor Coke Stevenson for the 1948 Democratic nomination, which Johnson officially (but far from legitimately) won by 87 votes. Texas at the time was a one-party state – with the one party being the Democratic party – so, in statewide races, the winner of the Democratic party nomination was all but guaranteed to win the general election (exactly like my home state, except with the single party being the Republican party). When the popular, honest, and honorable Governor Stevenson entered the race for the open Texas Senate seat it was presumed by most all Texans that he would be the nominee and the next Senator from Texas. But Lyndon Johnson, a man to whom winning meant everything, had other ideas. With a near unlimited amount of campaign money at his disposal and connections to some of the most powerful (and often corrupt) local leaders, Johnson was able to very literally steal the election for himself. The story of how this was done is absolutely fascinating. The ability of Pulitzer Prize winning author Robert Caro to describe in such amazing detail the political maneuverings and the interwoven lives and activities of all the players kept me enthralled from start to finish. The Years of Lyndon Johnson is so much more than just a biography. As the author explains: From the first time I thought of becoming a biographer, I never conceived of my biographies as merely telling the lives of famous men but rather as a means of illuminating their times and the great forces that shaped their times – particularly political power, since in a democracy political power has so great a role in shaping the lives of the citizens of that democracy. What I set out to try to do was to examine the way power works in America in the middle of the twentieth century. Mr. Caro fully achieved his goal with this book.
