Larry McMurtry reinvented the Western novel. With his debut, “Horsemen Pass By” to his Pulitzer Prize winning “Lonesome Dove,” McMurtry broke from the conventional Western made popular by Zane Gray in the early twentieth century and Louis L’Amour in the mid-twentieth century and portrayed the West—whether historical or modern—with more grit and grim. McMurtry’s speciality is character development. And perhaps no Western character is more beloved than “Lonesome Dove’s” Augustus McCree. McMurtry knows how to capture the essence and quirkiness of a character. None do it better in any genre. McMurtry doesn’t disappoint in painting the pen portrait of his heroin, Tasmin, in “Sin Killer,” the first his Berrybender Narratives—a tetralogy, or series of four volumes following the lives and adventures of the noble English Berrybender family as they explore the American West. Traveling the Missouri River, Tasmin and the various Berrybenders encounter a score of troubles from Indians, the weather, and their own folly. “Sin Killers” is at once a quick and accessible read with the feel of an epic novel. It is the epic nature of the four volume series that seems to give this first novel an overwritten quality. McMurtry knew financial success from the very beginning of his career. “Horsemen Pass By” sold (and continues to sell) hundreds of thousands of copies and was made into a major movie staring Paul Newman and Patricia O’Neil, “Hud.” And he won critical acclaim with “Lonesome Dove,” which was made into major mini-series for television. From such heights McMurtry has never descended. But it might be such heights that gives “Sin Killer” such a lazy feel to the writing. McMurtry doesn’t have the reputation of trying to tackle big ideas or trying to push the cultural boundaries in his novels, but the ideas in “Sin Killer,” written by a more mature McMurtry, don’t live up to the earlier works of “Horsemen Pass By” or “Lonesome Dove.” “Sin Killer” is a good summer beach read, but there’s not much sin to kill within its pages, and I think that’s a sin . . . committed by one of the finest American writers of our generation.
