Three stars only because this isn’t totally my style of book. An existential and philosophical rumination on the nature of humanity, intelligence, and technology. 5000 years ago most of the human race instantly disappeared, leaving a handful of humans, including a native tribe, and all the robots to inherit the Earth. Separated from technological infrastructure, and in the case of the humans, granted incredible longevity and health, each of these groups are left to develop in ways previously unimagined while the Earth returns to its natural state. Most of the book explores the social and parapsychological changes that have emerged in the absence of technology. It was an interesting read right after Sisterhood of Dune , with the fanatical anti-technological Butlarians and the various schools all attempting to evolve humanity to a higher state in the absence of “thinking machines.” It is well written and interesting, but more idea than story or character driven. If that’s your jam, you will love it! The ability seems to be inherent. Man probably had it for a long time before he began to use it. For it to develop time was needed and the longer life gave us time. Perhaps it would have developed even without the longer life if we'd not been so concerned, so fouled up, with our technology. Somewhere we may have taken the wrong turning, accepted the wrong values and permitted our concern with technology to mask our real and valid purpose. The concern with technology may have kept us from knowing what we had. These abilities of ours could not struggle up into our consciousness through the thick layers of machines and cost estimates and all the rest of it. … ”They are [frightening] to me,” said John. “Not perhaps because of any single facet of their culture, for some of these facets can be very pleasant, but because of a sense of the irresistible arrogance implicit in it. Not the power so much, although the power is there, but the naked arrogance of a species that sees everything as property to be manipulated and used.”
