The Hiding Place by Corrie ten Boom was actually a very good book, much to my surprise. I expected it to be very boring, very depressing, and very preachy. At times it did drag a little - especially at the beginning - and it was sad, but it could be called preachy, and the hope won out in the end. It won out through much of the book, actually; I never felt truly depressed. I just knew God was there. Corrie and Betsie both showed their belief in this truth in the way they dealt with difficult situations. The story starts with a recount of important moments throughout Corrie’s childhood and young adulthood. It gives a history of her family’s business which is a watch repair shop. It gives a good viewpoint of where Corrie’s thought processes, opinions, and beliefs come from. Parts of it didn’t seem important at the time, but I became convinced later that it was important - because it all turned Corrie into the woman she grew into, the woman who lived through what she did. At last the book arrives at the Nazi occupation of Holland. This is when the story really starts to pick up. In their own quiet way, the ten Booms stand up to the Nazis - first by keeping their radio from being confiscated … and slowly through becoming involved in the Resistance and saving people. They become deeply involved in the Resistance. The book gives us many examples of them risking their lives to save a few people. After having helped many people escape Holland and kept many hidden in the special room behind Corrie’s bedchamber, the ten Booms are found out and raided by the Nazis. Though the people in their ‘Hiding Place’ stay safe, she and her father and sister and a few others are taken away to a prison camp where most of the remainder of the story takes place. There, Corrie’s father and sister Betsie both die - her father shortly after they arrive and her sister just days before they are released. Over many months in prison and in concentration camps, Betsie and Corrie both minister to others. They are a support and guide to the women there - hosting a Bible study and prayer meeting of sorts, encouraging and lifting up others whenever they can. I wonder if Betsie was a little white-washed in Corrie’s mind by her death, as she seems like one of those too-good-to-be-real characters - another Elsie Dinsmore, if you will. But she was definitely very noble - if a little too optimistic for her own good, methinks. Corrie was the narrator and the main character, of course, and I found myself liking her more than other characters. She had a lot of common sense and gumption. Later I found out that she was just released because of an error and the rest of the women in her group were killed shortly afterwards. Well, of course we know it wasn’t an ‘error,’ exactly. It was God! The point of this book is, of course, that God is there even when things are dark - even when it seems like there is no life, there is no hope. He is our hiding place in time of trouble. This book can teach you so much … about history, about people, and most of all, about God. It’s really an incredible work - and the fact that it’s a true story makes it even more impressive. The author was very honest about the tough things she went through and the things she saw others go through. And yes, it was horrific … but the message of seeing God in it all was incredible! I wish everyone who had to go through anything traumatic or horrific could read this book. It would do them a world of good! Since these are real life people, not characters, and since this is a real life story, not a plot, I won’t critique this book on those points. The writing style was excellent - it was plain and truthful while getting the point across without preaching. My mom got emotional about this book. I did not. Not much upsets me. But it was very emotional what with everything they had to go through and then how it all wrapped up. I can see how some people might cry when they read it. I really enjoyed this book and would definitely recommend it. Kellyn Roth, Reveries Reviews
