Into the Blue is classic Goddard culminating in an unforgettable ending. “Harry Barnett lives the life of an Englishman on permanent vacation in Greece, house-sitting a villa in Lindos, Rhodes for a powerful friend and hiding from a past disgrace. That is, until a guest at the villa, Heather Mallender, disappears on a walking tour of Profitis Ilias and Harry is the number one suspect.” As mentioned in my review of Harry Barnett #2 I have cast Killing Eve’s David Haig as Barnett and can’t you just see him lounging around, no ambition. Quite content to get drunk with the locals, smoking Greek cigarettes but still with a brain able to recognise when something isn’t quite right. Here is the first paragraph and I dare you not to continue reading: “If she should return now, of course, or even five minutes from now, it would still be all right. The thought that he might never see her again could then be dismissed as a delusion, an absurd over-reaction to an excess of solitude and silence. And from the notion that, at any second, she would return, calling to him as she came down the track, part of his mind could not be dislodged; the orderly, housetrained, rational part. It was only in the chaotic realm of instinct and sensation that a contrary suspicion has taken root, only, as it were, in the part of himself that he did not care to acknowledge.” Goddard is so good at not only setting scenes but deftly sketching a character’s state of mind. “Suddenly like a cliff face that is undermined for years by the sea before abruptly subsiding, his self-control disintegrated. He had been manipulated every step of the way. The face at the window, the abandoned scarf, the disembodied whistle: all were part of the trap into which he had been led. Logic and reason were beyond him now, headlong flight his only recourse.” There is the mystery of two unused postcards of Rhodes that turn up in Harry’s glove compartment and then there are the photographs that Harry picks up from the developers. “Ever such a lot on it,” Heather had said. “Twenty four colour photographs taken with Heather’s camera. The most recent photo was Heather in the garden of the villa, a photo of Harry himself, three shots of local villas, the harbour from the villa. Working backwards there was the villa from the beach, the harbour promontory which Harry guessed might have been taken on Heather’s first afternoon in Lindos. Harry begins thinking about dates. “The photographs had begun to assume a magnetic quality of their own, drawing him further and further into the past.” Harry goes through the rest of the sometimes random photos and discovers the first photo taken on the roll is one of Mallender Marine, Heather’s family’s business and where Harry used to work. This where the magic really begins. “Until his discovery of the photographs, Harry had found the mystery impenetrable. Now it seemed that there might be a solution, if he could but penetrate the meaning of the scenes she had recorded.” Into the Blue is very hard to put down after this.
