Neiderman's Pin was mentioned in Paperbacks from Hell: The Twisted History of '70s and '80s Horror Fiction , and while I have not read that yet, I thought I would check out some of his other novels. Someone's Watching possesses some interesting historical details about old Catskill's resorts, but beyond that, meh. Our main protagonist, Marty, lives with his drunken lout father in an old farm house deep in the Catskills; the closest dwellings around are old, abandoned resorts that at one time catered to the Borst Belt crowd, but those days are past (this was first published in 1983). Marty dropped out of school at 16 to help his old man with repairing cars and such; this and other old jobs constitute their primary source of income. One day Marty's dad comes home with a woman and her teenage daughter and announces they are going to be married, which they do a few days later. Now, Marty's dad has 'eyes' on the 'cocktease' daughter and one day gets his chance and starts raping her, only to have Marty show up and clock the asshole with a coal shovel. Feeling it best to lay low for a spell, Marty and Judy (the daughter) decide to hole up in one of the old, abandoned resorts; seems like a good move, but the old motel is not as abandoned as they thought... While not a really novel premise, this could have made a decent story nonetheless; alas, it falls flat on almost every level. Marty and Judy are so cardboard it hurts, and this extends to all the characters in Someone's Watching . As everyone is basically a walking trope, there are no real surprises and this felt scripted to say the least. Of course Marty and Judy fall for one another. Of course Marty's dad is gonna look for some payback. Of course there is some creepy dude at the old motel. It was interesting to read about the old motel in its heyday, as narrated by a senile old man still living there (one of the owners), but not interesting enough to really carry the novel. I have read grocery lists that keep me more interested. Not a complete fail, but I cannot recommend it either. 2 sleepy stars.
