This collection from 1981 is not perfect at all but I'm going to contrary-wise give it 5 stars because there are achingly wonderful stories here by authors who are new discoveries for me, and who I will explore more. I feel my life has been hugely enriched by reading it. An interesting recurring theme is children, stories seen from their point of view. It got me to thinking, are there disproportionate numbers of short stories about children? The form seems to lend itself excellently to capturing their sometimes black/white way of seeing morality, which can be shorn of excessive contingencies and caveats. Also, the way children experience a single event and as a result radically change their approach to life, becoming almost a different person. (Eddie Limonov's piece in Granta 14: Autobiography is the best example of this, but there are elements of it in the HE Bates, Morley Callaghan, Saki and de la Mare stories here). Some are incomprehensibly forgotten. One of my favourites was William Sansom's Various Temptations. Sansom "was once described as London's closest equivalent to Franz Kafka" (bit odd that - was there someone in Glasgow, or Birmingham, who was closer to Kafka than him? Or was the aim to emphasise how much of a London-rooted author he was?) Various Temptations is a great example of an author setting himself an almost impossible task, in order to push his skills to the limit - imagine a young, lonely woman, on her own in her flat, reading about a serial killer who has been preying on .... well yes of course, young lonely women. It's beautifully written, and utterly compelling. Sansom's most popular book on GR has 44 ratings. It makes you think about the nature of long-term fame. We tend to think time is an efficient and fair sorter of wheat from chaff. But really, why are some writers forgotten? I'm definitely going to read more by him. William Trevor is of course much better known. Still, 5701 is his maximum rating here - hardly Lee Child, or even Raymond Carver. His story, Going Home, of two miserable people - one a 13 year old schoolboy, the other his 39 year old teacher - in a kind of verbal "who is the most tortured soul" competition on a train, is un-put-downable. Other joys here, which I will be exploring more: Bret Harte, O. Henry, Ring Lardner, Frank O'Connor, A.E. Coppard, Katherine Anne Porter. And Katherine Mansfield, who I'm on to right now. Of late, I've been delving into the wonders of the 19th Century, but I would still categorise myself as - mainly - a late 20th / early 21st Century soul. Novertheless, the most recent contribution here, by John Updike, wins the prize for most hated. A nice idea - a theology student, who works as a lifeguard on a beach during the summer holidays - what thoughts might he have, during those long hours up there on his high chair? What parallels might he draw with his studies? But, though short, Updike makes it a turgid slog of pyrotechnic literary masturbation. And, maybe predictably, being Updike, we have a mention of why skinny intellectual types like our young hero make the best lovers, despite having no recognisable connection to the theme (oh wait ... lifeguards are usually jocks ... connection established ... sigh). This would nowadays be called "Oxford Book of English-language Short Stories". There are no translations. It is quite a conservative selection, RK Narayan is the only representative of the developing world (well OK, there is also Doris Lessing... ). In fact, Oxford have not updated it - instead we now have collections of American, Canadian, Welsh, Scottish, English - the country not the language - etc. which means, ironically, that the developing world gets even less of a look-in, apart from a Caribbean collection.
