Finished: The last 100 pages or so I was thinking - stop with the crap about the customs of medieval times and just let me know what is going to happen to the main characters! I cared about them very much. I ended up totally loving Katherine. She was real. She made tons of "wrong steps" in her life, but damn it all we all have to live don't we! Who says we have to be perfect? Who says we SHOULDN'T fall in love and be carried away by our emotions. Also I REALLY learned about life in the middle ages. It felt that I was no longer looking at a foreign time and place, but was part of it. Part of the times - castles with their solars and kitchens and clothes (both jeweled and ragged) and strange foods and smells and holidays and chivalry and plagues, scarlet fever and stupid political and religious leaders, but also truly religious individuals who helped and were kind and understood others' weaknesses. What else? Pilgrimages and shrines and a corrupt Church and Chaucer. All of this came alive and it was an enjoyable read! Not heavy. Any happiness attained was certainly earned! Through pages 455: Politics - lies, lies, lies. Will the serfs attain freedom? Katherine has gotten off her high pedestal. Quick changes here - I am on page 410 and, yup I do like it again. I guess it is just that I got so terribly annoyed with Katherine. Is that b/c the author has made me care for her? Anyhow the following pages with Katherine and her first daughter, Blanchette, sucked me in again. I am not giving any spoilers! Through 399: Sometimes the stupidity of Katherine annoys me. I am happy that the serfs are being egged on by John Ball. Katherine is getting spoiled by her good living. Is her memory so short? Here is a short conversation between Katherine and her maid, Hawsie: Katherine says, "The poll tax is hard on folk, no doubt, but wars must be paid for, Hawsie. Why must they show so much hatred?" "Tis easy to hate, lady dear, when you be poor and starving." "But they are not!" cried Katherine, her eyes flashing. "Nobody starves in Leicester, or any of the Duke's domains. The kitchens often feed three hundred a day." "Tis not everyone wants to be beggars, sweeting," said Hawsie. Katherine has changed. I remember when she behaved more as a commoner, on May Day festivities when she ran barefoot and frolicked with the others. And NOW she is finally beginning to realize that if the Duke dies she will be in quite a pickle...... Everybody makes choices. You have to live with these choices. Through page 392: Not as good as before. Why - well I am really not into politics, whether it be of today or the 1300s. It is 95% of the time corrupt and self-centered. Who is ruling is interesting to me more in terms of how it affects the normal lower status people, the masses. That is just where my interest lies. Neither am I that interested in who is marrying who. The more one knows of history the more one is interested in it, and I quite simply don't know very much about medieval royalty! So this book has to be more interesting to those who knows a lot about the various kings and queens and their personal traits. I DO have to start somewhere. And then Katherine's role as acknowledged mistress just rolls along. I do admire the blatancy with which the Duke shows this to all and everyone - BUT what about the misery he is causing his Castilian wife? He did marry her, and if he is such a kind person .... Yes, yes, I know, politics and how kingdoms were made and broken, well that is how it was done - through battles and marriage and then the bed to produce the needed heirs. Furthermore, now "romantic developments" are sprouting for the children too! I am not as attached to them as I am to Katherine so it means little to me. Books often drag 2/3 - 3/4 through. History continues to be deftly interwoven into the story. The book continues to describe the customs of the times. This I continue to enjoy! So it is not hopeless. I have forgotten to mention that the plague - the Black Death - was well depicted, and bits about Chaucer are interesting! Also the historical developments of part of the 100 Years War are explained. Through page 151: What a surprise. This is fun to read. The author has correctly followed the historical facts. I read that some say the ending is not agreed upon by all historians, but I am not there yet. So the history is correct and small details of how things were done in the 1300s are interestingly and accurately described. This is history that is fun to read. Never dry text. It takes place during the 100 Years War. Reading it feels simply like reading a fun novel - and you are leaning at the same time. What could be better! There is something about the way the author depicts people that makes them very real. Flesh and bone. Physically when Katherine is frolicking on the day before her wedding, a beautiful spring day of May, you feel the dew on the grass on your own bare feet. She somehow with just a few words catches how one's body interprets the weather, physical contact or sickness. The smells are in your own nostrils. The wetness on your own skin. And it is all done so naturally that it seems you are simply there, not reading about it. The characters are not one-sided. The same person has both good and bad qualities, just like in real life. So far so good. I am enjoying myself. A delightful surprise. I am worried about this one. I feel I OUGHT to read it, but will I like it?! It seems like it has a religious ending - gulp. And the romance - won't that be too much?. Also some say it has a slow start. With all these negative points, why does it have such a high rating? I can always just stop if I really cannot stand it.......
