The person who convinced me to read this is no longer on Goodreads, so I cannot tell you what meanings I thought I would discover within this work. Even the collective 'meanings' is a poor word choice, because my relationship with literature is one to which only the pair of mentor and mentee of the male variety has claim in the bowels of history and pop culture. It is my lot to be mentee to a few of the living and far more of the dead of various forms and nationalities; the only commonality is we have never met and, even in the case of the alive, will never do so. Thus, I do not have the benefit of consultation on even the most arduous or rare or fleeting of terms, nothing to enable an inheritance of a complete whole of the older and the wiser. What holisms I make, I make alone. He had a great contempt for people who renounce the world and then appear not to have done so after all. But she was leaving him. It is tiring to think on how academia would have processed us had it caught I and the work together. Thinking of it is unavoidable when one is interested in literature and not institutionalized definitions of such, and it has been a long time since I've forborne from writing what I knew classrooms would not like, but I am not yet aged enough for unconcern to come without resistance. Aspiring professors of English do not build their critical evaluation on video games and animated televisions shows and an uneasy consciousness of the Other, even when the evaluation is of the most loving nature. Technically this work is not found in the English curriculum, technically a proper understanding of this goes far beyond what my academic career is aimed towards, but I have not yet broken past the mental block of the ivory tower that dogs my every self-reflexive thought. She liked his bemused way of cocking his head to one side as he contemplated his unhappiness. My favorite video game of all time is called Okami, and I firmly believe my understanding of The Tale of Genji was aided immeasurably by my history of playing. It is funny, it is menacing, it is lengthy and complex, but above all it is gorgeous in the most life affirming of ways. I neither sniff at cities nor sentimentalize the countryside, but in Okami the goal is to restore growth of flora and fauna to the world through the power of writing. Add music and art and heartbreak that does not happen through war torn horrors, and you have as close to my ideal as reality can currently come. Such a difficult, constricted life as a woman was required to live! Moving things, amusing things, she must pretend to be unaffected by them. With whom was she to share the pleasure and beguile the tedium of this fleeting world? Since it choose to look upon women as useless, unfeeling creatures, should it not pity the fathers who went to such trouble rearing them? Like the mute prince who was always appearing in sad parables, a woman should be sensitive but silent. One thousand one hundred and thirteen pages and what I found of my Eurocentric feminism could be numbered off in concentric quotes with the fingers of a single hand. Even if the owner of the historically granted nom de plume of Murasaki Shikibu hadn't been female, my vein of 'outside reading' would have sought out my definition of evidence she was there. It is the usual lack of objectivity I favor after so many centuries of venerated others pretending otherwise, but this is one thousand and more years ago, this is one of the most auspicious pieces of literature known thus far, and above all else, this is Japan. Here, Orientalism is the name of the game, and my fascination does me no good if I do not make an effort. How could she even consider giving herself to a man? The first overtures, capable of arousing such tenderness, must lead to unhappiness later. No, it would be better for them to go on as they were, neither of them demeaning the other and neither going flagrantly against the other’s wishes. Her resolve was firmer than ever. Some of you may be familiar with Japanese anime. It's something I grew up with and have a great deal of fond feeling towards, but after learning of Hayao Miyazaki's distaste for the industry, I've had to critically evaluate my relationship with something that has entertained, sustained, and stabilized through various periods of my life. I've commented on similarities between Japan and the US before, and while a few animes are truly great and humanizing works of art, it is the worst that the media and the mainstream community sustains itself upon. The most obvious characteristic is the treatment of women, an objectifying and dangerous flaw that not even my beloved Okami escapes. Even this most esteemed of tomes builds itself upon systematic patriarchy; what is different is the deliberate separation of the realities of life from the feelings of the characters. Listen to them. They seem to have no notion that I might be ill because I misbehaved. Works such as Middlemarch may be easier to the eye of Eurocentric sensibilities, but this work here has as much to offer of real people thrown into social roles. It is much, much, much harder to see, and it's highly likely that what I'm actually seeing is my own desires of female affirmation in a world of ubiquitous male power. What I do know is Shikibu deconstructs the stepmother stereotype, the suicidal maiden stereotype, the manipulative wife stereotype and the useless hag stereotype and the wife in the madhouse stereotype and even the evil witch stereotype, all these women pulled and pushed along the lines of Genji and his descendants in a reality where feeling is both emphasized and shuttered away, where the next bite of food hinges on the calculus of relations and the spider web of public opinion. It is beautiful in the way all poisons are and, of course, I may be misleading myself entirely. Still, one would not wish to describe him as merely perverse. Had he been a man of reprehensible tendencies, the emperor would surely not have insisted upon having him for a son-in-law. In high matters of state, one would imagine, he showed uncommon talents. There's no war, or plagues, or any physical conflicted more violent than a doubly misguided tryst that ultimately ends in mutual hilarity. In light of that, I know many readers will find it boring, and there were times I wished I could be moved more by the usual things and not have to spend so much time with the ancient and the lengthy and the subtle. However, so much of that 'usual' is built up on what our world has become since the time this was written, and every so often I need something that unspools my brain from modern hegemonies and places the emphasis on what I can appreciate rather than how much I can understand. Proust came close, but I did not know how soothing the repetition of years with its poetry and its seasons and its flowers and colors and songs and dances could be until I began understanding the references without the help of the footnotes, and that is not something that can be acquired through an obsession with exact details. This work, masterful in its beauty, came down to us because only women wrote the much scorned fiction; I know this world should not survive, but I would become the woodcutter with their rotting ax handle in a heartbeat. Soon it would be sunset. Mists were rising, and the mountain fastness seemed already to be receding into night. The air was heavy with the songs of the evening cicadas. Wild carnations at the hedge and an array of autumn flowers in near the veranda caught the evening light. The murmur of waters was cool. A brisk wind came down from the mountain with a sighing of deep pine forests. As bells announced that a new relay of priests had come on duty, the solemnity of the services was redoubled, new voices joined to the old. Every detail strengthened the spell that was falling over him. He wanted to stay on and on. The voice of the priest who had come down from the mountain was grander and more solemn than the rest. When enough time has passed, I will come back here to rest. It is a matter of the heart I will never be able to reconcile, but its existence is enough.
