Review posted at Books to Brighten your Mood The Forbidden Lady is my very first book by Kerrelyn Sparks and believe me when I say that I was impressed! So impressed, that her paranormal series that I've been forever postponing to read, has moved up to my TBR pile. Since I haven't read the author's paranormal series, Love at Stake, I can't really compare her writing style between the genres, but what I can safely say is that historical romance is definitely a genre she can deliver! I enjoyed every single minute of reading The Forbidden Lady! One of the things I really love about Historical Romances is that along with a good story I have the chance to learn new things too about the era each story is set in. Not that every historical romance story out there delivers in that department, but when I find one, I greatly appreciate it. And The Forbidden Lady is definitely among those ones. Set in Boston in 1769, Kerrelyn Sparks did an amazing job at weaving fact with fiction, making me want to learn as much as possible about the events she described, and stopping my reading just to research some things. I always love it when an author makes me do that. This is the story of Quincy Stanton, something like the James Bond of that time one could say, just because of the various gadgets he uses! I loved him. Even with the wigs, the heels and every other piece of clothing I couldn't imagine a sexy guy wearing, I absolutely loved him. His attitude, his masculinity, everything about him was just amazing! As amazing and fearless was Virginia as well. As far as memorable couples are concerned, this one is high on my list. Both of them, work as spies for the Sons of Liberty, a revolutionary organisation, Quincy knowingly, and Virginia as a means to help her aunt. When they two meet, they can't help but fall in love, despite of the way Quincy acts to maintain his secret identity. The Forbidden Lady isn't full of action, as one might expect considering the premise and the fact that both heroes are spies, but there's definitely some action there and the romance is sweet and not the instant love I despise so much. There's instant attraction, but not love. And that in my book, is always a plus. The writing style is good but the character development could have been a little bit better. Especially the secondary characters if they were a little bit more explored they could have easily added to the whole narration. All in all, The Forbidden Lady is a really interesting story, one that had the potential to be a little bit better, at least in the action department, that makes me hope that Kerrelyn Sparks will write another story in this genre as soon as possible!
