Regarded as one of the pioneers of the sci-fi novel and the alien invasion trope, it was first published in serial form in 1897 and then as a full novel a year later. Tells the tale of a superior intelligent species from a dying Mars that has been scrutinising Earth for some time and ultimately decides to invade. Set in Victorian London, our unnamed narrator meets his friend Ogilvy, a well-known astronomer; they spot what look like falling stars coming from Mars towards Earth. It's not long before they hit Earth's atmosphere and crash-land one by one. The first is thought to be a meteorite, but it soon becomes clear Martian life has launched an incoming attack. "With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe about their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empire over matter." The book is split into 2 parts. Book 1 focuses on the time between the initial invasion and the realisation of our narrator that he is in the throes of a fight for survival—we also get to learn about the journey of his brother. Book 2 focuses mainly on our narrator and the world slowly being overtaken by the Martians, leading to the finale. Our narrator wasn't a particularly likeable character; he was an elitist snob who thought everyone was beneath him. Not only did he seem to care very little for what happened to his earlier companion, but later, while hiding in ditches, thirsty and starving, he still manages to belittle—via his inner monologue—other survivors he comes upon. Even when he was in the same position as everyone else, he still couldn't resist being unpleasant. The narrative is incredibly slow-paced at times, and it does tend to veer off course into rambling territory in abundance. The story arc of the brother, whilst fairly dominant in the latter part of book 1, completely disappeared in book 2, so his fate was left a mystery. We also get some casual misogyny thrown in for good measure—unfortunately, when reading these older books, you do tend to come across outdated attitudes and language on occasion. Not one of my favourite classic reads, and my rating for this one mostly goes to the rich literary prose and its archetypal Martian storyline, which has inspired many an adaptation. Whilst this may have been a revelation when it was first released, it's one that hasn't aged particularly well. I found the characterisation woeful and the narrative as a whole a leaden, plot hole-filled chore.
