Take a committee that needs a committee to form another committee to assign a committee to decide if it needs another committee to look into the matter of funding an expedition from Melbourne, Victoria, to the North coast of Australia. Then add an ambitious, inexperienced, media hungry, hubristic expedition leader, a "team" that has no cohesion, an unclear mission direction, a naturalist who thinks the expedition has a scientific aspect and he's to document new species of Australian flora and fauna, many camels, horses, a few wagons, supplies that put the fancies of the British Empire to shame and you have all the makings of a disaster. And basically it was. The amazing thing is that the leader and his second in command, Burke and Wills, who lost their lives on the expedition (due to unclear instructions, bad decisions, and sheer bad luck) are heroes. Isn't that just the way of the world? Murgatroyd does a marvelous job of covering the Burke-Wills expedition to cross the Australian continent, south to north, in 1860. They set off with pomp and cheers from Melbourne and one survivor of the entire (4 persons who attempted to reach the actual coast) trip arrived back, totally broken down physically and mentally. Seven of the expedition and one aborigine were killed, most of the animals died and, to top it off, the group that made the last run to the coast didn't succeed. The journey begs comparison with both the Lewis and Clark expedition in America and the Scott expedition in Antarctica. Lewis and Clark, however, had clear directions and were both experienced. Scott's expedition more resembles it in that the leader, Robert Falcon Scott, ignored the advice of many and the experience of the few and died in the marvelous Victorian hero manner. He didn't succeed either. Of course there's more to it than this. Victoria and South Australia were in a race to provide a route from the northern coast of Australia to their territory for a telegraph wire. Other things, of course, added to it. But basically this is a story of a failure made heroic. I'm not sure if I agree with the heroic part. I have trouble seeing people like Scott and Burke as heroes given their part in their own demise. But the story is fascinating and the writing impeccable. I finished the book in one day. And you have to decide whether Burke and wills were heroes.......or not.
