”Captain Bulstrode had served in India, and had once tasted a horrible spirit called bang, which made the men who drank it half mad; and he could not help fancying that the beauty of this woman was like the strength of that alcoholic preparation; barbarous, intoxicating, dangerous and maddening…she lifted her eyes to his face and asked the strangest question he had ever heard from girlish lips. “Do you know if Thunderbolt won the Leger?” Aurora Floyd’s the spoiled, only child of wealthy, widower Archibald Floyd; the result of his scandalous marriage to a penniless actress. Adored by her father, Aurora grows up a renowned beauty, known locally as ‘fast’ for her unladylike habits - hunting and racing horses – she seems to possess boundless confidence. But after a spell at a French finishing-school, Aurora returns oddly changed, haggard, anxious, harbouring some terrible secret. Time passes, Aurora’s engaged to be married but her past threatens to ruin her chance of happiness. Although it’s vividly drawn with a compelling plot this doesn’t reach the heights of Braddon’s brilliant Lady Audley’s Secret but it’s still richly rewarding. Realist with more than a dash of gothic melodrama, Braddon’s story incorporates all the markers of a classic ‘sensation’ novel: vengeful villains, thwarted lovers, buried transgressions resurfacing to disrupt the present, all manner of crimes and dastardly deeds. However, Braddon has a lighter touch than some of her fellow ‘sensation’ writers, so this is often wittier and less sombre than East Lynne or The Woman in White. Aurora’s a magnificent creation, a refreshing departure from standard ideals of Victorian womanhood; flouting convention, passionate, generous, she’s basically a likeable version of Jane Eyre’s spirited Blanche Ingram. Aurora Floyd’s by no means flawless, the ending’s problematic, the representation of characters with disabilities sometimes made me deeply uncomfortable. Although admittedly these elements added another layer of interest, because of the way Aurora Floyd, like the earlier Jane Eyre and later Dracula, highlights tensions and questions around femininity, as well as the development and circulation of ideas linking certain bodies to criminality, deviance and/or that Victorian bugbear degeneracy.
