This book is not about what I thought it was going to be about. No sad dragons. ::Sigh:: Sometimes it’s a good thing when a book doesn’t match your expectations. Being caught off-guard by a book—when it isn’t the result of a perfidious marketing campaign, or the product of a particularly deceptive cover or dustjacket blurb—can be positive. A book should surprise you. When it’s done well, you get one of the heights of literary accomplishment. This book does not represent one of those heights. It’s not a bad piece of work by any stretch of the imagination, but it’s also not any stretch of the imagination in and of itself. There are more than a few nicely turned phrases that Mr. Koontz unleashes in his narratives. He has a penchant for detailed descriptions and painting a scene that is often lush, but sometimes crosses that strange, gray line into the tiresome. Normally, the detailed descriptions of character's thoughts and actions builds tension nicely, and gives us a firm mental image. However, we need not know every detail of every move of a character looking around a room, particularly when there’s nothing there. Nothing under the couch. Nothing behind the door. Nothing lurking in places where nothing should be and nothing to be done about the nothing in the first place. Surprise! Right behind you all along. Somebody throw that drowning man a trope. Speaking of tropes. Cops are an overused trope in urban fantasy. Disgruntled cops an overused cop trope. Mismatched emotionally unavailable cops as partners an overused trope of cop tropes. Overall, Mr. Koontz dipping into the trope well isn’t all that desperate a writing technique, but if you’re looking for something different then the main characters are a fail in this book. Mr. Koontz gives the reader more than enough trope to hang himself. (OK, I’ll stop with the trope puns.) Mr. Koontz does have a feel for personality that is quite strong, and he spares neither his readers nor his characters the least analysis. The characters are all motivated by personality traits, not just events, and their overall world view is presented consistently and with aplomb. This isn't a character study, though, so readers must be satisfied with "neat freak" as a personality type, "freedom lover" as a personality type, or "battered wife" as a personality type. These are not new forms in modern literary terms, but Mr. Koontz gives them more than enough depth of character to satisfy a thriller. Where this book often goes too far is in its relentless Millennial doomsday theme. Written in the 90s in an attempt to capture some of the clock rollover angst, Mr. Koontz makes the inevitable creeping decline of human civilization the main backdrop of the book. This was a clear attempt to cash into that lowest order of cultural numerology; the fizzle that was the Millennium rollover. I imagine that when the book was published, that backdrop would have read as fresh and edgy. However, reading this book after the 1990s makes that constant theme something of a chore. Two decades on it reads like a dated and overwrought egoism in the guise of pop culture commentary. The 90s being a decade of collapse, decay and malaise is a constant refrain of the book to the point that those of us who lived through that decade have difficulty reconciling their own experience with the vast banking malfeasance, the complete failure of government leadership, and overall decline in the decade that followed. But the steady improvement that occurred in the 90s was not part of Mr. Koontz’s vision. Rather, this book is predictive pessimism in prose. Worse, Mr. Koontz weaves it right into his characters and narration in every major portion of the book, right up into the finale where it borders on the ridiculous: “The explosion was muffled, like firing into a pillow, the green glow disappeared in the instant it first arose, and he squeezed the trigger again, both rounds into the troll’s brain. That was surely enough, had to be enough, but you never knew with magic, never knew in this pre-millennium cotillion, these wild ‘90s, so he squeezed the trigger again.” What the 90s have to do with pumping bullets into the head of a magically empowered psychopath , I’ll never know. But Mr. Koontz started banging that drum, so he might was well finish on the beat. The end of the world is nigh, blah, blah, blah. I imagine a sequel would cash in on June 6, ’06 fear, and then there’s the 2012 Aztec calendar anxiety. Surely we can milk a little out of some other apocalyptic Gregorian fallacy.... Sheesh. The story follows mostly the exploits of two police officers who have caught the attention of a supernatural being killing its way along a route to power. There are chapters from the perspective of several other characters: a homeless man, a homeless woman with a child, an invalid in a nursing home, the occasional secondary character related to our main protagonist and, most unlikely, a stray dog. Detailed chapters from the point of view of a dog are much less interesting and amusing than one might imagine, particularly in the context of an urban horror novel. Those who like goofy cuteness interspersed with their horrific murders may find this more palatable than I did. Personally, I found the Prince/Woofer chapters obnoxious. There always comes a point in an urban fantasy where the reader has to do a form of metasuspension of disbelief. That is, when the characters manage to see through the looking glass into the supernatural aspect of the fictional world they inhabit, the reader must not only accept that supernatural aspect, but must believe that the characters can believe it. In many cases, this the most difficult part of a story for readers to accept. I found it tough in this book. The hard-bitten, tough as nails, firmly rooted in the real world cops jump straight from their logical world right into Buffy the Vampire Slayer with nary a blink. Once they’ve accepted it, they immediately begin speculating on the superpowers of their godly opponent, and we are treated to rambling explanations and more than a few leaps in supposition as they make their way towards the final confrontation. At its worst, this occurs during a long, meandering time stop speculation section in which the super-powered villain has suspended the passage of time for everyone and everything except himself and our heroes . Though couched in uncertainties, Mr. Koontz could not resist throwing in more than a little of his own thoughts on the physics of time, clearly gleaned from his own reading on the subject. In and of themselves, these thoughts are not necessarily bad, but they do seem strange coming from the mouths of homicide detectives fleeing for their lives from a psychotic super villain on his way to demigodhood. There are long POV chapters from the perspective of our killer and his potential victims. Some of them are quite poignant, though somewhat pointless. Sammy Shamroe faces the villain at, arguably, his most disturbing, and we are treated to some quite well executed examples of horrifying prose. Unfortunately, Sammy turns out to be something of a non-starter as a character. His contribution is minimal. He is literally told to “wait in the car” with two other minor characters at the book’s finale, so all that nice character development didn’t go much of anywhere. I hope they at least left a window open a crack. In any case, I am giving this book a star for some of the nice phrasing that Mr. Koontz uses. He occasionally—more than occasionally, to be honest—turns a phrase in an elegant and outright artistic way. I’m also giving it a star for a nice villainous villain, whose development and background are entertaining if somewhat fanciful. The baddy’s depravity and cruelty are a little superficial, but he remained interesting and well considered throughout the book. However, I’m not giving it more than 3 stars, because of the 90s theme that just dates the book so badly, and that merits at least -*. Also, the climax was somewhat anti-climactic, and after 300+ pages I want more satisfaction. So, star deduction #2. I can’t really recommend this one because of that relentless 90s theme, but if you don’t think you’d be bothered by that then it’s a pretty decent thriller.
