"To Woo a Wife" is the story of Sabrina/Abbie and Jarrett. Umm. This was just messy. The book begins when our h is about to dine with her newly married friends, and realizes that they have invited their pal, our H to it too. She eavesdrops to the H proclaiming about all women being airheaded gold-diggers, and polishes her appearance to shock him. The H certainly is taken aback, and they engage in hot and cold banter. The h soon realizes the H is a millionaire like her, but he is there to search for Sabrina Sutherland, which is her real name! He also gets jealous when she talks to another man. The H then thinks of the h as a call girl/escort/bimbo, until she rebuffs him. Next morning, he chases her down to discover she has a child, and that she is actually Sabrina. He declares his motives of tracking her down, not disclosing the involvement of her shitty stepchildren in it, but the wish to buy the hotels from her, majority of the shares to which are in her guardianship until her daughter turns of legal age. He then suddenly wants her. But she wants nothing to do with him. So he would let her go. But he's horny. So he wants her again. It's a toxic cycle of boners. The book then has many things going on together. - We have a deceitful hero who is -> attracted to the heroine -> hates marriage because of his own absent mother -> jealous of his own brothers -> thinks the h is a gold-digger -> still badly wants to bed her -> commits mistakes but does not apologize, however browbeats the heroine in banter and makes her admit it was her mistake - A pansy heroine -> who is still scarred by not only her first sexually abusive/unfulfilling marriage, but also cruel step-kids -> loves her daughter and deeply cares for her -> gives into the moody hero's whims and falls for him..apart from pursuing you, lying to you and getting you out of financial difficulty..WHAT DID HE DO TO DESERVE YOUR LOVE?! He kept assaulting her until she retreated..and that was sexy? I mean, just bad. The only positives I found are the charming brother Jonathan and Jordan, and the adorable daughter Charlie. I hoped this would be angsty, passionate read- but the H was overbearing and the h very forgiving. Safe 1.75/5
