Much has been made of literacy education in the United States in the last couple of years, particularly post-COVID distance learning. Many states and districts, including Ohio under Mike DeWine and the New York City Public School Districts, are heavily emphasizing a return to “science of reading” curriculum. The popular podcast amongst educators “Sold a Story” chronicles the widespread “Reading Recovery” curriculum developed from Marie Clay’s research on optimal literacy practices. Reading Recovery was heavily expanded under the Clinton administration, and was based on a fundamental disdain for, and misunderstanding of, our optimal process for learning the written word as opposed to the spoken word. I believe it is unquestionably a net positive for American literacy that we re-emphasize phonetic instruction; Reading Recovery, however, is not solely responsible for the historic illiteracy of Americans (60 million at the time of this book’s writing), and a return to the strictly mechanical “scientific” instruction is not a cohesive solution. “Literacy” expounds upon the significance of reading the world as much as the word, evaluating literacy as our mean for critically analyzing and, eventually, “writing” the world. As such, it consists of far more than the memorization and reproduction of a primary language: it constitutes our critical perception, comprehension, and consciousness. It is far more subjective than it is often acknowledged to be. I could repeat much of Freire’s philosophy here but there’s little reason when he’s done so exhaustively, suffice to say that “Literacy” is a very compelling argument for the acknowledgment of literacy as being a social discipline as much as it is a “scientific” or mechanical one. Although I am encouraged by recent pushes for the improvement of English education in US public education, it is very far from the beginning of the end of illiteracy. In fact, we may merely be returning to the status quo of what has historically been an insufficient mode of literacy education. Hopefully that will not be the case.
