Mary is a talented clairvoyant who's found her calling in helping police across the country solve cases despite having no leads. Aided and guided by her devoted husband and doting brother, she's led a seemingly simple life. Until her visions change, and a dark, preternatural force seems to enter her life. Where are these visions coming from? Will she be able to solve this new case and find her answers before it's too late for her and those she loves? Far from one of Koontz's best works, this is still a fun read. It has an easy, flowing rhythm to it, along with fabulous dialogue. Mystery fans be forewarned, as the killer is easily distinguished by the end of the second chapter. It's the brother. This was most likely the height of the disappointment for me, especially considering just how hard Koontz seems to try and steer the reader towards believing the killer is the husband. Let's be realistic, here, for a second. If you trip and fall and obtain a small cut upon your finger, your entire sleeve will not be ruined by copious amounts of blood unless you have some type of medical disorder, at which point you will be going to see a doctor. When you trip and fall again, and reopen the two day old wound and it ruins your shirt and jacket from even more blood, and then you get stabbed three or four times and shot, you're likely going to bleed out extremely quickly from these massive, gaping wounds you've sustained, rather than being able to walk across a 60 yard room, down a corridor, force open a heavy oak and glass window, climb out of the window, fall six feet, and then climb to your feet to greet police officers...unless, of course, you're batman, which this character most certainly is not. I also failed to get an emotional connection to the characters, something I've grown accustomed to in other works by Koontz. I shed a tear at the end of Odd Thomas , grew frustrated at the failed attempts and lack of connection in Lightning , and was out of breath from fear, anticipation, and shear flabbergastedness in both Fear Nothing and Seize the Night . When someone died in this book, I honestly didn't care other than to think, "Hm, I wonder who the killer could possibly be" in overly sarcastic tones to myself while turning the page. All in all, while it's not overly terrible, it's not a fantastic work, or even up to par by Koontz standards. That being said, if you are a die hard fan of Dean Koontz or are simply looking for a quick read, pick it up, but don't feel bad about skimming through it. Otherwise, skip it.
