Three years after Return to Sender —Kevin Henkes's debut novel—came Two Under Par in 1987, and the plotting, characterization, and expression of emotion all show improvement. Life has recently gone askew for ten-year-old Wedge, who didn't have it easy even before the seismic shift. His father left before his birth and has never been in contact; the boy's mother, Sally, raised him almost by herself, with occasional assistance from his Aunt Bonnie and Uncle Larry. Wedge can't be certain what he's lost by not having a father, even as he feels the chasm inside himself daily. The recent upheaval in his life is intended to change that, however. With hardly a word of warning, Sally married Arthur "King" Simpson. A widower, King owns King Arthur's Camelot, a miniature golf course with a house on the property. King and his five-year-old son Andrew—a pair of blond, excitable string beans—live there. Now Wedge and Sally do too, and Wedge is not happy. Sensitive about his pudginess, Wedge has never been easy to get close to. In the interest of helping the family integrate, Sally plans a getaway for just her and Andrew, leaving Wedge with King. Wedge resists bonding at every turn, making it clear to King that he isn't Wedge's father. King wants some version of father-son relationship with his stepson and he reaches out in good faith, but Wedge's anger toward him rises when Judith Mills, a girl from school, informs Wedge of a rumor that Sally had to marry King because she's carrying his child. Could this be the reason for the hurry-up wedding? Would Sally keep a secret of such magnitude from her son? Wedge doesn't want to believe it, but he's more wary of King than ever. Any little provocation could cause Wedge to snap. That provocation, when it arrives, ends the bonding experiment. A disappointed Sally returns home with Andrew. She can't comprehend why Wedge refuses to accept the family she wants to build him after years of loneliness for them both. King is a good man, Sally says, and wants to be there for Wedge as his biological father declined to be. Holding onto the anger feels good, but Wedge knows he's longed for his father every day of his life. Can King, goofy as he is, be the father Wedge has waited for? Wedge needs a symbolic gesture to show King how he views him now, a gesture that doesn't end up being made until after this book's final page. But you can bet the days ahead will be different for Wedge and the family he didn't believe he wanted. Two Under Par is more cohesive than Return to Sender , though it's not on the level of Kevin Henkes's later novels, some of which won major awards. Wedge is prickly, with flaws and imbalances like any real person, so his progress feels meaningful. The box of secret gifts for his father, a modest trove Wedge has accumulated since his early days in elementary school, is a particularly emotional component of the story. Saving these trinkets as presents for a man who likely will never come for him is a small heartbreak dealt with subtly in the book. I'd probably give Two Under Par two and half stars, and fans of Kevin Henkes should take the time to experience this early work of his. It's better than many authors' second novels.
