“Even among the moodiest the tendency to be cheered is stronger than the tendency to be cast down, and a soul’s specific gravity constantly re-asserts itself as less than that of the sea of troubles into which it is thrown.” Hardy is known for his tragic pessimism, and that may be what I find attractive about him. Whatever it says about me, too much positivity sets my eyes rolling, whereas gloominess always seems more real. There’s plenty of tragedy here, but in this one, he may have allowed his soul to rise above his troubles, and that may be why he considered it a favorite novel. It may also be why I was sometimes skeptical as I read. He takes us deep into the woods, to Little Hintock, which we see from the beginning is a hard-to-find little village where a handful of people live amongst the elms and ashes and apple trees. We feel things narrow as we enter this insular place. We’re introduced to people who seem to appear from behind the trees, and then, their stories of hard work and disappointment and love and betrayal unfold. Hardy’s poetic prose draws the picture for us. “A lingering wind brought to her ear the creaking sound of two over-crowded branches in the neighboring wood which were rubbing each other into wounds, and other vocalized sorrows of the trees, together with the screech of owls, and the fluttering tumble of some awkward wood-pigeon ill-balanced on its roosting-bough.” We meet the hard-working Marty South, Giles the struggling cider maker, the beautiful and educated Grace Melbury, her meddling father, and others who make their living by the trees in this wood. Two outsiders live up the hill: a suspicious doctor/scientist, and a rich actress who has inherited the largest house and much of the land in Little Hintock. Destiny is, of course, a theme, as Hardy explores struggles between men and women, between parents and children, and between social classes. Looking back after finishing the book, I see he did a beautiful job of sculpting his plot and characters. But I was having my own struggle with destiny as I read, and felt a little manipulated when he took the story in a direction I didn’t like. By the end I realized more patience would have saved me my frustration. But isn’t that the way it often is?
