Invading aliens have never been that ridiculously incompetent That´s an often seen problem in classic sci-fi, the authors didn´t really care about thinking too much about logic or readers' problems with suspension of disbelief, they just wanted to tell their story. As long as there were no other genre writers and they had the monopoly, that worked out quite well. But Aging well and growing old gracefully is a completely different thing Many old and classic sci fi has problems with realism, often combined with struggling to fuse plot and characters. Some worst cases like general bad works and the weak ones by Heinlein and Dick, even mix this together with strange ideology, passages with poor writing, and authors' voice. But at least Wells added some hidden criticism about the British empire By satirizing colonialism and making humankind the colonized victims, he opened up many important questions about the ethical implications. Of course, these were totally ignored and never discussed, just as the dark past of many big countries like the US, France, Turkey, Russia, China, etc. People don´t want to get their flag tainted with the blood of millions and their patriotism vilified, because it helped promote exploitation and genocide. So all media of the time, and nowadays too, prefer to drivel about How cool alien invasions are And no one loves them more than I do, because I may have seen and read something between 1 to 3 k versions in all media I consumed united over the decades. There can be so much more added to the mix, science fantasy, cosmic horror, mind manipulation, infiltration, cooptation, friendly assimilation, and especially how many different species on different technological levels do it. Mentioned plot holes are always a running gag element in sci fi But honestly, no virus scanners, biotech enhanced vaccinations, or any kind of quarantine plan? After having handled lower Clarketech, thereby probably physics manipulation and understanding of astrophysics we just could dream of? And then they are unable to do what freaking apes like us could do with the stone age smallpox vaccination warp speed concept of rubbing infected, dried pus and creepier stuff in fresh cuts? Come on, alien overlords, you can do so much better, ask me if you want some tips. I believe in your supremacy and will always help you colonize our planet by betraying my species Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
