Re Wedding-Night Baby - Kim Lawrence does the tropiest big misunderstanding/seekrit baby romance of 1999. In keeping with the old skool 70's HPlandia vibe, she gives us an utterly misogynistic H. The book starts with the h opening the door to the H believing he is an escort she has hired to attend her cousin's wedding. The cousin is marrying the h's ex-fiance. The ex fiance cheated on the h before he dumped her and the h promptly moved to London from her small market town and got a job as a high powered PA for the owner of an ad agency. The h is good at her job and three years has given her some polish, but the wedding is in the h's hometown and she doesn't want yet more gossip following her, so she arranges herself an escort. The H, while not an actual date for hire, is a snot snarfing nematode right from the start. He takes one at the h and pretends to be the escort instead of telling the h that he is the nephew who inherited the h's bosses company after the boss died. The H went to the h's house to give her a bunch of shares the H's ad agency owning uncle had left her, but then the misunderstanding happened and the H saw a perfect opportunity to berate a tart. (The H's own mother is a famous opera diva and she took the H away from his father in Australia after her marriage broke up and the H's father remarried. The woman claimed she had to do it for her 'art', but essentially the H was used as a club to beat the H's father with. The H did not like being a pawn in his mother's games, nor does he like his mother and he has a HUGE amount of baggage.) So when the H sees the h, her appearance and her dubious position in his uncle's company lead the H to believe that she is a promiscuous, scheming career woman who will use whatever and whomever to get to the top. So he treats the h accordingly and the h is so het up over having to attend her ex's wedding to a relative who seems to hate her, she doesn't really notice. While they are at the wedding, the lurve force mojo between them blooms. The H alternates between nasty remarks and sexual innuendo. The h is wary of affairs, her mother had a string of them while she was growing up and her mother always blamed the h for making the h's father leave them. (We learn later that the mother lied. The h's mother had an ongoing affair with the h's deceased boss and it broke up the h's parents marriage. After the h got dumped, the mother called her old lover and he gave the h a job as a favor to his old flame.) The h initially has no intention of giving into her sudden case of Treacherous Body Syndrome. But after a confrontation with her cousin, who throws her bridal bouquet straight into the h's face, several glasses of wine and a lot of H verbal attacks, the h ends up drunkenly sleeping with the H in a room he gets for the night. After the big lurve club event, the h sleeps for a little while and then wakes up. It is still dark and the h is embarrassed over her lack of will power, so she takes off for home and leaves the H in the hotel room alone. The h goes into work a few days later and finds out that the new owner of the company is the H. He is extremely sexist, nasty and crude for most of their confrontation, but keeps attempting to get the h into bed or at least on his office couch in between verbal attacks. It is the very worst kind of tart shaming and harassment. The h resigns on the spot, but has to stay for another six weeks to be able to hand over her former boss's accounts to new executives so the agency won't go under. The h gets a ton of harassment from all the male senior executives and the H doesn't do much to stop it. The H keeps up his own attempts at assault and harassment and the verbal battles are epic. The H finally announces that the h will be getting a new boss, because the H is moving to France to teach them how to make wine. (And yes, the H said exactly those words.) We get a little time jump and the h is preggers and has quit her job. The seven months pregger h is subjected to a very nasty assault by one of senior executives she used to work with, which sends her to the hospital. The H showed up at the assault at the last minute, the h had not seen him for yonks, and he immediately starts berating her for dating the slime pustule attacker as she is waiting to hear if her baby has died. The h knows better than to try and explain anything to the H by now, because the H repeatedly tells her she is a lying, conniving, tramp and he doesn't believe a word she says. The h is released and the H bullies her into going to his home in France. He threatens to fight the h for custody if she doesn't comply with his demands and only backs off a little when the h tries to leave the hospital in a sobbing panic. Once in France, we get more verbal combat with the H as he flaunts his girlfriend - who is the sister of his partner- and yet AGAIN the H refuses to deflect continual attacks on the h. (This h took a lot of abuse, both physical and verbal from people associated with the H, he stops none of it and indeed heaps his own abuse upon a heavily pregnant h which really made me despise him.) By now the h's messed up hormones and nesting urges have convinced her she is in love with the H. So when she goes into labor alone and isolated in the H's remote farmhouse, things don't look very positive. We finally get a smidgen of remorse from the H as he finds the h about ready to give birth and realizes that his mental and emotional garbage has forced the h to go through a whole pregnancy and most of the birth all alone. He does manage to catch the baby girl the h delivers as she is born. (Unfortunately that is the only remorse we ever get from the H, even more unfortunately he never makes amends to the h for his bad treatment.) The h's mother shows up to be a bovine snot snarfer and the H goes off with his girlfriend a lot. The intense home delivery experience made the H propose marriage to the h and eventually the h is so sleep deprived, verbally abused and harassed that she breaks down and declares her love for the H. This leads the H to declare that he might be faithful if they get married and he does a basic 'I love you and have since I met you' speech which was about as believable as my moving into my new lovely ocean side summer home on Mars. We get the standard HP H disclaimer that he wasn't with the girlfriend as much as the h thought he was and a sorta denial that there was one time when he was gone all night, (amongst many nights of being gone,) that he did not sleep with his girlfriend. (We are also indirectly assured that if he did sleep with her, she was only subbing for the h) This big declaration is good enough for the h, she agrees to marry him and we leave them loving it up for the standard HP smoggy sunset HEA. This is only KL's second HP, so I made allowances. But I wasn't feelin' the lurve on this one, mainly cause there was no relationship between the H and h to love. They fight, the H lies A LOT, they have lustful urges and that is it. The h is by herself for most of the story and the H is off with his girlfriend - whom he later claims isn't. But if that is the case, then the H's wine venture is going to go very badly very quickly, cause I can't see the OW's brother, who is also the H's business partner, staying cool with a guy who leads his sister on like that. However, KL follows the standard HP old skool nematode H/seekrit baby guidelines to a T. There is also some pretty funny verbal snark moments. So in HP math it works out to a 2.5 rounded up to a three and it wasn't the most horrible HP outing. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
