This is a scholarly work of Indian history, extensively researched and written with a passion and a nostalgia for a not so distant past when there was wholesale interracial sexual exploration and substantial cultural assimilation between Indians and the British in India. Author Dalrymple says that till the early years of the 19th century, there was an Indian conquest of the European imagination when one in three British residents in India acquired Indian women as wives or mistresses and maintained substantial harems. They adopted Indian dresses as conventional wear, smoked the hookah and children born to them often spoke Hindustani or Persian or even Tamil as their first language. Even though some British Generals did the puja and participated in the Kumbh Mela, it was essentially a fusion of Britain and Indian Islamic culture. So, how did we get from the days of these 'White Mughals' to the violent Mutiny in 1857 and the bitter struggle for Independence over the next 100 years? This book provides the historical background for the final days of this cultural mix through the love story of General James Kirkpatrick, a British Resident in Hyderabad, and Khair-un-Nissa, a Sayyid Shia of Indo-Persian aristocratic upbringing and said to be a descendant of the Holy Prophet himself. Towards the end of the 18th century, the Mughal empire in India was plagued by endless skirmishes, wars and invasions and gradually broke up into smaller kingdoms ruled by regional leaders. As the diminished Mughal emperors in Delhi became just figureheads, there arose three indigenous power centers in India, namely the Maratha confederate of the Peshwas in Western India piloted by the brilliant minister Nana Fadnavis, Tipu Sultan of Mysore and the Nizam of Hyderabad in the south. At this juncture, the East India Company sent Richard Wellesley as Governor-General to Calcutta even as the French were also casting their eye on the 'jewel of India'. Lord Wellesley, while not an Indophile like Warren Hastings who preceded him as the first G-G of India, believed that India was no longer a place to embrace and be transformed by; instead it was a place to conquer and transform. He embraced the European view at the end of the 18th century that the 'undaunted spirit and irresistible ardour' of the West will bring blessings to India, which was sapped of its strength by its 'effeminate rulers and luxurious tyrants'. In such a volatile context, we come across the love story that is set in the state of Hyderabad. James Kirkpatrick, a 'White Mughal' and the British Resident of Hyderabad, falls in love with Khair-un-Nissa, who at age 14, was engaged to be married to a Hyderabadi Muslim. Khair also was quite smitten by James and with the help of her mother and grandmother, they get married against all odds in a society where it was unthinkable for such a cross cultural marriage among the high society. They have two children over the next few years but the tumultuous situation in India at that time is not conducive to an Indophile like James. He manages to get into the good books of the imperial Wellesley by helping in the defeat of Tipu Sultan of Mysore but eventually comes under great pressure to abandon Khair, which he steadfastly refuses to do. Sadly, not only does James send both his Anglo-Indian children away to England but dies soon after at age 41, when Khair was still only 19. In widowhood, as if the tragedy of her children and husband being snatched away from her is not enough, Khair is further disgraced, then banished and finally rejected. When she dies at age 27, this fiery, passionate, beautiful woman dies as much from a broken heart, from neglect and sorrow as from any apparent physical cause. Apart from the love story, there are other interesting details in the book about life in India those days. Apparently, young British women used to sail to India on the look-out for an eligible husband among the British officers living there. Unfortunately for them, most Englishmen in India preferred Indian women to Europeans. Part of the problem was said to be the 'unattractive' busks and corsets worn by English women which failed in competing with the Indian bibis wearing the sari, which was described by General 'Hindoo' Stuart as the sexiest garb imaginable. It is also equally likely that the Englishmen preferred Indians for the opportunity of having multiple women as companions instead of being married to one Englishwoman. This resulted in many women returning to England without a husband and were cruelly termed 'returned empties'. The book also chronicles the sad situation of Anglo-Indian children born out of this union. They suffered racism both in India and England - oddly more from the British in India. The White Mughal parents generally sent these children away - from their moorings in India and from their own parents - to England to be educated, often to be converted from Islam to Christianity and renamed with Christian names. The other surprising detail in the book is about how Britons died in droves in India while still rather young, possibly due to ill health, disease etc brought on partially by not adapting to the necessary changes required to live in a tropical country. This is a poignant and compassionate book about life in India when it was at a crossroads where the British decided to transform themselves from traders to imperial rulers. It is an authoritative and seminal contribution to Indian history. School Text books in India simply repeat the colonial view of 'the Twain shall never meet' when it comes to the Indo-British colonial engagement. It is time to rewrite our textbooks and say that it wasn't necessarily always so. The author ends the book by denouncing the post 9/11 penchant for the 'clash of civilizations' with the following words:"As the story of James Achilles Kirkpatrick and Khair un-Nissa shows, East and West are not irreconcilable, and never have been. Only bigotry, prejudice, racism and fear drive them apart. But they have met and mingled in the past and they will do so again."
