boy, starting off with two essays defending child/adult sex (though those are not the only essays where it is defended) is certainly A Choice. the bulk of this review is addressing the author’s view of child/adult sexual relationships, so major warning here for discussions of pedophilia, child sexual abuse, and related defense/apology and victim blaming. throughout this book (mostly in the two aforementioned essays) the author: ➖ defends gay boy lovers, lesbian girl lovers, nambla (north american man/boy love association), and child/adult relationships in general; argues there is “nothing wrong” with a “more privileged adult” offering a young person sexual pleasure; actually quotes a fifteen year old in his argument for child/adult sex and the abolition of age of consent; slams american society for “rapidly becoming phobic about any sexual contact between adults and minors”; argues an inexperienced or unknowledgeable minor having their first sexual experience with an experienced adult would be better or less awkward than with an inexperienced or unknowledgeable peer (that imbalance, coupled with the age difference, having a negative result is not acknowledged). ➖ denies that adults have power over children, even while arguing that adults are oppressing and controlling children; argues children have power over adults because they can “send them to jail for half of their life” (which is just victim blaming. the consequences of an adult’s decision to have sex with a child is not a conscious, manipulative power play on the child’s part); nonsensically argues that if a child can decide if they want to “eat spinach, play with trucks, or wear shoes” then they are old enough to decide to have sex (children, the same ones who want to jump off the roof to see if they can fly or want to touch a burning stovetop, are somehow capable of understanding sex and its consequences and the nature of consent and power dynamics in order to be able to give informed consent to have sex with an adult. sure). ➖ says boy lovers and girl lovers are “the only people offering a hand to help young women and men cross the difficult terrain between straight society and the gay community” (dismissing all the work and community building queer adults do to make the lives of young queer people better and safer in favor of adults who have sex with kids is vile); literally says “gay men who have sexual relationships with boys are the real victims” (author’s own emphasis. because all the implied victim blaming wasn’t enough); equates not supporting child/adult sex in the gay community with turning your back on gay youth and further oppressing them; criticizes “restricting” the gay movement to protecting the rights of “consenting adults” because it will leave child/adult relationships “vulnerable to persecution”; says it was “wrong” for queer adults turn down his advances when he was a minor and hopes other queer adults won’t make the same “mistake”; suggests the gay community support pedophiles, who “need us badly,” because “forty years [in prison] for what? for experiencing pleasure?” is indicative of a “very sad society with some very sick attitudes towards sex.” ➖ takes issue with using the word “child” to mean anyone from an infant to a teenager (the criticism is most often levied at calling teenagers children, usually in reference to an adult having a sexual relationship with a 16-17 year old); puts statutory rape in quotes and calls it a “dubious crime”; repeatedly mocks the belief that child sexual abuse is more than or even just as damaging as child physical abuse and generally seems to dismiss the trauma of child sexual abuse; thinks it’s a “mistake to characterize all child porn as a record of child abuse”; believes accepting child/adult sex would allow us to “protect children from abuse and exploitation” (of course ignoring the fact that an adult having sex with a child is in itself abuse and exploitation) ➖ and while i understand various kink dynamics and i’m not one to yuck someone’s yum or kink shame when all parties are consenting adults, given the author’s stance on child/adult relationships, him saying his lover being shaved reminds her that he “owns her genitals and reinforces her role as my child” is questionable to me. i’m just gonna say, i agree that minors need sex education and a safe space to learn about their bodies, sex, safe sex, consent, power dynamics, how to differentiate healthy loving relationships/behaviors and abusive/coercive/etc. relationships/behaviors and that there’s nothing wrong with adults providing that education or safe space. however, adults should not have sexual contact with minors. minors who want to explore or experiment with their sexuality should do so with themselves or their peers, not with adults. an adult having a sexual relationship with a minor is not a right or experience of an oppressed minority that should be protected. the idea that queer kids struggling to find other queer kids to experiment sexually with should be able to turn to queer adults for that, and positioning queer adults as “wrong,” making a “mistake,” and further marginalizing queer teens for not doing so, is horrifyingly absurd. those kids are vulnerable and without community or peers, and you think being preyed upon and taken advantage of by an adult is what they need? and i think it’s very telling that “cross generational relationship” in this book is used interchangeably and exclusively to mean child/adult relationship. y’all know adults from different generations can have relationships, right? note: while the author claims to have changed his views on child/adult relationships in the 2000 second edition of this book (the essays in the first edition are from 1979-1994), in that essay the author still compares child/adult sexual relationships to interracial and same-sex relationships (as in, people engage in those relationships despite the “taboo,” so who’s to say the “taboo” surrounding child/adult relationships is any different), argues if neither party in a child/adult sexual relationship has “complained” then there is no legal cause to interfere (because a child not understanding why the relationship is wrong definitely means the relationship isn’t wrong), expresses believing that minors are just as capable of sexual manipulation and coercion as adults are (which is just run of the mill victim blaming and sexual abuse apology. for example, how much media have you seen that depicts a student/teacher relationship as a helpless teacher being relentlessly pursued by a sexually aggressive manipulative student?), argues relationships between peers can be just as heartbreaking as child/adult relationships (suggesting the argument for minor/minor relationships rather than child/adult relationships is that there is no potential for heartbreak...?), and defends nambla. other notes: i definitely don’t care much for the first section of the book that focuses on legislation, oppression, law enforcement, court cases and trials. thus i thought i would like the other sections, but there is less analysis and exploration of radical sex, identity, community, etc. and more explicit, detailed descriptions of sex. and while i’m interested in reading about the identities, lives, and experiences of people in the kink community, pages and pages of scene descriptions isn’t what i’m looking for. the author says the thought of him going off with someone else “certainly makes [his partner] think twice about using her safe word too quickly.” threatening, even in a tongue in cheek manner, to have sex with someone else to manipulate your partner into not using their safe word is abusive as fuck, actually. he describes disabled people as lacking “charm or social skill to woo a partner,” “unattractive people” “without the ability or interest to give as good as they get,” and needing to rely on sex workers who “don’t discriminate” against them, which is ableist as fuck. some quotes: “the butler decision has had almost no visible impact on the straight-porn industry. instead, it has been used to impede the circulation of gay literature. it is part of a legal apparatus that seems bent on closing down gay and feminist bookstores in canada. hustler , playboy , penthouse , and other straight erotic magazines are still available for sale in canada. the joy of sex , which has more information about butt-fucking in it than advocate men , is allowed to circulate, but the joy of gay sex was initially banned. the first obscenity case under butler was a prosecution of glad day bookstore, a gay business in toronto, for selling the lesbian s/m magazine, bad attitude . madonna’s sex , however, heated up canadian cash registers with impunity.” “dworkin and many other members of the antipornography movement define violence as a male phenomenon and maleness as violence. as dworkin said in her speech, ‘sex and murder are fused in the male consciousness, so that the one without the imminent possibility of the other is unthinkable and impossible...the annihilation of women is the source of meaning and identity for men.’ thus the fact that pornography is aimed at a male audience is sufficient to justify calling it violent. in fact, pornography depicts a wide variety of sexual acts. very little of it shows violence or implies that any physical damage is being done to the models. only if one thinks of sex itself as a degrading act can one believe that all pornography degrades and harms women. it is true that pornography is marketed for a male audience, but there are women who enjoy it. i do not think it sufficient to say these women are brainwashed by the patriarchy, since women are socialized not to use erotic materials.” “do people have value only if they go about in pairs? it’s wonderful when health insurance, for example, is extended to a domestic partner. but people should not have to be in a relationship to qualify for health care.” “one of the dominant myths of our culture is that everybody longs to participate in romantic heterosexual love; that it is romance which gives life meaning and purpose; and that sex is better when you do it with somebody you love. we are also taught to assume that romance and money are mutually exclusive, even though the heroes of romance novels and neogothics are almost always as wealthy as they are handsome. it would be foolish to deny the existence of romantic passion and lust, but it would be equally foolish to ignore the people who prefer to fuck as far away as possible from the trappings of valentine’s day. these people don’t enjoy the roller coaster ride of romantic love. and there will always be people who simply don’t get turned on in the context of an ongoing, committed relationship. some of these people make trustworthy and affectionate, permanent or long-term partners as long as they're not expected to radiate a lot of sexual heat. but in a more sex-positive society, these folks might be able to have both marriage and paid sex without the guilt and stigma of being diagnosed as psychologically ‘immature’ or ‘incomplete.’” content/trigger warnings; discussions of homophobia, lesbophobia, biphobia, transphobia, amatonormativity, toxic monogamy, police brutality, hate crimes/gay bashings, homophobia in law enforcement, hiv/aids, ableism, addiction, sex, kink, puritanism, anti-pornography, anti-sex work, anti-kink, sex trafficking, pedophilia, child sexual abuse, child physical abuse, incest, classism. instances of pedophilia apologia, ableism, racism, n word, f slur, lesbophobic slur, acephobia,
