I confess. This is an abridged version of The Tale . I cheated. But this is the thrilling kind of cheating. Maybe I was meant to read this book in sections because the moment I started reading, I realized I'd read the first chapter as a child. How did I get it? From whom? I'm not sure, as my childhood had its share of rootlessness. I enjoyed this version from Penguin Classics for many reasons, including as an introduction to this wonderful tome that is considered the oldest novel. It was interesting to learn from the editor of this version, Royall Tyler, Japanese-language-and-literature scholar, that "all of Japan's early prose literature includes poems, and Genji contains 795 of them." The Akashi lady is said to be the best poet in Genji. Tanka poems have no rhyme, no meter, and yet they are short songs because of their indulgence in syllabic language and style. Most of the poems (poetry collections) I have read and reviewed on Goodreads have meter, so this was educating in a gratifying way. (As an aside, I only included one excerpt without the most accurate drop lines because I've found it difficult to include line indentation for poetry on goodreads). Like unmelted snow I linger reluctantly, and in my darkness find that I cannot be sure who I am or where I go. The author, Murasaki Shikibu, served the Empress Akiko around 1006, chiefly because of her fiction writing talent. When she died, she left fragments from a diary, as well as poetry. I enjoyed the poetry in this novel, the tragedy in storytelling, the inner conflicts revealed, but even the granular things were beguiling, like the syntax, for example: "his mind was in undignified confusion." You know you are in exemplary storytelling territory when you read and think about the symbolism of yugao, an evening flower associated with melancholy beauty. You know you are enamored when you start to look up moon vine seeds at Home Depot. Yugao, meaning moonflower or evening face, is a white gourd blossom that opens in the evening and easily withers. It is nighttime beauty, fleeting and fragile. It is mysterious and alluring, like the woman Genji is drawn to, when he sees these flowers blooming outside of her itaya. Her story is saddening, but so are the stories of all the women Genji comes into contact with. He is the downfall of many women. It was extraordinary, though, how leaving her in the morning or being away from her only for the day made him miserable enough to wonder whether he had lost his senses, and to struggle to remind himself that nothing about her required this degree of passion. Get to the story, you say, but this is the story, for this is what the tale does nicely. It gives allusions in storytelling, captures atmospheric tension, sends you back and forth in time while never losing a step with pacing. Alas, I do have to remind myself, I am reading the abridged version. Still, I am a bit awestruck. Genji loses his mother at age three and his grandmother at age six. His mother is one of the emperor's concubines and the emperor is in love with her. From birth, Genji is favored by his father and by most. He is said to have unparalleled beauty. However loved he may be, that love is stifled by customs. Because he is the child of an "intimate," customs dictate his place within the palace. Instead of naming him a Prince, part of the imperial line, the Emperor makes him a Genji, a commoner with title. After losing his mother to illness, Genji's nurse, the woman closest to him, renounces the world and becomes a nun. As a result, he also loses her. He feels abandoned by the women in his life and the novel explores his skewed relationship with women and his torment when he loses the ones he loves. You have to worry about the women Genji is drawn to because they all seem to have precarious lifestyles that make it awkward and dangerous for them to be with him, yet Genji is an obsessive lover who is relentless in his pursuit. He has numerous sexual encounters, some so scandalous and power-driven that they are painful to follow. He is a tortured soul, who, despite his likeability based on his good looks, feels insecure and inferior. He finds ways to exert the power he never received when he was excluded from the imperial family, even though he had significant influence with an emperor as a father. He has so many affairs that one needs a chart to keep track of the characters' names. So you would imagine that one of these affairs would be his downfall and that what he does to the wives of others, would someday be done to his. Anyway, I could go on, but I'll scrap my reading notes and pause here. Personal notes on the abridged version. My chief complaint of this abridged version is Chapter 25 being added as a prologue. From my viewpoint, it didn't seem necessary. I also think Chapters 33-35 could have been included, as they highlight major turns in the plot that could indicate protagonist transformation. On the other hand, the footnotes in this copy were a helpful reading tool. Overall, I was satisfied with this abridged version, as well as the translation and editing, and I think readers with a similar reading goal may find it useful.
