The Value of Kindness: The Story of Elizabeth Fry (ValueTale Series) by Spencer Johnson, Illustrator - Steve Pileggi- Children’s Illustrated Colour Picture Book- The book narrates the story of Elizabeth Fry, an English Quacker woman (1790-1848) who was informed that condition of male and female prisoners was bad in New Gate Prison. They had no food, clothes, no access to schools, no access to learn work which could get them money & no medicine for their ailments. The was no arrangement for Christian education. Argument of the people was that rude behaviour of prisoners towards society cannot improve. She discussed the issue with her friends that they could visit the woman Quarter of the New Gate prison with food, clothes, medicine, Bible and meet them. Her friends disagreed. With two baskets of food, clothes and Bible, she went alone to the New Gate Prison. All guards of the prison are called Turn Key because they turn the key in the locked gate to open the gate. The Guard initially resisted but allowed her to enter the prison alone. Elizabeth saw that the condition of women and children was pathetic. It was winter. The children did not have clothes to wear and food to eat. They all were fighting with one another. First Elizabeth gave clothes of a naked child to wear. Now, the woman inmates were ready to talk to her. She gave them food and clothes and recited the Bible to them. She enquired what she can do for their betterment. They replied – (1) books for children, pencil, note book, (2) teach us sewing so that they can prepare quilts and other daily use garments which can be sold in the market for their income. Elizabeth informed about the success of her visit to her friends who were prepared to visit the prison with her with the required food, clothes, books, pencils, needles and cloth for stitching clothes and winter quilts. They read the Bible to them. Elizabeth’s premise was that if we treat the prisoners kindly, they will behave well with us. They passed the message to all that “God loves all prison mates.” She helped to establish two schools, help the sick and needy. She advocated free education for children and abolition of death penalty. Coloured illustrations help the reader in relating to the story. Show more
