“Deep in the Forest” by Brinton Turkle; published by Houghton Mifflin Company; Boston, MA; copyright 1989 1. Awards the book has received: There were no awards received. 2. Appropriate grade level(s): This book is appropriate for children from Pre-Kindergarten to First grade. 3. Summary: This story is like the story of Goldilocks and the Three Bears. The only difference is that the bear cub is the one entering a human family’s home and trying out all of their belongings. When the bear first comes in he sees that no one is home. He goes into the kitchen and sees three bowls of porridge, one for the papa, one for the mama and one for the baby. He tried them all but they were too warm and too cold but the baby’s porridge was just right. The same goes for the three chairs he found in the house. Then he finds the bedroom and tries out the three beds. The first was too hard, the next was too soft and the last was just right. When the family finally come home, they see that someone has been in their house and has eaten their porridge, sat and broken their chairs and messed up their beds. The then find the bear in one of the beds. They are not happy so they shoo the bear away into the woods where he was reunited with his own family. 4. Review: I really enjoyed this story because it was a slight twist on a well-known fairytale. The illustrations were very nicely done and created an overall wooded feel for the story to take place in. It also set a scene for a more historic time period. I liked this story because it could be told exactly like the original fairytale but also had different places where you could read and interpret it as your own based on what was drawn in the illustrations. 5. Uses in the classroom: • Read Goldilocks and the Three Bears as a read-aloud or have them read it individually after reading this book, so they have a better understanding of what they are reading. • Create a class Venn diagram comparing the similarities and differenced between this story and the original fairytale. • Have the students create their own take of the fairytale. • Have the students recreate the story during play time. • Have the students discuss with a partner what they may find in a modern day house that could be just right and on the two opposite extremes. • Have students redraw their favorite scene and write the word that could be in the story.
