I tried a couple of Greene’s more literary novels when I was a teenager, but was too young to appreciate them. The only book of his I had fully read before was The Third Man, which like this book, was one of his “entertainments”. This is one of his earlier novels, published in 1936. I had mixed feelings about this book. I listened to an audio version, but couldn’t find the correct edition on here. “If a man’s born ugly, he doesn’t stand a chance. It begins at school, it begins before that.” For me one of the strongest aspects of the novel was the character of Raven, a professional assassin, who was born with a harelip. Having such a recognisable facial feature is a distinct drawback in his profession, and he is careful to eliminate any witnesses when he is on a “job”. Brought up in a children’s home where there were plenty of beatings but little else, he has spent his life deprived of companionship, warmth and affection. Like the person who’s not invited to the party and who says “I wouldn’t have gone anyway”, he has convinced himself he doesn’t need the things he has never experienced. It says something for Greene’s writing that the reader can sympathise, to an extent, with a character who is a cold-blooded killer. The novel maintains a good pace, and I thought there were a number of genuinely tense scenes, especially in the first half. As the book moved on though, the word “Buchanesque” kept coming more into my mind. Like the Buchan novels, the plot is held together with improbable coincidences (admittedly not the whoppers that you would encounter in a Buchan novel) and I thought there was one rather large hole in the plot. The main underlying story also had distinct echoes of Buchan, although Greene’s writing does give it a harder and more realistic edge than Buchan’s novels, which were deliberately written to stay just on the right side of parody. A big spoiler follows, to be avoided if you are thinking of reading the book. There are hints of antisemitism in the second half of this novel, as Greene creates a character who is a stereotype of the “evil Jewish puppet master”, complete with hooked nose. I realise these attitudes were pervasive in the 1930s, but it left an unpleasant aftertaste, when you consider what those attitudes led to. I liked the ending. I was going to read “Brighton Rock” after this, but I’ll scratch that now. I might though try some of Greene’s postwar novels.
