“There is no case at all, Rube, for a calculated risk. Because there is no calculation , but only risk. Who has given us the right to decide for the entire world that it should be taken?” … “Because you don’t turn back. Not ever. You don’t spend billions preparing to send a man to the moon, and then decide not to. Or invent the airplane, look it over, and decide to uninvent it because someday someone might use it to drop a bomb. You just don’t stop something as enormous as this; the human race never has. Risk? Yes, maybe. Yes, certainly . But who did that ever stop? Anyone whose birthday has become a national holiday? We are going ahead .” Simon Morley is a bit bored by his work as an artist at a Manhattan advertising agency. So, he jumps at the chance to be a part of a secret government project that is attempting to travel back in time. Together, they decide to solve a mystery that has been in his girlfriend’s family for generations: a cryptic letter found in her grandfather’s possessions after his death that warns “That the sending of this should cause the Destruction by Fire of the entire World.” But once in 1882 New York City, Si falls in love with a woman, and back in the present, it turns out his handlers may have plans for time travel beyond mere observation…. Time and Again was a very popular, and highly influential, work of time travel fiction. The novel presents an exhaustively detailed portrait of 1880s New York City and blends real history and people into the story. That portrait is relevant because the method of time travel is not a machine, but a combination of immersion in a realistic historically accurate surroundings and a form of self-hypnosis that allows the mind to slide from our time into the past. The time travel is original and unusual, and one of the better parts of the story. And I liked the ending. That said, at least for me, Time and Again was kinda meh. It might have been early on the themes of ‘you can’t always trust the government’, and ‘you were so busy figuring out if you could that you didn’t think about whether you should,’ but you’ve read those same themes done better in other books. There seemed to be a few significant plot holes: how was Katie able to travel with Si so easily when it was presented as being a rare skill? Wouldn’t the scientists have figured out the mystery of the cryptic letter in their research, especially after he came back from his initial visits with all of the names involved? And wouldn’t Byrnes still be lokiing for Julia when she returned to 1882? But most of all, the book just dragged in places due to the seemingly endless depictions of gaslights and carriages and other 1880s New York set pieces. Some readers obviously love it, but I was struggling to resist the urge to start skimming pages until we got back out of the description-merely-for-description’s-sake and back into dialogue and/or plot. I didn’t hate Time and Again . It was well-researched and certainly evocative in its detail of people and places. But it was a bit boring for long stretches.
