“If you read only one western novel in your life, read Lonesome Dove.” —USA Today Above statement seemed a bit too much to me before reading the book but not after reading it. My first time reading a Pulitzer winner and it is truly an epic story in every sense. A book that left me happy, sad, angry, and teary at times. Augustus McCrae and Woodrow Call are two retired rangers who run a cattle company in a small town called Lonesome Dove. Whereas Augustus is very talkative Call is the opposite, talking only when it is necessary. An odd pair to be friends. Everything is going fine and suddenly out of nowhere an old friend, Jake Spoon, makes an appearance out of nowhere. Jake Spoon by mistake has murdered a doctor in Fort Smith, Arkansas, and is now wanted for same. Jake in his conversation tells Call about how he’d been to Montana and its beauty. How green it is and there is no one to claim it. Call gets all anxious to be to first to claim it and soon he starts his journey from Texas to Montana with some 3000 cattle. I absolutely love the characters in the book. McMurtry has done a wonderful job in carving them. He has paid an equal attention to primary and secondary characters telling us about their backgrounds and how it effects their present. It’s such a huge book and so many characters that at first I have a little trouble in remembering all in starting but soon I got addicted to them. I laughed with them, I cried with them, felt their pain, indecisiveness, sometimes I hated them for their foolishness but in the end I loved them all. This review will be incomplete if I didn’t mention my favorite character from the book. & I think I am not alone in this, as far as I know he is everyone’s favorite from the book. Augustus McCrae, a non-stop talker, someone who can argue on a subject for countless hours. Fellow rangers worship him, though not for his talkativeness, but for he is a good man. I came to love his truthfulness and boldness. He is blunt but also helpful. Someone who keep his promises and has a good heart. So a request to everyone who has this one on their tbr, please read it asap and if you don't have it on your tbr even then go ahead and read it for this is an awesome read.
