This story begins by introducing the reader to a group of six penguins: Goodly, Lovely, Angel, Neatly, Perfect and Tacky. Right off the bat the reader can see that Tacky is the odd bird out. In the first illustration, Goodly, Lovely, Angel, Neatly and Perfect can be seen straightening their bowties at the top of the iceberg while Tacky is lying upside down at the bottom of the iceberg. The initial impression the reader gets from the first page is that this will be a humorous story. Each illustration is very well done. Instead of the standard whole-page illustrations followed with text, these illustrations are scattered throughout the page, interacting with the text as the story is being told. In each illustration the audience can see how Tacky really is the odd one, for he is always doing something he isn’t supposed to be doing. Tacky recognizes that he is different from the other penguins, and when he tries to be like the others, he runs into some trouble. When he walks with his beak up in the air like the other penguins, he runs into an iceberg, and when he tries to do the penguins’ cheer they have been preparing for a competition as perfectly as they do, he gets confused. Finally, he learns the cheer and does it with no mistakes. The other penguins are ecstatic because maybe for once, Tacky won’t mess something up. When it comes to judgment day, Tacky can be seen in the illustration sitting off to the side with the other penguins, slouching. He seems very discouraged in this scene. As the penguins take the stage shortly after, Tacky is back to his usual clumsy ways, but instead of the judges being disappointed, they find humor in the performance and beg for an encore from the team. Tacky proceeds with other silly cheers he knows and the judges go wild. This is when Tacky, and the other penguins discover that maybe his quirkiness is just what they need. Overall, this cartoon storybook about a silly penguin and his family of perfectionists is sure to make the reader of any age laugh. Both the author and the illustrator do a wonderful job of working off of what the other has created. The illustrations and text complement each other so well without being too simple or over the top. Although the story does teach the audience that it is okay to be yourself, the story does so without being overly didactic which makes the book that much more enjoyable.
