My sole purpose in purchasing and reading this book was not familiarise with the legend of Alexander but to determine for myself whether or not he is the Zulqurnain mention in the Quran in Surah Kahf. Zulqurnain which means Lord Of The Two Horns, is described in Surah Kahf. Three episodes of Zulqurnain are described. A journey to the East, A journey to to the West and constructing and Iron Gate to keep out the tribes of Gog and Magog. He is desccribed in the Quran as: 'Verily We established his power on earth, and We gave him the ways and the means to all ends.' 'One (such) way he followed, until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it set in a spring of murky water: Near it he found a People: We said: "O Zul-qarnain! (thou hast authority,) either to punish them, or to treat them with kindness." 'Then followed he (another) way, Until, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no covering protection against the sun.' 'Then followed he (another) way, Till, when he came between the two mountains, he found upon their hither side a folk that scarce could understand a saying.' 'He said: "(The power) in which my Lord has established me is better (than tribute): Help me therefore with strength (and labour): I will erect a strong barrier between you and them' This is in reference to the Iron Gate he constructed to keep out Gog and Magog. Now, for the book. Having finished reading it, unfortunately there were no episodes described by the author that corresponded exactly to the above. Yes, you learn that Alexander was a genius gifted with extraordinary charisma and had an unparalled talent for organisation. So the question remains is Zulqurnain of the Quran, Alexander The Great? On the face of it, the eivdence is compellling. The title Lord of the two horns is applicable to Alexander, he was Lord of the West and East, Lord of the Greek states and of the Persian Empire which included Western Asia. Also Alexander was depicted on coins as having two horns in reference to his deity. I emailed a couple of Professor of Greek History and asked them the following: 'In the Quran Alexander the Great is according to some commentators referenced by the title Lord of the two Horns. Other commentators however dispute this as Alexander the Great was not known to be a monotheist and participated in pagan practices. However from what I have read of Alexander the Great, he was a man of lofty ideals. His references to Jupiter Ammon may have been no more than playful references to the superstition of his time. He was also a student of Aristotle who was noted for the pursuit of truth in all wordly and spiritual matters. May I ask what is your opinion regarding this? Do you think Alexander the Great was a monotheist at heart? A man of faith as it were.' Here are their replies: There is general agreement that Dhul-Qarnayn in the Quran is indeed Alexander the Great - this is not because of any true history, however, but because of a post-Alexander fiction called the Alexander Romance, in one version of which he visits Mecca and is converted! 'I don't think his references to Ammon were intended to be merely playful: he was indeed very religious, but a polytheist not a monotheist who (I think) did genuinely believe that he was in some sense a 'son of' Ammon (ie, Egyptian Amun) - whom other Greeks also worshipped, by assimilation to Zeus, at Cyrene and whose oracle at Siwah had already been consulted before Alexander by for example Lysander the Spartan general. Alexander was indeed a former student of Aristotle, who influenced him strongly in matters of natural science (especially botany and zoology) but seems to have had little influence on his political or religious outlook.' So far as I can tell it is pretty much settled opinion that it is a reference to Alexander the Great and that the horns refer to the horns of Amun/Ammon with which he was often depicted. But beyond that there is much dispute and controversy. 'It is also certain that Alexander was not a monotheist in any meaningful sense and plenty of evidence for him participating in pagan cults. The main dispute concerns the meaning of the Ammon oracle at Siwah indicating he was son of Amun since all pharaohs -- and Alexander presented himself as such -- were considered somehow "sons of Ammon/Ra". Alexander and his successors presented themselves as legitimate quasi-native heirs of the last Egyptian pharaoh Nectanebo and as enemies by the same token of the Persian invaders. But there is dispute over how Alexander himself interpreted this useful designation outside the Egyptian context. He certainly also identified with Heracles who was son of Zeus (identified by Greeks with Ammon) and supposed ancestor of Alexander through his father Philip.' Quranic commentators are divided. The most recent crop assert that Alexander was a pagan which does concur with the views from the experts. Some of the self-annointed scholars have claimed that Alexander The Great could not have been a Muslim because he drank wine which is prohibited for Muslims. Says it all is my response to that. So the fundamental issue then in this controversy is was Alexander the God-minded ruler mentioned in the Quran or a wine-swilling megalomaniac who believed he was the son of a deity. Upon analysing the book, I conclude the following. 1) The question of divinity. This can be easily explained as a political tool. Alexander's father, Philip of Macedon used this same propaganda to ensure obedience and reverence amongst the troops. For illiterate Greeks the gap between men and Gods was not very big. The book describes an encounter when Alexander was bleeding and one of his followers remarked it was Ichor, a fluid that was supposedly flowed from Gods. Alexander corrected him by saying it was blood. Towards the end of his campaign, when his troops began to mutiny, he went a step further and declared that he was a God. But the purpose of this was as before. It is very hard to believe that educated Greeks took this seriously. 2) Was Alexander a pagan? Alexander was a student of Arisotle. Aristotle from his writings infered the existence of God as a prime mover of heavenly bodies which corresponds to the arguments used in the Quran when trying to convince the unbelievers of the existence of God. Certainly, Alexander before he set off on a journey made sacrifices to the Gods, but I beleive this was for the sake of appearances. He once fought in a religious month (Daisios) in which fighting was apparently forbidden by the Gods. This leads me to doubt his devotion to the Greek Gods. Alexander was an intellectual. He was versed in philosophy and kept the Iliad under his pillow. The educated elite Greeks, especially those who studied under Aristotle, were men who revered reason and were grounded in logic. As such I doubt such people really believed in the Greek Pantheon of Gods. 3) Character and conduct of Alexander. Alexander was not a lustful, greedy ruler like the Roman Emperors. If anything his interest women was tepid. When his army stopped at Babylon, a city renowned for promscuity and immorality, he abstained from the practices of his soldiers. Nor was he greedy for riches. He used his purse to buy the loyalty of his men and gave away other riches. Alexander was a compassionate and forigving man. Numerous examples of this are described in the book. When he saw the body of Darius, his arch enemy, he draped the body with his royal cloak and ensured he was given a royal burial. When during his travels he came across a tribe of misshapen men who lived in the wild, he saw to it that they were repatriated in their own homes and given sufficient money to live on. Alexander also seemed to have a deep affinity for sages. When insulted by Diogenes, Alexander took no offence. Another time he encountered some sages who told him that despite his conquest, in the end the only piece of earth which he could lay claim to was the earth the would hold his dead body. Alexander lauded their sentiments. He always forbade his troops from enslaving priests or destroying temples or shrines. All this points to an innate spirituality. Disregarding a lot of the romantic legends surrounding Alexander in which he is alleged to have been bisexual and have had a homosexual relationship with Hephaeston. A lot of romantic historians in the manner of medieval minstrels were prone to project their own fantasies on to historical legends. So it is safe to say such bardic tales have little or no resemblance to the truth. Some commentators have identified Zulqurnain as Cyrus the Great. An ancient Persian king described in the Book of Daniel as a ram with two horns who was trampled on by a goat with one horn. This does not correspond to Alexander The Great even remotely. And the authenticity of the Book of Daneil is very dubious. It seems to be a hodgepodge of Aramaic, Greek and Hebrew. As such my conclusion is that Zulqurnain in the Quran is indeed Alexander The Great.
