I could’ve sworn it took me much longer to finish this book. I loved her prose as well as the words of those she chose to quote: such lyrical, revelatory language. But it also wasn’t easy to get through. But maybe that was how it was supposed to be: that slowly taking in this book was meant to be like the author’s habit of walking labyrinths, wending her way in meditation and prayer. Favorite quotes: “‘What a waste it is to be surrounded by heaven, by a sky “made white by angels’ wings” and to be unaware of it,’ writes Esther de Waal. ‘Perhaps the first step is that we really should want to unearth God in our midst...[to] let the mundane become the edge of glory, and find the extraordinary in the ordinary.’ To find not perfection, but possibility.” p. 27 “I went to church as if it were a ballet. I went to the ballet on Sunday, felt many different kinds of feelings, couldn’t bring those feelings into line with my intellect or figure out how to integrate them into my own experience, and so they gradually faded as the week wore on. It didn’t connect. I suspect that many people who faithfully attend church remain in such a state and don’t know what to do about it. (And those who watch us from the outside wonder, rightly, What’s the point of all this?) What I finally understood was that simply going to church doesn’t do it, but neither does not going to church.” p. 66 “Turner adds, ‘To the extent that the church recommends its traditional teaching and yet at the same time fails to be a family in which loneliness is remedied, it will fail to recognize the necessary framework for understanding its own teaching...What we need to form is a moral and political community which is something more than a lonely crowd in pursuit of private ends.’” p. 68 “Faith is not about belief in something irrational or about a blind connection to something unreal. It’s about a gathering, an accumulation of events and experiences of a different order. These experiences are gradually convincing enough, or you have paid them so much attention, they reach critical mass. The famous ‘leap’ comes at the beginning, when there is not enough experience to justify the effort. Even then, something begins faith—a memory of a reality or of an experience that doesn’t quite fit with everything else, the longing a soul has to find its shape in the world.” p. 79 “...Anne Lamott writes, ‘I know Jesus drinks himself to sleep.’” p. 125 “I offer to pray with her. God help Lois make this decision, I think, as we pray. I don’t understand until much later, as I’m driving away, that she needed me to go out on a limb with her and be responsible, with her, for making what may have been the wrong decision. She needed me to help carry the load. I didn’t. That had nothing to do with respecting Lois’s autonomy; it was about washing my hands. We pretend to respect the autonomy of people who are sick or dying; in actuality, we hang them out to dry. I see something then, just at the periphery, about faith. I want to remain clean, innocent, above the fray, but faith requires me to get down and dirty, to risk making a mistake for the sake of another, to join in the awful intimacy of Lois’s suffering.” p. 145 “‘Do you believe in an afterlife?’ Jodie asks. “‘Yes,’ I say. ‘Something happened to Jesus, but I can’t imagine what it will be like.’ “Then I remember an afternoon Jodie came over with other friends and we sat outside in the backyard. “‘Do you remember that afternoon?’ I ask Jodie. ‘When everything was so easy?’ “‘No,’ she says. “‘It was sunny and everyone was relaxed, nothing special was going on. I was so glad to see you. I felt completely in the present. No part of me was missing. I think that has something to do with eternity.’ “‘Yes,’ she says. ‘I know what you’re talking about. I know exactly what you’re talking about. I’ve had those moments, too.’” p. 154 “Seen through our modern eyes, the lives of saints and pilgrims seem excessive, bordering on the crazed: Joan and her voices, Francis and his kiss upon the leper’s lips, Julian of Norwich nearly walked into a cell, bands of pilgrims walking barefoot toward a shrine. Excess marks the lives of saints and pilgrims. Viewed through the lens of faith, however, these lives reveal this truth: the love of God for us is excessive and deserves, even demands, extravagance in return.” p. 178 “‘You know, you have a choice, in our culture, to have a cultural Christianity or a committed Christianity,’ Robert says. ‘A cultural Christianity is a Christianity where you go to a nice church and you take your children to a nice church where you have a liturgy that pleases you without any depth of commitment. A committed Christianity challenges people to cross that bridge from a cultural inclination to a commitment in faith.’” p. 194 “In answer to a question regarding the afterlife, Henry David Thoreau is said to have replied, ‘One world at a time.’ It is here, all around us, the kingdom we seek, in ordinary things and in time, in what we allow into us.” p. 202 “For a Eucharistic prayer Roy Parker sings a version of e. e. cummings: ‘We thank God for this amazing day / For leaping greenly spirits of trees / And a blue true dream of sky / And for everything which is natural / Which is infinite, which is Yes.’” p. 203
