This review is of the first seventeen chapters of this book which has a total of fifty-four chapters. This was the scope of assigned reading for our book group in order to keep it at a reasonable length. The complete book is about 1,500 pages (72 hours audio). If this story were set in today's world it would be an example of #MeToo on steroids. But it was written and takes place in Japan around the year 1000 (long before #MeToo), and it describes typical male behavior when given (almost) unlimited power and influence. The main character Genji is a son of the Emperor and favorite concubine. He is not in the line of succession, but he nevertheless is favored by the Emperor. His combination of good looks and protection of the Emperor makes him a man to whom you can't say "no." This novel's account of Genji's life concentrates on his romantic life and describes the customs of Japanese aristocratic society of the time. Genji has a habit of sneaking into the beds of women at night and having his way with them, and in one case impregnates a wife of the Emperor. The subsequent son born from this encounter eventually ascends to become Emperor. Even though Genji is not in line of succession he is son of an Emperor and ends up being the biological father of an Emperor. The first eleven chapters tell of his younger years when his sexual exploits were greatest. By chapter eleven he gets caught in the wrong bed at the wrong time and is forced to go into exile for several years. Chapters twelve and thirteen are about those exile years, but in Chapters fourteen to seventeen he's back in the Palace of Kyoto with all his former power. In these later chapters he is older and perhaps less wild because he is now checking to make sure all his former girl friends are taken care of. The following excerpt from Chapter Eighteen is an example of the reputation Genji had developed. He was trying to get Akashi, one of his mistresses, to come stay at the Palace, but she is reluctant to do so because of his reputation. He wrote frequently to Akashi and many times begged her to come up to the Capital. But she had heard so many stories of how others had suffered at his hands—how he had again and again toyed with the affections not only of humble creatures such as herself, but of the greatest ladies in the land, only to cast them aside a few months later with the most callous indifference. Surely it would be foolish not to take warning. If this was his conduct towards person of rank and influence, what sort of treatment could she, a friendless girl, expect? What part could she hope to play save the humiliating one of a foil to the young princess who was Genji's lawful bride? It's my understanding that the story goes on from there with no particular plot other than everybody is growing older and by the time the reader reaches the end it's about the third generation descendants of Genji. The following is a link to a New York Time article which discusses Tale of Genji: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/15/bo...
