If Irish crime writer Stuart Neville's 2010 novel THE TWELVE (US title: The Ghosts of Belfast ) is touted to become a fictional classic about The Troubles of Northern Ireland, British thriller writer Gerald Seymour's 1975 HARRY'S GAME is the seminal novel of urban guerilla warfare and espionage bureaucracy in the early days of The Troubles. Neville's protagonist tells his haunting story after an early release from Long Kesh prison following the "Good Friday" agreement of 1998. Seymour's hero is undercover agent Harry Brown sent to Belfast to infiltrate the terrorists...and find the IRA assassin who gunned down a British cabinet minister on a London street in the early 1970's. Gerald Seymour was perfectly capable of writing this thriller, this tension-filled story of a manhunt. Before he wrote HARRY'S GAME he was a successful British television news reporter whose work involved him directly in Vietnam, the Mideast wars, the Munich Olympics massacre...and six years of reporting the guerilla warfare in Northern Ireland. In the early pages of this debut novel, Seymour writes of a telephone directive received by a Dublin newsroom: "Listen carefully. I'm only going to say this once. This is a spokesman for the military wing of the Provisional IRA. An active-service of the Provisional IRA today carried out a court-martial executive order on Henry DeLacey Danby, an enemy of the people of Ireland and servant of the British occupation forces in Ireland. During the eighteen months spent in Ireland, one of his duties was responsibility for the concentration camp at Long Kesh. He was repeatedly warned that if the regime of the camp did not change, action would be taken against him. That's it." And Seymour the journalist turned writer calls a spade a spade yet tries to remain neutral. Harry Brown's superior tells of sending him to "infiltrate the most successful urban terrorist movement in the world over the last 25 years." And a now popular phrase is coined as Harry ponders the words of a Red Cross man from Switzerland on another assignment: "One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter." Neville tries to persuade his readers that his Irish killer is a freedom fighter. Seymour calls his IRA assassin The Man...well, an assassin for a terrorist movement. And he calls Long Kesh prison a concentration camp in the Provisional IRA directive. HARRY'S GAME is a fascinating tale told by a master storyteller with two of the most exceptional characters of suspense fiction. If the title of the book sounds familiar, the novel was made into a successful British TV series in 1982. The theme music was provided by the Celtic band Clannad. "The Theme from Harry's Game" became their breakthrough title. History buffs interested in Long Kesh prison, the old RAF base in Belfast that later became The Maze, may enjoy the first half of Sam Millar's autobiographical On the Brinks and his infamous stay in Cell Block H there "on-the-blanket" for eight years. Thriller readers like me, who prefer gritty realism without high-tech trivia, wild car chases, and shoot-outs, may be interested in Seymour's other Irish thrillers The Journeyman Tailor and Field Of Blood .
