Red Dragon opens to Will Graham on the beach behind his Florida home, his wife and stepson close by. But it's the visiting Jack Crawford who holds Will's attention at the moment. Within these first pages you come to understand the recent violent history of Graham's past with the FBI. That he has taken a life and nearly lost his own to the hands of the Hannibal Lecter we shouldn't yet know (but of course we do since this book was written in 1981); that Graham has removed himself from that past – out of the game and the hunt of killers. If only the men like Crawford would leave it that way, and a most recent killer hadn't arisen. This book has a brilliant way of illustrating Graham's past as he seeks the “Tooth Fairy” (an early moniker given to the Red Dragon). It feels almost as if you're reading a second book in a series, but not at all as if you'd missed reading the first. The brief moments spent here with Hannibal are intense and revealing. It's completely possible that I would feel differently about who Lecter is if I hadn't already known him from the Silence of the Lambs movie, but that's kind of like hearsay. A link is formed between Lecter and the Dragon, with Will in the middle, and then the spotlight smartly transitions to our new killer. Spending too much time with Hannibal would have been a mistake. It was right about this point that he surprises me by snatching Lounds (literally biting his lips off) and then returning him by a fiery fate. Note: The book has some sickly, gruesome moments, but it is so well done. Through the midst of this, the reader is treated to the killer's childhood and tutelage, so to speak. Understanding Dolarhyde's past and what he becomes does not make you like or identify with him (cause he's a crazed killer), but it serves in broadening the entire experience. Three-dimensions is the key to this and many stories, and I loved it. A quick aside in my review. I actually held Red Dragon in my hands as a very young teen in 1981. This may have been the second or third book I'd received after joining a book club, and I had probably read the first three or four chapters before stopping (Graham inside the first victim's home was still clear to me). Was I too young for the Killer-Thriller genre, and my first crime novel? I don't know. I had read Cujo by that point in time, but I guess that's somewhat different, and it's possible that this story was all too real for me at that point. Anyway, it's a memory I have. I'd be remiss by not mentioning how strong and well-written the character of Will Graham is here. I don't believe I'll see him after this and will miss him. As far as my rating, even though I'm not certain how much I liked what feels like a movie style ending, Red Dragon is far too good to receive anything but 5 stars.
