This short booklet (basically a pamphlet) was one of Nietzsche's early writings before he became The Anti-Christ and contracted a bad case of megalomania where he would sign his letters to people as "The Crucified." The title "On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life" summarizes Nietzsche's thesis with this work. Nietzsche criticizes the Germany of his time as without culture and lacking instinct, a place where a sick soulless inwardness prevails and a synthetic pseudo-kultur disguises the real feeling of the country. Nietzsche blames this phenomenon on the typical German's abstract feelings and belief in unharmed inwardness. Nietzsche also states: "Only strong personalities can endure history: the weak are completely extinguished by it." Nietzsche believed that the modern German no longer trusted and had faith in himself, therefore when looking at history he would think "how am I to feel here" as opposed to the actual reality of the situation. Looking at how absurd the typical American's (and European) irrational (and total ignorance of in general) views on the second World War II certainly proves that Nietzsche's views are still more than relevant today. When talking about most historical (and contemporary events), most people have an anti-intellectual emotional response that they have unknowingly been indoctrinated and conditioned with like Pavlov's dog. All in all, this is a very insightful work in regards to understanding history and its context (especially among different type of individuals, from the neuter to the alpha-powerful). Maybe if more people read works like this they would realize that their worship of historical myths presented as conclusive facts would be extinguished, but that is surely doubtful. In a world where collectivist anti-intellectual metaphysical propaganda dominates and where virtually all "professional" Historians are compromised by the thought police, it is very hard for one to discern the true facts of history from the propaganda of lies.
