Aurora Floyd, by Mary Elizabeth Braddon, much like Lady Audley's Secret, is a novel that makes a clear and positive impression on the reader, not so much because they are similar to the big name authors of Victorian literature like Dickens, but because they are dissimilar. Dickens is my favourite author, but it is impossible to find a strong, powerful lead character who is female. Such is not the case with Braddon's Aurora Floyd. Aurora is both a reflection of the proper Victorian heroine as she does faint and fret somewhat about household matters, but she is much more. While attractive like a good Victorian heroine, she is not perfect. Her physical beauty is the least important part of her character. She loves horses and rides as well as any man, she is more comfortable at a race course placing a bet than she is in the parlour doing crochet work. She is willing to travel on her own, is not above whipping a stable hand for mistreating her dog and has, of course, a deep secret that Dickens would shudder to give to Lucy Manette, Agnes Wakefield, Ester Summerson or Florence Dombey. You will not find the depth or breadth of a Dickens novel in Aurora Floyd, and the grand passages of atmosphere, the fingernail biting bits of suspense and the panorama of characters are all muted in a Braddon novel. Nevertheless, her novels offer much to please the reader. The "just one more chapter" desire before dinner exists in Braddon as it does in Dickens. In Aurora Floyd Braddon includes in the story the names of most major Victorian novelists, make constant reference to Shakespeare's Othello and Macbeth and too frequently addresses her readers in asides and instances of self-reflexivity. These incidences, while minor, were constant irritants. Unless their intention was to help ground and stabilize her structure, and give her novel more buoyancy, I am not certain of their necessity. In any case, I found this novel a worthwhile read. The sensation novel's most well-known author is Wilkie Collins, but M.E. Braddon is worthwhile reading as well. Enjoy the second line of Victorian authors. There is much to celebrate.
