5/5/25: Still 5 stars and an absolute delight! 4/2023: the rare book I actually enjoy more with each reread - really appreciated both main characters growth and increasing maturity, subtle growth of increasing attraction and attachment between them. Add in delightful characters, dialogue - what’s not to love? I have a real soft spot for Freddy, he’s a kind, practical, well-mannered, humble yet charming and likable young man. Love his interactions with his urbane, wise, yet bemused father, watching the evolution of his son before his very eyes - really touching and relatable! 3/2021 - one of my favorite Heyer’s! Bummed that the unabridged audible is no longer available, wish I had bought it when I had the chance! Clair Wille does a lovely job narrating the abridged version, I just pause and read my favorite bits so I don’t miss any of the funny parts. Freddy and Kitty are a delightful pair, great supporting characters and dialogue 10/2018 - still great fun! I very much enjoyed this 4th(5th?) reread - listened to the audiobook, mostly - with the Georgette Heyer group, great discussions as always! 2010 - As so often happens when I read a new (for me) Georgette Heyer, I think this is my new favorite! I've been collecting and reading her books for years and can't believe I hadn't gotten to "Cotillion" yet. As she cleverly did in another favorite book, "The Foundling", Heyer turns the traditional tall, dark and handsome rake-as-hero romantic ideal that she herself created on it's head in this delightful, charming, intricately plotted romp. I laughed out loud in several places as I witnessed the growth and character development of Kitty and Freddy as they embark on their sham "secret betrothal" (by the middle of the book most of fashionable London knows about it and half don't believe it). As the story opens, Kitty Charing has been told by her cheap, selfish, curmudgeonly guardian that he will make her heiress to his fortune - but only if she agrees to accept one of his nephews as a husband. He clearly means for her to choose Jack, the dashing, handsome, rakish nephew for whom the naive and sheltered Kitty has nurtured a schoolgirl crush for years; Jack, however, refuses the summons and Kitty feels humiliated, angry and cornered. She runs away to a nearby inn and luckily runs into yet another nephew, Freddy Standen, a dandyish, fashionable, kind-hearted but rather empty-headed fellow who hardly seems the hero type. Freddy had been on his way to visit Uncle Matthew (the curmudgeon) at the behest of sneaky Jack; Kitty talks him into the sham proposal so she can escape to London to visit his family (naively hoping to get Jack's attention as well). Freddy is rather dim but bright enough to foresee trouble ahead, but goes along with it because of his good nature. As the pair navigate London society interesting developments arise as Kitty befriends and decides to help some decidedly shady characters...No spoilers, but anyone who has read Heyer's sparkling, witty Regencies will appreciate the farcical complications, charming and comical supporting characters and wonderful dialogue. Highly recommended.
