Love's Own Reward by Dana Ransom was a wonderful contemporary romance. The book opens with Charley driving down the road, on a normal day. She has witnessed thousands of people being cut-off in traffic and very rarely does it turn into an accident. This is one of those rare occasions. Charley witnesses the accident and jumps out of her car to go save the occupants involved. Unfortunately, the car is already smoking. Throwing caution to the wind, Charley finds her way into the car and rescues a little boy, she gets him to safety and then starts running back. She is set on saving the little boys parents. The car breaks into flame, and she continues to try to get the car open, burning her hands in the process. The car starts to be overtaken by flame, and a tall guy jumps in and grabs her, hauling her away from the fireball that explodes seconds later. Charley is taken to the hospital and is treated and released. She calls a cab to come and get her, but with all the reporters around, she can't find it. she starts to black out when strong arms hold her elbows and help her into a car. She falls asleep immediately. When she comes to it is the next morning and she hears pots and pans banging around in the kitchen so she gets up to investigate, thinking it is her fiancé. When she gets the first glimpse of the guy, his rear end, she knows it is not her fiancé. As Jess stands up, she realizes that she has no clue who this hot guy is in her kitchen, but she is willing to find out. Jess saw her being bombarded at the hospital and does a real decent thing, he takes her home. His whole angle is to get the best story of his career, unfortunately, he does not plan on falling in love with Charley, but his heart is doing flip-flops and Jess starts to fall for the pretty, selfless, wonderful woman that he knows he does not measure up to, in any way possible. This is a wonderful story of love and the possibility of righting wrongs, no matter how long it takes. I look forward to reading more contemporary romance by Dana Ransom. I received a free copy of this book in return for my honest opinion.
