My intention of writing a review for this book is to tell all the negative reviewers to SHUT UP! I am all for everyone's right to express their opinion but I read a few of the '1 star' reviews and I was shocked to read what a few people had to say about this book. Before making an opinion I suggest people to keep a few things in mind: 1. This is someone's DIARY not a book meant to entertain people. If you think it was boring then answer me, how many interesting things can you possibly do locked up in a place for 3 years?? 2. For those who comment on the writing- This is a 14year old's diary!! She didn't write it with the intention of winning the pulitzer. 3.For those who commented on her ideologies or how nazism is portrayed. Hello!! She was 14!!! And maybe..just maybe its justified to think the way she does considering she LIVED it unlike so many of us who get to sit back on our comfortable sofas and critically analyze every XYZ thing in the world. I believe no one has the right to 'review' much less criticize a written document of a 14 year old's life who made it through the worst of circumstances and through difficulties we cannot even imagine to live through. Its a pity some people think the way they do. EDIT 27th Sep, 2013: I never imagined I would garner so many likes for this review. This only means that a lot of people are emotional about this book and take negative reviews as a personal insult. I wrote this review in a very emotionally charged mind frame. A year later, now that I am older, wiser and more mature, I realise I could have used fewer exclamation marks. :P EDIT 24th Sep, 2020: It's been 8 years since I wrote this! I am definitely, older, wiser and more mature. And so, I would like to point out, that I do regret the explosive "SHUT UP" in my review, no scratch that, in my "rant". I guess such is life when you are young- angry & angsty. It's amazing though that despite the angry tonality, there is so much love pouring in the comments section! Thanks y'all. I shall continue my attempt to grow wiser as I grow older. PS: Time for a re-read?
