It's not a very good sign when one of the BEST things you can say about a novel is that it was short! Less than 200 pages, I never really found any sort of identity with this book. To quote the famous line from Jerry Seinfeld " It was a story about nothing". I mean things happened, there was a sort of a plot, but it was all contrived and none of it added up to anything with any sort of meaning. The characters were weak and poorly developed. The characters were misfits, weirdos, oddballs, criminals or just a motley collection of life's 'deplorables'. Advertised as a story about "society's newest outlaws" it failed even to project any true radicalism and ended up a bunch of hollow cliches about society in the 1980's. It was a stereotypical collection of oddballs, like a poorly cast sit com with people randomly dreamed up to be as ridiculous and eccentric as possible. I was deeply disappointed by the lack of any insight or point to this novel. I mean I 'get' the idea of a simple 'slice of life' portrait being effective. Written in 1990 this was very much a warm up type of exercise for Lewis Shiner. Novels trying to capture the existential wasteland of modern life are common. Shiner's prose is complex enough with lots of subtle nuance, so it reads well. But his characters were simply more cardboard cutouts than any reflection of real people. They are devoid of any charm other than being strange. Dave, the main character whose point of view structures the novel, is presented as sympathetic and an antihero at the same time. It all just doesn't compute. And as I said earlier, the rest of the characters are just irritating stereotypes and 'out of the blue' quacks. I bought this based upon my 5 star experience with Shiner's 2020 novel " Outside the Gates of Eden", his brilliant portrait and history of the Baby Boomer, Woodstock Dream generation. I'm sure " Slam " was an important building block for Shiner as a writer. I own a copy of his 2010 novel "Glimpses" as well, and hope that lives up to it's award winning buzz.
