Boring, with absolutely no payoff, and mildly insulting actually. It boils down to basically the dual cliches of technophobia and the old classic trope "Native Americans lived in harmony with the earth until the evil white man ruined everything." I kept reading hoping for something beyond those two themes, but that's all there is. The first one is galling enough as he doesn't present one unique idea as to why technology is a bad thing, it's just the same shit you've heard a billion times before, and the Native American thing seems just thrown in there because it's an easy and lazy way of emphasizing the "evils" of technology. The Native Americans never do anything, they exist purely so that the main character can reference them in his inane thoughts about technology. The characters are also incredibly weak and allow the author to not have to explain anything scientific because none of them give a shit how anything actually works, they're all content just sittin' on the porch whittlin' away the days of their 5000 year life spans. That works perfectly for the author because the stuff he wants the reader to accept is ridiculous; telepathy, teleportation (simply by thinking about teleporting), healing-- these are all the psychic powers that apparently humans can develop if they'd just forget about technology and science and live in harmony with the earth. I mean it's not like that's how humans spent every day of their lives up until the last couple centuries, it's totally plausible that turning your back on tech would result in humans evolving to live 5000 years and have ultra powerful psychic abilities, just like the Amish. Anyway, the more I think about this book, the more I hate it. I should have bailed in the first 30 pages when it was so excruciatingly boring that I couldn't get through 2 or 3 sentences without my mind wandering, but I thought "he's just getting the boring setup out of the way before all the interesting stuff starts happening". About 140 pages later, one single fucking thing had happened, barely anything was explained, and what was explained was retarded.
