3.5 * I read Dune 9 years ago, thought it was perfect and left it there. Since then, I’ve debated whether I should read the follow up. I had two fears, one, that it would not be as good as the 1st in the series and, two, that things will go very badly for Paul and his Jihad. I was right on both accounts. On Saturday, I saw Dune 2 which was a masterpiece. In its aftermath, I was elated and then I felt a deep sadness and emptiness. When I read that Villeneuve almost finished the script for the 3rd Part, I decided to take the plunge and read Dune Messiah. I am content with my decision, although it wasn’t as good as the first and I felt depressed all the time I was reading it. “No matter how exotic human civilization becomes, no matter the developments of life and society nor the complexity of the machine/human interface, there always come interludes of lonely power when the course of humankind, the very future of humankind, depends upon the relatively simple actions of single individuals.” This review contains spoilers for Dune and minor ones for this novel. Many complained that this is a boring book and that nothing happens in it. I fully disagree. Oh, the novel has problems but not these ones. I mean, ok, if you expect epic battles, you won’t find them in here. What you will find are plots over plots and a lot of internal struggle. It was not boring, I mean you do not need a large attention span to finish this book. It is a lot shorter than its predecessor and a fast read. The novel starts 12 years after the events in Dune. Paul Atreides is now the Emperor, the most powerful man in the Universe and he feels very, very unhappy and guilty. “To endure oneself may be the hardest task in the universe. There’s no writ of inquest or calling of witnesses to provide answers. No servant—or disciple—can dress the wound. You dress it yourself or continue bleeding for all to see.” At around 40%, we find the hard facts of his discontent: “Statistics: at a conservative estimate, I’ve killed sixty-one billion, sterilized ninety planets, completely demoralized five hundred others. I’ve wiped out the followers of forty religions”. A feat hard to achieve in terms of destruction. His only comfort is that “he had seen enough alternate Timelines to know of worse possibilities than accepting godhead for himself. Much worse.” “You can’t stop a mental epidemic. It leaps from person to person across parsecs. It’s overwhelmingly contagious. It strikes at the unprotected side, in the place where we lodge the fragments of other such plagues. Who can stop such a thing? Muad’Dib hasn’t the antidote. The thing has roots in chaos. Can orders reach there?” Paul is not the only one with issues. Many of the remaining powers try to kill him and even part of the Fremen are unhappy about the way their world changed, now that they have time to think. “Empires do not suffer emptiness of purpose at the time of their creation. It is when they have become established that aims are lost and replaced by vague ritual.” The Bene Gesserit Reverent mother, Scytale, a face Dancer Bene Tleilax, a guild navigator and empress Irulan meet to plot against Paul. They sent him a gift, a Ghola, a sort of clone made of Duncan Idaho’s dead flesh. They somehow program it to kill Atreides when activated. Paul is unable to refuse to have his childhood friend beside him, even though the ghola retains no memory of his past life. At the same time both Empress Irulan, Chani, the consort are desperate to sire a hire to the throne. Irulan feeds Birth control to Chani in secret while Muad’dib refuses to touch his wife. I confess that I’ve read the plot before starting. I wanted to know what I was getting into, my own power of prescience. Already knowing the plot, it allowed me to concentrate on the writing. I was able to enjoy the philosophic dialogues that I also appreciated in the original Dune, but also to see the problems. By far, the biggest issue I have with this book is how the author wrote women and all the nauseous sexual innuendoes concerning Alia. I will elaborate for each character because it pissed me off. I was surprised by these choices since Dune had some powerful women. • Irulan: She was present only at the beginning to moan that she wasn’t getting it from Paul and that she wanted a child so badly. So much so that she decided to conspire with the enemy. • Chani: Poor woman is only a cardboard character here, a submissive thing and only a vessel for Muad’Dib’s heir. I remember that she had some sort of personality in the novel so I was very disappointed. • Jessica: The powerful Jessica decided she has done enough and retired on Caladan, letting her offspring to ruin the world without her. She only sent a pointless letter This is so unlike Jessica to stay behind and not try to scheme. • The Reverend Mother had some interesting interventions until she suggested that Paul and his sister should mate to produce a suitable heir from a genetic point of view. Later, she is brought back for a diatribe against IVF. It really reminded me that this book was written in the 60’. Or it could have ben set in Alabama. • Alia. Ok, I will try to write this without puking. In this book Alia is 15, going on 16 and apparently on heat. At some point, the author makes her fight naked and when Paul sees her, he realizes that she became a woman and almost gets a hard-on. Grose. And then there is talk about finding her a mate, later she feels a “post-coital sadness” and so on. Oh, and Duncan kisses her. I understand that she has the memories Jessica and all the Reverend Mothers before her but still, she looks like a 15 year old girl. WTF Herbert? The parts involving Paul, his internal struggles, the dialogues with his friends and enemies were all good, some excellent. They touched me and I felt sorry for him. I wanted to absorb some parts of this book inside me. However, I could not understand some of the author’s decisions. Well, as Paul said “There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers,” Paul said. “Nothing. Nothing can be done.” Some more quotes: The flesh surrenders itself, he thought. Eternity takes back its own. Our bodies stirred these waters briefly, danced with a certain intoxication before the love of life and self, dealt with a few strange ideas, then submitted to the instruments of Time. What can we say of this? I occurred. I am not … yet, I occurred. “We must not grieve for those dear to us before their passing.” “Before their passing,” Paul whispered. “Tell me, little sister, what is before?” All it required was water … and love. Life changed those irascible wastes into shapes of grace and movement, he thought. That was the message of the desert. Contrast stunned him with realization. He wanted to turn to the aides massed in the sietch entrance, shout at them: If you need something to worship, then worship life—all life, every last crawling bit of it! We’re all in this beauty together!
