well, I am glad I finished this by the end of the year. I've been reading it for most of the year - well, obviously, not reading it for most of the year. I started it in april, after I'd already met my reading challenge goal for the year (set low because it's been so unpredictable lately). ackroyd is of course insanely well-read and he's tackled a huge subject here; it's not as....organized as many non-fiction books are. which may well be a deliberate nod to the aspect of the english imagination he describes as additive or accretionary - a sort of organic growth in a chain rather than formally or theoretically organized. so it was like reading a lot of essays on various arts from drama to architecture to landscape design to prose writing to novels to poetry to music to painting and sculpture. altogether, although quite probably a very apt form for a book tackling such a large endeavor, it didn't make for a page turner. I read a bit, then I read several other more compelling books, and then at some point I just wasn't reading as much, I was watching things and knitting or doing tarot spreads or walking. so here we are at the end of december and I have just made a concerted push to get through it. he's a pleasure to read, really, even if it felt a bit choppy and I was putting it down for long stretches. he's erudite and masterful. at one point I read some other goodreads reviews that panned this book - I remember at least one person was miffed that harry potter wasn't discussed. this is about the *origins* of the english imagination, not its expression in 21st century children's literature. I feel like some people didn't appreciate the full scope of the project - to take not just writing but a broad view of human expressive arts and to extract what about it is particularly english, what characteristics persist through time and schools and genres and have some sort of relationship with the history of humanity in this place. some of what he identifies is a deep continuity with the past, indeed marked by a reverence for what has come before and often writing etc. in archaic language as if the author was of a past time, an earthy humor, an insistence on practicality rather than theory, a preference for surface patterning, humility and self-deprecation as an author, the aforementioned accretionary form of growth, a robust assimilation of outside influences, a love of alliteration and a persistent melancholy. there is also, near the end, a very interesting section on the romantic poets and their growth out of the reformation, and the sense that this is really the birth of the individual, divided from a communal experience contiguous with the past. "just as the reformation severed the national church from the consensus of a thousand years, so its natural child of romanticism abrogated the alliance between the artist and the larger settled community. that is why it has been argued that the 'central truth of romanticism is not joy and fullness of being but what hegel...called the 'unhappy consciousness'...the consciousness of self as a divided nature, a doubled and merely contradictory being' relying upon the artificiality of language and its constructs to exemplify its dubious status." my two favorite quotes from the book: "the yearning for ruins is of long duration." "in england the reverence for the past and the affinity with the natural landscape join together in a mutual embrace. so we owe much to the ground on which we dwell. it is the landscape and the dreamscape. it encourages a sense of longing and belonging. it is albion."
