I love Georgette Heyer's "lane" so much that I want her to stay in it. She invented, and perfected, the frothy period romantic comedy, and I find myself resenting her attempts to monkey with the genre. Her most popular books all have a likable heroine and/or hero, vividly drawn secondary characters, witty set-piece scenes that grow organically out of the clash of personalities, acting against the backdrop of the All-Observing Eye of Regency-era high society and its collective mind. In A Civil Contract Heyer deliberately set out to defeat all those expectations. I can understand her having become bored by her own formula, but the formula is successful for reasons. It makes for a happy escape from the stresses and reverses of everyday life; it allows for gentle laughter over the oddities and absurdities of human behavior; it makes the optimistic case for the existence of true love, belonging, and a safe haven. And in the hands of a master like Heyer, it allows one to indulge the dream without the embarrassment of being pandered to by a hack. Who doesn't want to live in that head space for a bit? In this book, Heyer dishes up instead an unglamorous, middle-class heroine for whom marriage is not the culmination of her story but the beginning--and it's a marriage of convenience, proposed by the groom so he can use her father's money to save his estate and provide a dowry for his sister. To cap it off, the groom is in love with one of the heroine's closest friends. This is not a fantasy scenario I want to plunge into. The heroine, Jenny, has many admirable qualities, but the life she has chosen for herself is humiliating. Yes, she's dignified and unbowed by all the humiliations--the in-laws who consider her beneath them, the husband obviously repelled by her and yearning for a glamorous rival who's clearly a worthless piece of work, the society folk sitting in judgment, the embarrassing and intrusive father--but surely a worthy heroine could enjoy a happier fate? And the hero is not a person I can respect, so I don't even want to root for them as a couple. There isn't even the relief of adorably ridiculous secondary characters, although the secondary characters are ably drawn. And even the London social scene is held at arm's length (the hero's world is cushioned by a few understanding friends who are better than he deserves), depriving the story of any strong plot driver. The whole setup feels like an intellectual exercise, the product of a bored author asking herself, "What would happen if I created a scenario that defeated all expectations?" A lot of the foundational premises of the story also seem implausible to me--why would Jenny ever be friends with a person like the antiheroine? Why would a hero with the life experience he is given not be able to see through that antiheroine? What we get is a semi-realistic portrait of a marriage of the early 1960s model, where the husband gets to lead whatever life he chooses and the wife chooses to contort herself to suit him. In this case the husband ultimately makes some decent choices, but that's not enough to redeem him in my eyes. It's a richly developed portrait of something I don't want to read about.
