Butt on the leather interior. Make that the hard seat vinyl sticking to the fart sound rubbing flesh like sweaty underwear that has crawled up sun don't shine places and worn for far too long and far too worn down. Ass in the seat of humanity. Hand on the wheel and the other masturbating a Johnson. Not Lyndon Johnson. Gotta be Ronald Reagan. I admit I haven't thought about wounded Ronald Reagan much since just say no to drugs! kindergarten sticker days to come up with any euphemisms in his honor. Fortunately for me, Ballard swapped out auto erotic cum vehicular slaughter fixation on the former president (short story "Why I want to fuck Ronald Reagan". I'm not being crazy) for film stars and prostitutes who you can anything you want to call them, baby. Since I have read City of Nets by Otto Friedrich I have a lot of secondhand knowledge about the film career of Reagan should I ever need football field room to run. Never mind. no one wants to go down that road with you, Mar. I wasn't thinking about Ronald Reagan in his various positions, honest. Eyes on the road kill road. The ass on the photo copy machine and stand apart and spread 'em, perp! Full body cavity search. Ballard is the hard ass female guard who could stick her hand all the way up there. I'm just doing my job, ma'am. If you read Crash you'll be all the way up there in the orifices is exactly what the book jacket blurb says, honest. My mouth hurts after all of that all the way up there, actually. I may be bruised and eating ice cream for a while. What did I have to hide? Pictures from the x-ray machine says Halloween costume for next year (if you plan these things in advance) and this is what I would look like if I were a smushed bug on your grill. The medical instruments are cold on the naked ass hanging out of the window for the passerby. She doesn't have a bed side manner. The hands are fucking cold. Clinical hands on the flesh equipment and contrasting assured movements on the machines that could be made to do the ass on the photocopy machine effect of I know exactly what I want it to expose and let's reenact this until it's all the way up in there. The problem with reenacting and trying to get some desired effect is it can be too actor moving stage right to stage left. I know there was something about our relationship to the material world in place of one with the other cogs, I mean bodies - whoops I mean machines. No, I mean people. If the ritual doesn't mean anything to you but habit it could be like sitting in traffic for the 24-7 jam. Married sex. This used to get me off of marriage to getting off. Ballard hardened me out like a used car. Sex like a body rolled into a morgue. Eleven o'clock news every day and same old shit. Scab healed over too many times. Am I trying to say I was numb by too much sex? No, I hope I'm not saying that. It was the injury as sexual as functional. The perfunctory let's stage car crashes, fuck like electric bunnies (they dream of electric sex) and stare at the blood droplets rising to the surface. I used to lock myself in my car and give myself heat stroke on purpose. I would do it on regular life work days. Personal hell sauna thing. I am on scar back of the hand intimate with feeling vessels by letting out the various bodily vessels. Mine was different than theirs. It doesn't feel like message speaking to society's problems with coldness. It feels more like just trying to push off the what you can't use pain off the cliff (and it ain't Freudian phallic). I don't know if I felt connected to them about all of this. It just doesn't feel like that to me. I guess I'm the ghost that doesn't know its dead in those horror stories. I would not like it at all to be submissive to anyone. Their retreat into these body crime scenes and giving up their ghost to the higher (?) authority of chance? I might be too different to understand the feel-something-different side of it. It's a whole different kind of release. No, I wouldn't like it at all. Pinocchio is too real a boy now. I don't think Ballard wanted a flesh and blood relinquishing to the sweet, sweet void anyway. I kind of wish it was. He would take apart the machine to see how it worked, I think. It's rare to get that out of Ballard, actually. He's so high concept for possibilities sometimes that I get to feeling frustrated. He's not always like that. His short stories The Drowned Giant and The Garden of Time are two of my favorite that I have ever read. If this were a robot that has dreams of bunnies it would be one of those Blade Runner machines that is a real person in a crowd of faces that look like his but could be another species for all he knows. Memories of them would just have to be made up. Realize you are standing on the ear of a felled big beast and think about what you are treading on all of the time to get to where you go without thinking about it every day (I stare at the ground too much). In our wounds we celebrated the re-birth of the traffic-slain dead, the deaths and injuries of those we had seen dying by the roadside and the imaginary wounds and postures of the millions yet to die. I like Ballard. I like that he thought about this stuff and tried to work it out some place that meant something to him (stories). It's not pushing it way, way down in the trunk, right? But I am Mariel and I haven't thought about Vaughn or Ballard (the Crash Ballard character) or Caroline or the others since reading until now when I'm writing my book review and if I don't think about them then they aren't ghosts. I guess I'm not a statement kind of girl. They were, though. They did nothing but try to make statements and beat up the words until it said what they thought it wanted to say. (They could have done something other than have sex where the bad thing happened. Ghosts only come to where it meant something to you so they were doing that wrong.) Did Ballard say what he wanted to say? I'm Mariel so I was looking for something else. I do think about how Ballard (character Ballard) looked to Vaughn to show him what to do. Luke Skywalker's machine hand has been veined to feed someone else. Now, a personal story to make all who read it weep. When... This is hard.... When I was a young girl I had to.... Maybe I should lie down in the back seat first. So my mother and older sister had a "thing" for actor James Spader. Yes, I am well aware that he is practically the devil! I watched the movies down to the Don Johnson socks and white suits. "There's no dust in this dust buster!" still passes my lips in my most apocalyptic memories. What would you have done? (It's so easy to sit there and judge some person who reviews these books out of nothing but the purest generosity of her book loving heart, isn't it?) So I sat right there and watched the damned movies. They didn't have any interest in the Cronenberg film of Crash, though (we watched plenty of his other films so this I cannot account for). I haven't seen it since high school. I don't remember it being like the book. It's hard to tell when I am trying to side step the haunting specter of Spader trying to steal Jack Nicholson's Michelle Pfieffer candy from a baby in Wolf. You would just love for all the shit to come down, wouldn't you? I could review the movie of Crash just for you and then Spader would make me eat three peas and a scoop of ice cream (from the film Secretary don't I just know it. Never mind that came out in my adulthood). It was like some acting out the horrors in a Lifetime getting off on abuse movie. They even made a movie about this (not Lifetime. Spike! This was male interest. Christina Ricci played me with all my pleases and q's). Well, I won't do it!
