December 28th, 2022: I cannot believe I finished it! I also cannot believe how it just ended. The ending was just a cutoff and not a real ending. So disappointing. But then after such a saga, I cannot imagine how there could have been any resolution. It will take me a while to write a review. This was such an epic and it has taken me so long to read, I am going to have to do some pondering to decide even how to review it... It is a most remarkable book! December 8, 2022: Even though I have been reading and/or listening to this book for over 6 months now and do not expect to finish it this year, I am still enjoying it very much when I do listen to it, which now is when I exercise, approximately 3 or 4 times @ week for 1/2 hour or so. At this point, Genji is dead, and the tale is about two sisters, the elder of which is also dead, and her relationship with two men, the Counselor and His Highness. Their actual names are rarely used, and only given at the start of the chapter. It is a story of high etiquette, appreciation and following of strict rules of behavior, yet great appreciation for beauty in its many forms: nature, human, music, art, poetry and even penmanship. Often as the reader, one is exasperated by one or more of the characters for his or her (usually her) extreme adherence to personal rejection of fate, but then there are always the dramatic options of escape to the monastery or dying in despair, which are both popular choices. I do not mean to make light of the story, because it is in a class of its own and is not meant to be read lightly or quickly, still it's not entirely possible for this 21st century reader to put off her chronocentric mindset and completely enter into that age and life, however much I might want to. Still reading... I have had a copy of this on my shelf for ages... I found it in a secondhand book shop on a visit to my sister and tried to tell her what a find it was. She just looked at me and smiled as most non-readers do when book people try to tell them about special books. My copy is in EXCELLENT, brand new, condition, and I got it for only $20. I shall be handling it very carefully as I read it. This is supposed to be the oldest known novel, from Japan and written by a woman. So far delighted with how readable it is! There was a very long introduction which was extremely helpful. Genji seems to be something of a charming rake, at least so far.
