If Edward P. Jones were asked to suggest an epigraph for Lost in the City, I imagine he would give serious thought to the inscription over the door to Plato’s Academy: “Let no one enter here who is ignorant of geometry.” Much is made of the streets of Washington D.C. both within these stories and within the province of conspiracy theorists. The original street layout of our national capital was designed by Pierre Charles L’Enfant, a Freemason like many of the founding fathers, and the briefest glance at a city map reveals a number of possibly cultic symbolic interpretations, but such a reductive stance is not the intent of these stories; the author never makes mention of the more mysterious aspects of Washington’s urban design outside of its impact on the lives of his characters—the ways these streets provide the larger framework for tangential interaction. In fact, the first set of streets Mr. Jones locates us in—3rd and L Streets NW—have literally been lost in the city during the construction of Interstate 395. Rather, these stories are thematically tied together by a sense of place created whole clothe from the vicissitudes of survival on the streets—a sense of place that ultimately threatens to displace the inherent value of a strictly survivalist worldview. I am thinking of how, in many of these stories, the streets come to define themselves both within the characters and upon the characters. It is, at times, a matter of subtle word choice. By way of example in “The Girl who Raised Pigeons” we get “…she smelled what seemed a mixture of dirt and rainy air and heard a heart that seemed to be hurling itself against the wall of the bird’s breast,” in which the body of the bird is described as having a wall. In contrast with this, we are told, “She sang on into the night for herself alone, her voice pushing back everything she did not yet understand,” in the final sentence of “The Night Rhonda Ferguson was Killed”—I think thematically this “pushing back” is walling the boundaries between the known and the unknowable. Other times this interaction happens in a more radical and overt fashion, tied closer to plot and story structure. For instance, characters in “The Store,” “Lost in the City,” and “Marie” use the streets to retrace the pathways of their lives and memories of the city. In “The Sunday Before Mother’s Day,” Samuel “Pookie” Williams II uses streets to define what he can and cannot accept from life, frequently lapsing into the first person plural “we” as he talks of himself—almost as if he cannot know himself outside of how he is known by others. By example, here is a passage from his longest speaking part: “…I been all over the damn world, …so when I came back I knew what I wanted to put in my own world, and he’ll never be in it…. We have our wife and child, and you and Maddie and Hazel’s family.” By further extension of this when the action of a story becomes violent or unpredictable, the details given often take on a geometrical quality. In the aforementioned story, we are told in a description of a pool of blood that: “The floor tilted, and so the blood had flowed through the night in several thin lines from the dead woman, and one line had been heading directly toward where Maddie was standing in the doorway.” After the climactic violence of “Young Lions” Caesar and Carol exit each other’s lives along diagonal lines—she walking away on Massachusetts and he heading north on 17th, looking over his shoulder “expecting something or someone.” Perhaps one of the more interesting examples comes in “Marie” when the title character slaps a Social Security secretary and the action immediately follows not the impact of the slap but the smaller incidence of a dropped fingernail file striking the floor. Of course, there is more at play than the significance of streets and geometry in Lost in the City. Stormy weather plays a major role as does music. There is also a specific dialect to which the author tunes the stories, but even these qualities feel subordinate to the streets. For a collection of stories about city life, more than half of the action takes place outside on the streets and, by extension, is under the influence of the city environment more so than some sort of controlled indoor atmosphere. There are the bigger questions of the city’s changing racial identity and familiar ties to the south, which often underscore the characters’ various perspectives, but even these play out into the streets as we find the advent of MLK and Malcolm X on streets and place names. The book ends paradoxically insofar as—when taken in conjunction with the title—the last sentence hints that part of the peoples’ voice isn’t so much leant to the streets as lost in the maze. Still, tonally this final note is pitch-perfect for the bittersweet nostalgia that threads through these stories.
