Hercule Poirot does not like to admit that he has any faults, but even he must concede that he does have a slight fear of the dentist. Even with his fear, he finds Dr. Morley a capable man and will stick with him… that is until Morley apparently commits suicide shortly after his appointment with Poirot. It makes no sense though as Morely would have had to do this between patients, and showed no signs of any problems that would cause him to take such actions. No, everything about the man’s psychology says he would not do this, and thus Poirot finds himself with another case (and most annoyingly, without a client paying him). This is the 23rd Poirot book and the first one Christie published in the 40s. Again, I can’t help but chuckle whenever it is noted that Poirot is getting to0 old, given that Christie kept writing the character until her death (the last book was published in 1975). The 40s stand, in my opinion, as the really underrated decade for Poirot with some of the better cases upcoming (Evil Under the Sun and Five Little Pigs), but this is not one of them. Honestly, this one is a bit of an oddity. It was clear that Christie wanted to mix things up a bit, and there’s elements of a spy novel and political intrigue added to it . There’s also some very funny (in my opinion at least) discussions on whether or not there exists super criminal masterminds, which having read The Big Four, makes me think Christie is trying to find a way to both allow that novel into Poirot’s world and ignore it. The case is rather disappointing. I solved most of the big aspects fairly early into it, and rather than feeling clever, I kept feeling like I’ve seen it done before (though for the life of me, I can’t remember where). I also was not a fan of the motive… but the book does regain a star due to the conversation Poirot has with the murderer in which they discuss the motive. Poirot is truly given one of his finest moments of dialogue here, in which he explains his own issues with the case. All in all, this is a pretty standard Christie novel, but one with an excellent ending… not in terms of the case itself, but in how Poirot deals with it. This is an oddity, because as much as I love Christie, her characters often come off as wooden. Here I felt that there was a moral dilemma, and it was better handled than in any of her past books. Perhaps if this would have been one of my early Poirot novels, I would have liked it more. 3/5 stars and a recommendation to fans and perhaps newcomers as well.
