A diverse collection from a prolific writer that got me wondering how to categorize these stories, the only common theme being that they all had been previously published in literary journals and magazines, and therefore many ran about the same length. It seems to be a pattern with Oates who periodically takes everything she has published recently and sticks them into a book, and publishers seem game to take this on for the long anticipated but hitherto unacknowledged Nobel laureate-in-waiting. The collection is divided into four uneven parts. The number of stories in each part varies, and I couldn’t understand the reason for this sub-division. Was it even necessary? Family dysfunction dominates parts 1 to 3, while a surreal atmosphere lurks over Part 4. The stories are set in the states of New York and New Jersey, in particular around the small towns on southern shore of Lake Ontario, which interested me as I live in a small town on the northern shore of the same lake. The narratives are non linear and jump back and forth in time. Every story tries to introduce a new voice as its narrator, a new syntax, and this is impressive, in particular the voices of teenagers caught in sinister situations. A strong thread of predatory sexuality runs through the collection, and the stories engage immediately. The guilty ones are alluded to but never openly exposed, as the endings are often open ended to the point that many interpretations are possible— some would consider this a plus for the short story, but I need to have a bit more than a suggestion of guilt. The downer is that a lot of back story has to be covered on the characters and therefore there is a lot of “telling.” The most impactful stories to me were: “Jorie and Jamie” in which the mental illness of a child and its destructive effect on her family is powerfully rendered through the eyes of one of her siblings; “Wolf’s Head Lake” in which a woman ponders the likelihood of a sexual predator casing the joint among the myriad of lakeside cottages in search of a new victim; “The Girls with the Blackened Eye” in which a 13-year old is kidnapped and abused by a sexual predator and forced to watch him do the same thing with an adult woman; “The Instructor” where a young remedial English teacher develops an attraction for one of her students, an adult male recently released from Death Row; “The Skull”, a renowned sculptor remakes the shattered skull of a murder victim to assist the police investigation and triggers a revelation of his real character—but as I mentioned earlier, guilt is only a suggestion. The final story in the collection, “Mutants,” conveys the atmosphere of surrealism when a woman is trapped inside her Manhattan apartment during 9/11 and starts to act out of character. Much has been commented on the Marilyn Monroe story, “Three Girls,” but I thought that the more interesting characters here were the other two girls, and I wondered whether Monroe was a figment of their imagination and desire, triggered by their heightening attraction for each other? What impresses me most is Joyce Caro Oates’ versatility. I have read her novels, non-fiction, and now, short fiction, and she excels in all three departments. And the sheer volume of her oeuvre staggers me, with very little repetition in theme, other than for the Kafkaesque stain that spreads over all her work, a darkness out of character with the staid and sheltered college professor she has been for most of her life. Which goes to show that copious and diverse reading helps us escape the narrow confines of existence, and that imagination works better than experience when it comes to telling a rollicking good story.
