This is a very difficult book for me to review; I chose to read it because the authors appear on Gary Gygax's revered "Appendix N" (list of authors and stories that were seminal to his thinking in creating the original Dungeons & Dragons. It features what is, by now, a familiar theme of the swords-and-sorcery adventures of Appendix N - ordinary people from our world (specifically, from the time of the writing, 1940s USA) being transported to fantasy worlds and having to survive there. I did find some of the influences on Gygax here, such as the division of spell components into verbal, somatic, and material. Another common theme in Appendix N, though it may appear here for the very first time, is the concept of the "mathematics of magic" - that magic is simply a sort of science, in a milieu where the laws of reality are slightly different (an idea which probably finds its full flowering in Jack Vance's work). I personally found the first installment, in which a psychologist is transported to the world of Norse mytholoy, very appealing. The other stories, which involved trips to the world of Spencer's "Faerie Queen," Coleridge's Xanadu, and Ariosto's "Orlando Furioso," far less compelling (L. Sprauge de Camp apparently agreed with me about the "Faerie Queen" sequence, though Pratt had apparently been mad for it, and De Camp came to appreciate it later). Anyway, it is well-told, though the colloquial nature of the dialogue suffers after so long (1940s slang rings a bit oddly, now, in modern ears), and I fear that most people have lost the sensibilities, as well as the grounding in Western literature, to appreciate the artistry with which Pratt and De Camp re-create the settings of Spencerian or Carolingian literature. I can't give it 5 stars, I imagine most moderns would be hard pressed to give it more than 2. But I *DO* appreciate the language of Spencer and Carolingian chansons de gestes, so I shall give it 4. Just be advised - it is a kind of sci-fi/fantasy writing that requires certain education and sensibilities to enjoy - it may be an acquired taste.
