This book gave me the almost lost feeling of being gripped by thorough research and evidence-based biography, the sort that went out of style in the 1990s, in favor of politically correct judgments. This biography is necessarily long, out of richness not wordiness. In any substantive non-fiction, the author faces a dilemma between pace and depth. It's a constant struggle I have faced myself in my own non-fiction, for which one's tools include footnotes for the nice-to-know over the need-to-know. Tanenhaus footnotes nothing except references to other chapters. The names of the many persons of note with which Chambers becomes acquainted - significantly, through communist espionage, are sometimes bewildering, but Tanenhaus doesn't shy from what we need-to-know. He sometimes aids us with an adjective or two as reminder of where the character last appeared. In general, the book is fairly described as complete yet fast paced for its completeness. The first chapters, by the way, are not the best of the book, although still good by comparison with normative biography, in part because Chambers' early life is poorly documented, and sometimes self-contradicted by Chambers himself. The book really gets suspenseful in the many chapters covering the confrontation between Chambers and Alger Hiss before the House Unamerican Committee, which Tanenhaus is first to expose in full with previously unpublished transcripts. In these chapters, the reader finally gets the sense of Tanenhaus' anti-communist motivations, rare in themselves. The biography up to that point is largely non-judgmental, and honestly critical of Chambers' own unreliability as a source as an older man, and a partner to lovers and friends as a younger man. The subject is well chosen beyond his own achievements as a writer, journalist, communist spy, and anti-communist crusader. Chambers is a vehicle for an under-publicized period of American history when the Soviets were proactively penetrating the US government to senior executive level, from the 1920s, and particularly in partnership with New Deal progressives in the 1930s, and through World War II, when Chambers did not yet have the chance to fight spies, because he was still locked in a fight with journalists kowtowing gullibly to Soviet propaganda. Anti-communist biographers must work harder than the communist apologizers who dominate the publishing industry, and it shows. The industry satisfices for lazy writing, self-censorship, and unproven but fashionable conclusions. I for one am more selective. I recommend this book as biography, history, and literary style.
