The earliest edition of this novel, the 1968 one called the Holt Library Edition, is the one I read. It does not have the non-fiction padding material about lasers later editions contain. It also calls the U.S. fighter squadron Cobra rather than Arrow. (I have no idea why Cobra wasn't a good enough callsign for a fighter formation in the later editions.) This novel was ostensibly written for junior high school students. At least that's who it was marketed for. I see little evidence in the novel itself that its audience was intended to be a YA audience. None of its characters are youths, and there is war and death in the novel. Anyway, I found the book delightful as an adult reader. An Alaska-based squadron of four experimental fighters made of a new material and capable of extremely high altitude flying at Mach 3 is the attraction. One of these fighters on one occasion, then two of them on another, are vectored out to a mysterious Russian bomber overflying the Arctic when they are shattered. Materials engineer Sarko is called in to investigate what happened. Were the experimental planes defective? Did the Russian bomber do something? Was it sabotage? This short 88-page novel, Bova's fourth, is a lot of fun to read. The suspense and mystery are well-handled and the characters are mature and two-dimensional. It's Bova's best novel yet to date, which is saying something, because his first three, The Star Conquerors , Star Watchman , and The Weathermakers , are also fine novels. This novel continues to be written for YA audiences, though it is the least so in my opinion. Incidentally, the book mentions four non-fiction books Bova has also published by this date: The Story of Reptiles, Giants of the Animal World, The Milky Way Galaxy , and The Uses of Space . The four YA novels are a good start for Bova's first ten years as a writer, but I think the thirteen short stories he published during this time span is his real achievement. This fourth novel marks something of a departure for Bova. The first two novels were set in a far away universe into a distant future after Earth has established a galactic empire. These are space operatic. The next two novels are closer to us and set on a near-future Earth. They capture Bova's speculations on what we might soon do in terms of progress controlling weather and how lasers might affect modern warfare. All are worth reading because of Bova's talent as a writer and ability to get an audience to care about his characters and the situation he sets them in.
