This was my true crime book of the summer - I've been trying to get through the classics of the genre, but you really can't read more than one of these at a time. Last summer I read Helter Skelter, and a few years ago I read In Cold Blood. I tried to read The Executioner's Song, but couldn't get through more than 100 pages or something. For another time, maybe. But ANYWAY. Fatal Vision is an incredible book. It's exhaustively detailed and clocks in at 684 pages, but I read it pretty fast, even just on my commute to and from work each day. As the reader, you learn about Jeffrey MacDonald's life before and after the murders, his presumed innocence, the damning physical evidence against him, the many hearings and trials and indictments, and finally how the author, Joe McGinniss, became convinced of MacDonald's guilt. While MacDonald sued McGinniss for defaming him, there really is no page saying, MACDONALD IS GUILTY. THAT'S IT. BELIEVE IT. McGinniss says explicitly at the end that that's what HE believes (and I think you'd be pretty dense not to agree with him), but there's definitely room to draw your own conclusions. As a human, I loved the detail about all the people involved in the case. As a journalism student, I found McGinniss's tales of the struggle to report this story heartbreaking and invaluable. The only criticism I have of this book is that it can get a little repetitive. Because the case was heard so many times as it went through the army, then the grand jury, then the trial, then the 4th circuit (sorry if I forgot one), and because McGinniss wants to be as exhaustive as possible, he repeats the same evidence many, many times. This is good because it drives the points home (I would have no problem explaining to a friend in detail why MacDonald is guilty), but after a while I was like, okay, I know about the holes in the pajama top matching up with Colette's wounds. I love this book and I think any fan of mystery, true crime or just really good reporting would feel the same. It will stay with me for a very long time, and I'm happy about that.
