Osborne, Mary Pope. Favorite Greek Myths. (1989) In this retelling of Greek myths by Mary Pope Osborne (she wrote the Magic Tree House series) the author introduces young readers to twelve classic Greek myths. In this anthology, I enjoyed two myths the most—Apollo’s Tree and The Great Bear. In Apollo’s Tree, we learn the tragic tale of Apollo and Daphne. Apollo (the god of light and truth) gets into an argument with Cupid, the god of love. Although Apollo’s arrows can kill dangerous animals, Cupid counters that his arrows can be just as lethal. To prove his point, he takes two arrows and gives them separate purposes. The arrow with the lead-filled tip would condemn that person by always running away from love. The other arrow was filled with gold and it would doom that person to fall in love at first sight. Cupid pointed the lead-filled arrow at Daphne, the goddess of wild things. After being hit by the arrow, Daphne called to her father for help and asked that he would never make her marry and help her at any cost. Next, Cupid shot Apollo with the golden arrow; the first person he saw was Daphne and he fell instantly in love. He professed his love for Daphne and began chasing her through the woods. Daphne called for help from her father, a river god. As she yelled for help, Daphne began to transform into tree. Apollo was shocked over the loss of Daphne, his only love. In The Great Bear, we learn of the tale of how the Big Bear and Little Bear constellation came to be. Jupiter, god of the skies fell in love with a woman named Callisto. She had a baby named Arcus. When Jupiter’s wife learned of his betrayal, she turned Callisto into a bear. In bear form, Callisto was separated from her beloved son, Arcus. Arcus was adopted by a family and Callisto stayed near by to watch over him. Over time, Callisto stayed away from Arcus and humans because she did not know how to fight, as a real bear would, and she did not want to be discovered. One day, Callisto and an adult Arcus crossed paths. Arcus was about to shoot Callisto with an arrow when she was saved by Jupiter. Jupiter took Arcus and Callisto and turned them into stars. Juno, the jealous wife, cursed them even further by not allowing the stars to fall into the ocean like other stars. “ For this reason, the Great Bear and Little Bear are the only two constellations that never set below the horizon.” Both re-telling of these myths are accompanied by a full-page illustration of the main characters. In the story of Apollo and Daphne, the reader is treated to an illustration of a woman posed on a hilltop/hillside with tree branches sprouted above her, while a lovestruck Apollo is caught in mid-stride running to his first and only love. In the story of Callisto and Arcus, the illustration of a black bear surrounded by clouds, stars and a boy with a bow and arrow foreshadows the story. These illustrations enhance and preview the stories for the reader and gives them a visual reference point for their imagination. Target Audience: Ages 8 to 12 years old
