1957...w/a new material copyright 1976...i don't believe i've read anything from asimov...so this is a 1st. has an introduction that begins: one of the stories my mother likes to tell about me as a child is that once, when i was nearly five, she found me standing rapt in thought at the curbing in front of the house in which we lived. she said, "what are you doing, isaac?" and i answered, 'counting the cars as they pass.' onward and upward. the intro is loaded w/trivia...'how much time must pass in order than a million seconds may elapse?--answer: just over 11 1/2 days.' there's more like that. chapter one "the atoms that vanish" some interesting points, some that get lost (for me) in the jargon of science...carbon-14...but interesting in how one looks at the universe...we have what we were given...or less...cause atoms vanish, half-life and all that. yet at the same time, the skeptic in me wonders how anyone can know "x"? probability. okay...not easy to buy, devilishly interesting...and too, the thought that certain atoms are a part of us...w/the potential to do damage...and i think, okay, Cell from Stephen King ..."no phone"...yet we're bombarded w/all manner of rays, waves, nessy pas? i recall when project seafarer/project sanguine were afoot...something's afoot!...and this lady calls the wmply hot-line, saying she didn't want all those rays (elf rays) bombarding her temple. heh! who's to know? oops...i did chapter two above, too..."the explosions within us"...wind me up! before you go! so...two done.. chapter 3 "hemoglobin and the universe" ooo, good one: " even the purest and most high-minded scientist finds it expedient sometimes to assault the fortress of truth with the blunt weapon of trail and error. sometimes it works beautifully. big numbers here...if you think the national debt--$16 trillion+--is big and incomprehensible...numbers here are big big. that means big. and honestly the essay lost me somewhere around number big big...but given the ways and means we have used to express the mystery of life...i can't help but think of blueprints...one sees some fine architectural wonder after hacking one's way through the jungle and the 1st thing one asks is, 'mon dieu! who built this!' silly man, still pizzed off about having to attend sunday school, sees only chance, scoffs at the idea of a greater being... ...and then immediately petitions her/his congress critter to place obstacles in the path of others so as to attain nirvana here on earth...believing in their twisted heart that utopia is possible. faith...or something in the formula? chapter 4 is victory on paper the key to the answer to the problem of protein structure was found by a russian. this was michael tswett. the germans didn't believe him or his ways until enough time had passed and they discovered his process for themselves and lo and behold...chemistry never changes, but people do, figure that one. insulin makes an appearance...difficult to stay interested, me...in between some americans discovered so, too...but the germans were the big-cheese and so it goes. we never leave the playground behind. chapter five is the abnormality of being normal a common catch-phrase is the one that goes, 'there is no such thing as a normal person.' why? he asks...uses numbers to say at the end "normal plus normal plus normal-ever-so-many-times does not equal normal. it equals highly abnormal, and it is a limiting case." ...using the characteristics of a hemoglobin molecule... chap 6 planets have an air about them ..... update, finished, 7:42 a.m. sunday 15 jul 12 cough! chap 7...the unblind workings of chance 8 the trapping of the sun 9 the sea-urchin and we 10 the sound of panting 11 the marvelous properties of thiotimoline 12 pate de foie gras whew! those last two are meant to be comic...11...actually both...abound in chemical-speak, elements this that the other...daffodil-13....tulip-235...asparagus-57....that sort of thing. ga ga ga. goo goo goo. is all i got to say to you. okay...okay...the unblind workings or chance...some interesting, thought-provoking stuff happening there...i get a kick out of it when scientists say things like "must"...this is the variation on "assume" and we know what that means. chance. he mentions some other guy who suggested from findings that a sort of intelligence could-might be responsible...and then he shows there is a chance that chance worked, given the ingredients he provides... the panting chapter tells a bit about the volume, the number of articles/reviews/lists of lists that exist...all of which has no doubt by now doubled or tripled since the 50s when asimov wrote this. that 12 is about the goose that laid the golden egg...a bit of a hoot...but even so it contains pumpkin-451...pansie-3435...hayseed-12...things like that.
