It isn’t really clear within the book why Lu Chi wrote his book other than to help show the rules of writing he has found. Lu Chi did write in the book “For a way out, search the depths of the soul for a spirit” telling us that you have to dig deep to want to write again. Lu Chi wanted to publish this book to write down many speakers of language and the style of art whose words use “Thoughts rise from the heart on breezes, and language finds its speaker.” and was also scared he could’ve never finished writing it as “I worry that my inkwell may run dry, that right words cannot be found.” The work that he wants to pass down was very detailed and sprinkled with hidden meanings in the smallest roses. In “The Art of Writing” by Lu Chi translated by Sam Hamill it leaves plenty of room for the reader to reflect on their own life or world. Lu Chi often writes his lessons in poems with their meanings hidden deep inside the words that often leave space for the reflection to take place as you can only see their true meanings through taking that “step back” to understand it. In Lu Chi’s words “However each sentence branches and spreads, it grows from a well-placed phrase” symbolizing that reflecting on the sentences before and past are all holding a hidden meaning. This also can be seen really well with “all their real jewels, cannot fill the little cup, I make of fingers.” bring the reflection that they do not make enough good poems as even still the cup will always seemingly be empty. Lu Chi has shown several times in his book “The Art of Writing” that there will always be sentences that you would need to reflect on to understand their true meaning that is hidden behind the poems like they’re a wall of rain. In “The Art of Writing” by Lu Chi translated by Sam Hamill there is one audience that the book is both explicitly and implicitly is the reader. The book written by Lu Chi has the intention of teaching everyone who reads it about the art of writing which has been stated here in poems. The fact of the matter that Lu Chi tries to tell us repeatedly is “ideas seek harmonious existence, one among others, through language that is beautiful and true” because language needs to be shown to everyone instead of a few. The”enchanted by the poet’s voice, the crowd may shout hosannas” of praise to the words that seem new and complete. Lu Chi never tries to imply at any point that there is a hidden implicit audience.
