this is my first time reading this book! in part two of Mary Anne and the Great Romance , mary anne and richard move into the schafer house and no one can get along. the spiers are too omnivorous, and the schafers are too messy, and mary anne and dawn hate sharing a room because they were stupid to think it was a good idea in the first place (after seeing marilyn and carolyn's fighting resolved once they stopped sharing a room). then dawn plays a horrible prank on mary anne, unbeknownst to mary anne, and everything is resolved, because dawn is a jerk. meanwhile all the pikes get sick with the "pike plague" (i.e. everyone in the family is out of commission, though not all for the same reason; the triplets have pneumonia, mallory has chicken pox, vanessa gets in a bike wreck [no lie, I actually wrote pike wreck at first by accident], nicky breaks some of his fingers, margo and claire get bad colds, mrs. pike hurts her knee, and mr. pike burns his hand) and need a lot of help from the baby-sitters. highlights: -finally we have a resolution to the cliffhanger: WHO CATCHES THE BOUQUET?! the answer? mary anne. dawn is resentful because she thinks she should have because it was her mother who threw it. -apparently dawn likes 50s music. she is stoked about a song that she thinks is by buddy holly coming on the radio. I find this conceivable because I loved 50s pop rock songs when I was 13. -nicky makes the "doctor, will I ever play the violin again?" "I don't see why not." "well I couldn't before!" joke -at one point claudia is standing on her head. she says she thinks it will make her smart because blood is rushing to her head. kristy says that since she's been sitting all day, "you can imagine where my blood has settled. I must have the smartest--" and everyone cuts her off before she can finish her butt joke. but I appreciate your butt joke, kristy. lowlights/nitpicks: -according to bsc lore, mary anne went to live with her maternal grandparents after her mom died. this says both her maternal and paternal grandparents are dead. but she hangs out with her grandmother in later books. huh? -they move into the schafers' on sunday, but then dawn says that by the next day, sunday, mary anne is doing better. the day after sunday is monday. we don't get two sundays in a row. -mary anne says to dawn re: getting dressed for the dance, "when you have a boyfriend, you want to look good for him." seriously I want to murder her when she says that. at least dawn responds, "maybe you do, but I would rather find a guy I could be a slob around." heck yes dawn! -mary anne says to dawn, "don't think of yourself as someone who can't get a date, okay? it isn't healthy." WHAT A SMUG JERK. I HATE MARY ANNE SO MUCH. no outfits. snacks in claudia's room: -pretzels in her closet -tootsie rolls (n.s.) -pretzel sticks (n.s.)
