(2024: Review to Minford's translation, on Penguin, ISBN 9780143133803)(older Barnes & Noble review after that) Second or third reading, this time in a 2018 translation, but mainly got this one because the cover was *really* pretty haha. I would say that this reading opened up the text more to me (because the commentaries were really helpful, both Eastern and Western views included), and the translation was very well done. I can easily see why these texts (that may be collected here as an anthology, really) could be meant to be read slowly and meditatively – and it would be very fitting with the Tao beliefs 8) I feel this book version is more connected to Taoism as a religious practice than the Barnes&Noble version I have; I find that the list of Taoist key themes and images gather together well all the essential points that appear within the poems. The Tao is the unused block of wood, water getting everywhere, the yin and yang symbol, feminine side, working on inner self, practiced quite hidden, to live a better, kinder, gentler life. This is "The Tao and The Power", contemporary to Confucius (more southern, versus C's northern), LT not being a fan of Sun Tzu 'The Art Of War'. Here is what to do as a person, but also how good Tao practice would be for a nation, and ruling a nation, and at war. The influence on Zen, and certain art pieces in China and Japan, is also easy to see. I am the Tao, The Tao is Me. (reminds me of Star Wars: Rogue One) I can see how it in some ways could be fitting into Christian beliefs, if one peers at it hard enough. What Tao is like, how one lives one's life, detachment from owned things, honors, wealth, fame, pleasures of the sense, etc. Now I also found things I don't agree with, like the aim for no-self, lack of interest in things beyond one's nation's borders (not all would be disruptive to the practice), or culture, or traveling. But it's easy to see how these beliefs could be practiced secretly, for a lot practice happen within the person, and one's actions outside it don't declare what one beliefs that loudly either. It was a pleasure to read, opening up these poems more, and this deluxe edition was also pleasant to hold while reading. And now it's nice to own two copies of this book. = (review after rereading:) This book's contents and history have both a sense of vagueness, but not in a bad way, in my opinion. It's somewhat uncertain when it was written (circa 4th-3rd century BC), the author's life details are largely invented, and the existence of the author is not quite certain either (Lao Tzu is just his title, and also it's not known if the text is by one author, or a group of authors worked over some years). It was first translated in the late 1700s, and the oldes existing copy is from circa 300 BC. It's a bit hard to categorise: ethics? religious? philosophy? But really, in my view any of those would do. In a way it felt a bit like Dhammapada, which I've read earlier, in that even if you're not interested in the religion it's part of, it will still appeal, and is a pretty easy a read. I read it quite quickly now. Taoism is clearly put as an opposite way of thinking against Confucianism - which shows in some parts of this text - the latter being based on duties to the community and the family, but somewhat rigidly black and white at its hardest. Taoism is in its end less rigid, putting weight on the coexistence of the opposites, reverence of nature, flexibility and not being too controlling. The Tao is a force in the world, not completely graspable or something one can give a finite meaning, but which balances our world. It is gentleness, avoiding conflict of grasping, seeking peacefulness, simplicity, detachment and humility. Making the point without engaging in rhetoric and arguments. The book's message is simple, the prose spare with plenty of natural imagery. The wisdom (the Tao) of the book is feminine, yin in balance with the yang (while in Confucianism the yang seems sometimes bit heavily-leaned on). The message seems simple, yet is deep. Quite a few sentences bounced out of the text as familiar, things I've seen quoted. Reading and rereading each page will most certainly happen for me in the future. The whole thing reads just like a beautiful ancient Chinese nature painting... and the view is beautiful, peaceful. Such is this book.
