It took me a few chapters to work into this novel, which won the Miles Franklin Award in 1982. At first, I struggled with its eccentricity - its cast of characters, its locality and its circuitous prose. Over time, I figured it to be a comedy, mostly dark, sometimes bordering on slap stick. It was satirical, almost a spoof. The novel, set in the mid 1970s, features the residents of Whitey's Fall, a small town the back blocks of NSW, which has been largely forgotten. And that's just how the residents, who are mostly related to each other, like it. When the government offers them funding to upgrade their civic infrastructure, the residents, led by Felicia and Sebastian Brinsmead, who run the local store and have a dark secret of their own, tell the government to shove it, thanks very much. The big secret is that Whitey's Fall sits on a mountain of almost pure gold. It began life as a gold mining settlement in the last century, and it had apparently been mined out. The local residents stayed on, as they and the town decayed towards oblivion, but they wanted no outside interference. But there were longtime rumours of a major lode of gold. Someone knew where it was, but others wanted to blow up access to it, to ensure it remained a secret from the wider world. The local Senator visited the town to convince the locals that progress was inevitable as part of regional development plans, and that a highway past the town was under construction. He argued for the economic prosperity the new road would bring, but the locals were not for turning. When the road construction machinery uncovered a seam of gold during excavations (without seeming to know just what it was), the locals took decisive action and formed a guerilla 'seniors' army, complete with gelignite and ancient weapons to wage war on the road crew and the government. This is pretty funny stuff for the most part, with each of the town residents being highly eccentric and/or loopy in their own way. And yet, there was a degree of pathos, of poignancy about how these simple, mostly elderly, folks cared for their mountain, which was the altar upon which they practised their religion of Remembering. Just Relations wasn't always completely coherent - Hall jumped about and got lost a few times in his own witty prose. There was a degree of self indulgent showing off. The ending was also just a little bit ridiculous and unsatisfying. This is the 42nd Miles Franklin winner I have read, and I would rate it in the lower half of my favourites. Nevertheless, there was plenty to enjoy in this rural Australian romp. Show more
