I am glad I have embarked on an effort to re-read some of the books I read long ago and feel deserve a revisit. This was a wonderful choice. I had not forgotten that I loved this book, and I had not forgotten what Corrie ten Boom had suffered or that her sister, Betsie, was as close to a saint as has ever walked this earth. What I had forgotten was all the details, the character of that suffering apart from the general knowledge of what goes on in concentration camps, the personal and moving way in which the faith of this family carried them through the unimaginable horrors they were forced to face together and alone. Childhood scenes rushed back at me out of the night, strangely close and urgent. Today I know that such memories are the key not to the past, but to the future. I know that the experiences of our lives, when we let God use them, become the mysterious and perfect preparation for the work He will give us to do. Most of us have probably wondered how we would have met such adversity, how we would have dealt with the insane cruelties, the unending tortures, the starving, the illness, the death--the constant death. Few of us would face it as Corrie ten Boom did, and even fewer with the compassion and selflessness of Betsie. That God was present with these women, guided their paths and provided for them, is beyond question to me. Corrie details several instances in which only a miracle could have saved her life or guarded the Bible that she kept on her person throughout her imprisonment and transfer from jail to camp to camp. ”But if God has shown us bad times ahead, it’s enough for me that He knows about them. That’s why He sometimes shows us things, you know–to tell us that this too is in His hands.” Love. How did one show it? How could God Himself show truth and love at the same time in a world like this? By dying. The answer stood out for me sharper and chillier than it ever had before that night: the shape of a Cross etched on the history of the world. I am so in awe of anyone who can walk through this hell of man’s making and come out the other side still feeling forgiveness and hope; still loving their fellow man; hoping to heal even the hearts of those who carried out this abomination; not seeking vengeance, but seeking healing. We will never know how many hearts Corrie and Betsie ten Boom touched with God’s love in places where love seemed the least likely thing anyone would find. This is a book of faith and of human endurance. I wept through much of it, and I hope I have drawn some permanent strength from the love it stands witness to.
