This review will contain spoilers so do not read if you don't want to know what happened in the book. Sweep 1-14 was good. I was interested. If I were inclined to write a review, it would be positive. Then there was book 15. My advice - don't read book 15. Read books 1-14 and think of your own future for Hunter and Morgan. Where to start? First - I have never reviewed a book on Goodreads - good or bad - but this book disappointed me so much I could not stay silent. The characters have aged four years. Many books do this to finish the story and it works in most series. You open the book and Hunter dies. This was not overly surprising given his enemies as a Seeker, but the manner of his death is poorly written. The ferry he is travelling on just went down. That's it. Clearly the work of dark magick yet Belwicket does nothing. Nothing happens in the book around this mysterious accident resulting the deaths of dozens. Morgan slips into a clinical depression and loses the will to live - after her ring from Hunter flies off her finger and into the sea. Nothing suspicious there readers. Just accept it and keep on reading. Fast forward another 16 years. Morgan marries Colm two months after Hunter dies. She doesn't even remember it. While in her state of despair Colm and his mother Katrina discover she is carrying Hunter's child, heal her, and LIE to her for 16 years about the father. I know Morgan is a strong witch (apparently until she meets Colm and Katrina who manipulate her in my opinion), but really, can the girl never catch a break? Hunter finally proposes, they will have the life we have imagined they would have and then he dies in some weird freak ferry accident. And then their daughter is in the same position she was in as a teen: a hot guy who is the first to like her and his mom and dark magick. Ok some suspicious dark magick, some scrying, a weird dream and .... Hunter isn't really dead, let's have some EPIC battle to get him back. No book series would be complete without a crazy fight scene where every feat seems impossible but happens. Oh and we thought the dark wave was gone, but no, someone has figured out how to bring it back. With all the work they did to dissipate the wave in Widow's Vale, you would think they would have written it down, committed it to memory, and taught it to everyone; especially the Woodbane clan Belwicket! So there is the EPIC battle, the witches defeat the dark wave AGAIN, with Hunter's help. Though he was close to death when they found him he is still able to assist with the defeat of the most powerful dark magick ever . And Moira, a 15 year old teenager, just accepts he is her biological dad and everyone lives happily ever after?? Even Katrina, dear old mother-in-law that lied to you for 16 years about the paternity of your child? And we never did discover how Morgan became pregnant with Hunter's baby. They did all the correct spells. It was just "fate". It was a flimsy excuse to fill in a major plot hole. In my mind: Morgan goes to study abroad. She finishes high school, moves to Ireland to help rebuild Belwicket and Hunter helps to build the New Chapter of the Council. The events in book 15 did not take place. That is the only way my brain can justify the energy I put into reading this series. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
