4.5 stars Another banger from Bertrice Small! Beginning in 1577, this is the story of Skye O'Malley's youngest brother, playboy Conn, and his bride, a sheltered country heiress named Aidan St. Michael. Interestingly (to me anyway), although this book is third in the Skye O'Malley series chronologically, it actually came out 2 years after the fourth book in the series. I always thought having Conn as the lead in this story was kind of an odd choice because he is just a random sibling of Skye's, but actually according to Bertrice Small she wrote this book in response to her readers who were apparently clamoring for more Conn and Aidan after reading about them in book 4, This Heart of Mine . This book was basically more of the same Skye O'Malley formula, but the formula is still working for me thus far and so I thought this was another fun entry in the series. I found this story to be not quite as episodic and meandering as the two previous books. The vast majority of this story takes place in Istanbul, which was a setting I enjoyed. I think that the story being mostly rooted to one location allowed the characters to be more fleshed out than the characters in previous books. For example, this is the first book in the series where I've felt that the real life historical figures included (in this case, Murad III, Nurbanu Sultan, and Safiye Sultan) were actually incorporated well and added to the story rather than detracted from it. I also thought that the final climax sequence of this book was particularly exciting and featured an extremely satisfying villain death. I was curious how Bertrice Small would possibly follow up a heroine like Skye O'Malley. How can you attempt to one-up a heroine who is canonically the most perfect woman on earth? The answer is, you don't. Nobody one-ups Skye O'Malley. Poor Aidan is plain of face with a mousy complexion, and must settle for only having magnificent red hair and an absolutely banging body. In all seriousness, I really liked Aidan as a heroine. I found her to be surprisingly relatable and was impressed by her character arc. Conn was neither here nor there for me. I preferred Aidan's secondary love interest, Javid Khan, over Conn. I've noticed in these books that the main heroes are usually kind of bland, and Bertrice Small seems to take more risks with the secondary love interests, so those characters usually end up being more complex and interesting. My only real criticism is that this book lacked the earnestness and sincerity that I felt was present in All the Sweet Tomorrows , and was a return to the "sex adventure" format of Skye O'Malley . There was definitely a lot of weird sex stuff in this one which I did not enjoy. But overall I get a kick out of Bertrice Small's writing, and am looking forward to reading more in the series.
