4.5 epic Stars rounded up to 5 Fabulous Stars by virtue of the edifying and inspiring Afterword. Having recently finished Cormac McMcarthy's THE ROAD, this preapocalyptic speculative SciFi thriller is uplifting! Author's Note: "As writers go, I suppose I'm known as a bit of an optimist, so it seems only natural that this novel projects a future where there's a little more wisdom than folly...maybe a bit more hope than despair. In fact, it's about the most encouraging tomorrow I can imagine right now. What a sobering thought." There's an exceeding amount of extraordinary jawn going on in this preapocalyptic tale of "fifty years from tomorrow!" Please read the goodreads book page blurb for a very succinct and accurate teaser to this epic tale! There's amateur psychanalysis: "The hallmark of sanity, Alex, is the courage to face even unpleasant points of view."page 134 How wonderfully different, and inspiring, than contemporary cancel culture 🙄. I really enjoyed the following visual wrt all the information, not to be confused with actual knowledge, available off the world wide web, aka The Net: "The Net was such a vast sea of information, sipping from it sometimes felt like trying to slake your thirst from a fire hose."pg136 And, of course, as with any epic tale firing on all cylinders, there's Undulating ⛎: "The loop began undulating, turning, whirling. Watching the undulations, Alex felt the same mixed rapture and loathing as when he'd first realized such things were possible...when he first suspected he had made something this biblically terrible, and beautiful." pg 168 Published in 1990, this remarkable novel remains largely relevant on innumerable points of interest! Just a few apropos exemplifications for your enjoyment: 🔄 "The government's charade is working perfectly. It's a venerable tactic. Keep loudly denying something you didn't do, so nobody will look for what you really did!" pg 150 🔄 "Back in 1990, people in the U.S. paid $3 Billion for 18 ThousandMillion disposable diapers. Into these snug, absorbent, well-engineered products went 100 Million kg of plastic, 800 Million kg of wood pulp, and approximately 5 Million babies. The babies weren't disposable, but all the rest went straight into the trash stream. Along with them went Hep-A, Norwalk & Rota viruses, and a hundred other air and water and insect borne threats." pg 334 🔄 In 2038-->"Causes have been proposed for the pandemic of infertility: women deferring child-bearing until late in life or effects inherited from the sex crazed 80s, the cancer plagues, or drug-happy 2010s. But new reasearch shows that pollution play a principal role. Chemical mutagens in the air and water causing early spontaneous abortions, now appear to lead all other forms of contraception in the industrialized world."pg 460 🔄 And in 2038, Defunct--> clock making, handwriting, dentistry, sunbathing, barrel making, farming & ranching, banking, game show host, drug smuggler, mailman, golf course manager, art appaiser, and nameless other passe professions. Instead, en vogue--> prenatal tutor, ferret designer, biotector, meme adjustment specialist, voxpop arbitrageur, insurance lifestyle adjustor, Net-SIG consultant, indoor microecologist, prenuptual genetic advisor, household toxin inspector. ༄༄༄༄ Ever hear of Kondratieff waves? Me neither, maybe it's just a case of apophenia, idk. What do you think? I may put more stock in the theory of 'Conservation of Crisis' which contends that in any given century there's only so much panic to go around: " 'From lifetime to lifetime it all balances out so that the average person remains just as worried about the future as her grandmother was.' SubForum 562:Iconoclastic Social Theories." pg 580 This novel may actually have swayed my inimical regard for EPIC as being a profane 4-letter word! This is truely an epic read in the best sense of the word.....Highly Recommend 💛🧚‍♀️🙋🏼👍!
