Re The Millionaire Affair - Sophie Weston's last HP Outing after a ten year hiatus is a class conscious story that doesn't quite hit the believability mark. Lisa is our 24 yr old Head Bond Dealer heroine and she is one of the best SW heroine's ever. Lisa's story is that she is a bit of a genius combined with some savvy street smarts and when she left school at 16, she broke out of her very low socioeconomic class to become the IT girl of bond trading. Her father is gone, her mother had two daughters and only menial job skills and her younger sister is anorexic and 'troubled' and Lisa has always felt out of place where ever she finds herself. When Lisa started the road to huge financial success, the first thing she did was get her sister and mother into a nice house with a short term mortgage. In an astute financial move, Lisa is very aware that the life of a bond trader can be very short in the financial rewards department, so she aims to pay off her mother's home as quickly as she can so her mother has some security. Lisa has also been footing the bill for her sister's very expensive treatment and therapy over the years and as per the standard HP h rule book, her mother very much takes her for granted and focuses all her devotion on the younger sister. Careerwise, Lisa is the number one bond trader in the City, but since she is young, trendy and doesn't have the old school money or connections the usual trader has, she is in for a lot of flack. Lisa also shops at thrift shops and second hand places, so her look isn't the latest couture collection style and her boss, in particular, gives her tons of grief about it. But all of this success has meant that Lisa doesn't really fit in anywhere. She is too posh for her origins and too low class for her new status. SW shows us this when we learn Lisa is living in a shared flat with a group her own age and the other flat mates are exceedingly envious of her rising career star. Throw in an almost obsessive infatuation fixation from one of the male roommate - he is lusting after her looks and her earning potential -and poor Lisa is just about at the end of her rope. Her displacement in the world she finds herself in isn't helped by continual sniping from her very jealous male boss about her clothing choices. Nor was it helped by being dumped by her first lover at 18. The ex was the current top trader at the time and very quick to seduce the "new girl" in the dealer room. When he got a big job offer in NYC, the man was also very quick to kick Lisa out of his life, the slime gulper claimed Lisa was a sexy tart and smart, but too trashy to really be his partner in life. So Lisa has had some knocks and doesn't get a lot of external support from anyone. Her only real emotional outlet is her dance sessions, where one of the other is dancers is an elderly Russian ballerina. The elderly ballerina happens to be a very blue blooded Russian Imperial Aristocrat who has an equally aristocratic nephew Hero named Nikolai, a jungle explorer animal behaviorist. The ballerina offers Lisa her granny flat in her Notting Hill home, as Lisa can no longer tolerate her current roommate situation. The ballerina is a true Old World female aristocrat and refuses to deal the financial aspects of flat letting - so Lisa gets provides her own equitable lease agreement and a cheque for the cost of leasing the flat and that is where this story begins. Nik is sent by the rest of the family to investigate Lisa and make sure she isn't a con woman out to take advantage of his great aunt. As soon as the two meet, Nik slips into chauvinistic, aristocratic patronizing snot snarfer mode and he never really leaves it - even as he can't control his attempts to provoke Lisa into a very passionate lurve club experience. Lisa is irked by Nik's imperious manner and having been there and got the t-shirt with men who think she a hot piece of low class trash, Lisa isn't impressed with Nik's alternating accusations and then lurve club attempts. As the lurve force mojo intensity builds between them, Nik resorts to devious ploys and plots to get Lisa to give into the lure of his tower of power. He is aided and abetted by his equally devious family, who always can make some condescending space for anyone who can be enlisted to increase the family fortunes. Lisa finally does succumb when she has to escort the ballerina to Nik's family's great French Chateau estate - but when Nik once again puts her down for her lower social status and lack of high society polish, Lisa is done with him and resolves to shut him out of her life. It isn't until Nik finds a therapist for Lisa's sister that actually helps the sister get away from her mother's overwhelming smothering and into her own life, that the sister feels sorry for Nik and gives him a huge skillet to the head. The sister points out that implying Lisa is low class tarty trash, (and allowing his now married-to-another-man high society ex girlfriend to berate Lisa out sheer pique that Nik is not available to the OW,) is way too reminiscent of how Lisa's only other relationship went. Nik needs to learn that Lisa isn't stupid, she knows when to cut her losses and wait until the market shifts. In an SW deus ex machina move, Nik suddenly sees the light. As with all the previous books in this Notting Hill Groom's series , Nik waits until the Notting Hill Carnivale to waylay Lisa once again and semi-humbly declare his love and adoration for Lisa if she will marry him. Lisa believes Nik's declaration and claims she feels 'at home' with him, plus she has been in love and having a mopey moment about it for the last three chapters, so she agrees to marry him for the big HEA. This one is fantastic in terms of the heroine and negative 10 in terms of the hero - which makes it a three. Because while I did not believe the HEA, I was happy Lisa did and she was smart enough to dump Nik if he got obnoxious again. SW will now permanently relocate over to HRTropia for the rest of her HQN career, so we bid farewell to Ms. Weston and thank her for a really unusual and interesting heroine for her last HP outing. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
