In Possessing the Gates of the Enemy, Cindy Jacobs explored the topic of prayer and how we can be intercessors for the Kingdom of God. She has rereleased this book as a fourth edition with updated content geared towards helping the new generation. Cindy Jacobs believes in the power of prayer and she is committed to praying regularly. She strongly believes Genesis 22:17-18 which discuss how God has said He would bless you and multiply our seed and we would possess the land of the enemy. And God said He would bless us and all the nations of the earth if we obey His voice. Throughout the book, she shared stories about how prayers saved people’s lives and has changed their circumstances. She also went into great detail about how the power of agreement and a very helpful sample prayer that you can pray with your friend. She explored the topic of binding and loosing satan and how we can seek freedom from his schemes. It was also beneficial that she discussed the different types of strongholds and how we can recognize when satan is trying to gain power and influence over our lives. I would recommend this amazing book to anyone who is ready to learn how to pray for others and how the power of intercession can change things. God will listen to us when we pray and when we come into agreement with others. This book is a guide to believers in learning how to actively pray and it will help readers to see if they have the gift of intercession. I really enjoyed the topics of the language of intercession, prophetic intercession, intercessory praise, corporate intercession, and reforming nations. I really connected with the discussion of joy and laughter and how we can use these tactics towards satan and his schemes. As we all know, the nation and the world needs our prayers and we can learn how to pray prayers that will make a difference. If you’re seeking an excellent book on the power of intercession, then read this book! “I received this book free from the publisher through the Bethany House Publishers/ Chosen book review bloggers program.”
