Who better than Jonathan Aitken to write a biography of Richard Nixon? Aitken is a British conservative who ended up in jail for lying to cover up his shady dealing. Nixon avoided that fate but is famous for his character flaws and the Watergate scandal where he lied to cover up his shady dealings. At the time this book was written - the early nineties - Aitken had not yet fallen but, perhaps presciently, he is very forgiving of Nixon’s misbehaviour. All of Tricky Dicky’s sins are listed but lightly brushed over as routine in politics at the time, understandable because of his tribulations or acceptable because his enemies did worse things. It’s certainly true that in the Presidential election of 1960 the Kennedy’s were not too scrupulous about how they won. Nixon could have challenged the result but - like Al Gore later - decided patriotically that to do so would damage democracy. The fact that rigged elections indicate a democracy already in pretty bad shape doesn’t seem to have occurred to either one. A forgiving analysis by a crooked politician of another crooked politician doesn’t sound promising and yet this is really a pretty good biography. There are plentiful writings about Nixon by his enemies so it’s refreshing to have one by a sympathizer. The book is also very readable and, as far as I can tell, gives all the facts. The author is on Nixon’s side but this is no hagiography and he doesn’t shy away from listing the great man’s flaws. Aitken also tries to explain how the President’s character came to be that way under pressure from a hostile press. Nixon was not a natural politician but forced himself to keep going with it because he thought he knew the right way forward in foreign affairs and had a duty to take control. His life was not easy, unlike Kennedy’s, and he worked extremely hard to make himself a success. Aitken also explains how his appeal bypassed the ‘Eastern liberal establishment’ and went straight to middle America, or the silent majority as he later called them. In England, we call it the middle ground and practical politicians want to occupy it. The common man can be a difficult chap to woo and public servants with high ideals can’t always do it. You can’t take this as Gospel, keep pinches of salt to hand, but it’s quite enjoyable.
