Shattering Glass , by Gail Giles, relays the tale of a group of “popular” boys who decide to take an outcast, Simon Glass, under their wing and turn him into Prince Charming. Rob, the leader, is insistent on controlling everything and making sure everything goes according to plan. When it starts to become too much, Young Steward, the narrator, can only watch as his friends start to take matters into their own hands. One of my favorite aspects of the story was that it was not written from the hero’s point of view, rather a bystander’s. While it is still in first person, it seems like the reader is viewing the story through the eyes of someone watching the events unfold. Giles was very descriptive when writing. She managed to describe everything without making the book too heavy in detail. She added adjectives in just the right places to make her sentences more advanced. For example, she wrote, "As we jogged, our sneakers slapped against the wet sand. Coop ran, slow and steady, more at ease than I had seen him in weeks." The way Giles wrote the story did not seem cliche at all. I also liked how she infused subtle humor into an otherwise serious book. The dialogue, the actions, and the way she describes the environment all have a dark comedy feel to them. Giles has a very firm grasp on a typical high school and the characters are very enjoyable. She creates a sense of mystery to shroud each character. None of them are what they seem, and only Young, the narrator, is able to see the darkness behind their masks of goodness. I think Giles raised awareness to the fact that everyone has an ulterior motive behind a seemingly good action. She portrays Rob, the main character, as an attractive, intelligent, well-liked boy while also making him rather sinister. Even Simon, the sniveling, unpopular nerd has a dark side. This reminds me of myself. Every kind action is meant to benefit myself. Although it feels good to help someone, I find it feels better when people like you for being helpful. Something I didn’t like was that the author kind of gave us an ending in the middle. Every chapter began with an interview or testimony of someone who knew Young, Rob, Simon, and their friends. They told the reader what happened after a certain incident, which we don’t find out about until the end. The testimonies described how the lives of each boy changed drastically after the “incident”. This was the reason for an extremely abrupt ending. While I do think the story was ended appropriately the way she wrote it, if she hadn’t told us what happened after, the story wouldn’t have been cut off right after the incident occurred. However, while I was reading, I found the sneak peaks into the future very entertaining. I think this story is meant for a slightly older audience than myself. Brace yourself for some mature topics and offensive words.
