A Stroke of Genius November 28, 1999 New books from Jenna Ryan don't come out nearly as often as they used to, so each one is cause for celebration. "The Stroke of Midnight" is no exception. With her distinctive writing style and flair for suspense, Ryan tells a tale that's sure to turn up the heat, even when sending chills up your spine. In Philadelphia, a serial killer has murdered a radio talk show host on each Christmas of the last seven years. Last year, a man confessed to the crimes. But now, Devon Tremayne is receiving the same threats of the seven women killed before her. The police believe it's just a hoax--all except Detective Joel Riker. The sexy, closed-mouthed cop has vowed to protect her. But when even Riker has secrets he refuses to let her know, is there any hope that Devon won't be another victim--killed on Christmas Eve at the stroke of midnight? A top-notch antidote for those tired of the glut of sappy holiday releases coming our way, "The Stroke of Midnight" is another of Ryan's dark, atmospheric tales of love found in the most frightening of circumstances. The romance between Devon and Riker smolders before sparks begin to really fly, and both characters are well-drawn, an impressive feat considering all that's going on around them. Though astute readers will probably get clued in to the killer's identity long before intended, Ryan provides enough twists and excitement to keep you glued to the page. I would relish any Ryan story just for the atmosphere, and "Stroke of Midnight" doesn't fail on that count. Even the cover is beautiful--and not only do the characters look like they're described in the book, but they're wearing the colors they're constantly described as wearing! It may be a little thing, but considering how often the heroes on these things look like those same cover models or the heroine has the wrong color hair, it's a relief. If you love romance and true suspense, put "The Stroke of Midnight" on your To Buy list and watch a master at work.
