The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire – by Edward Gibbon, VOL III Reviewed 16th Feb 2023 Volume III takes us from about 365 CE to around 490 CE. This period covers the first time the Eternal City was sacked for around eight hundred years, a momentous event indeed. The Empire was split in two at this time (East and West), the capitol of the West was either Milan or Ravenna and the capital of the East was the wondrous city of Constantinople (Istanbul). In my mind, Rome was still a significant city, full of old-fogies (Senators etc), a significant population of (maybe around 800,000) and had considerable symbolic and historical importance. A significant aspect of this volume concerns the affairs of the so-called barbarians . Gibbon persists in this moniker for the Huns, Goths, Vandals and Visigoths, but from my other reading and listening (to some excellent podcasts) these people were far from ‘barbarians’. They had structure and ambition, many or most were Christian by this time. Importantly, they were also embedded firmly into both the Western and Eastern Roman Empire – a number were even ‘Roman’ Generals. One man in particular, a General called Stilicho was the most powerful man in the Western Empire for a time. Much of this came about after the death of Theodosius I (who was Emperor of both halves) in 395 CE – when his two very young sons took over the East (Arcadius age seventeen) and the West (Honorius age ten*). These lads were ‘supervised/controlled/ by the likes of Stilicho (a Vandal), Alaric (a Visigoth) and Rufinus – it was these guys who did the real bidding. * This is amazing really. When I was ten I spent most of my time kicking a football and picking my nose. Imagine being an Emperor? Either way both of these boys were considered inept and were under the total control of their wives, advisors and others as previously mentioned Keeping in mind, Constantine the Great was running around earlier in the 4th century - Christianity and the Churches (East and West), played a massive part in this period, there were civil wars, wars against outside forces and usurpers raising their ambitious heads. In fact, I enjoyed learning about significant religious figures such as Saint Ambrose, the Bishop of Milan and also John Chrysostom, the Archbishop of Constantinople. My verdict : This review only tangentially touches on a few events discussed in this volume. To be honest, out of the three volumes I have now read, this one was really heavy going. The characters were numerous – overly so and the events just stumbled into each other one after the other. I think my ‘happy place’ is the first three centuries of the Roman Empire. I don’t have the energy or mental capacity to absorb all of the details of this period, and I doubt very much I will be able to do so all the way to the eventual final fall in 1453 CE (as fascinating as that may be). Time to go back and snuggle into the familiar bosom of Trajan, the high jinks of Nero, and the familiar limp of Claudius - I will dip into the later Empire now and again. 4 stars for Vol III Ps. Happy to take comments about any errors or disagreements regarding my commentary here - or any discussion, I don’t profess to be an expert 😊 REVIEW OF PREVIOUS VOLUME BELOW The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire Volume II, by Edward Gibbon was as enjoyable and interesting as the first volume. Volume I presented a wonderful summary of the Empire’s first 66 Emperors – ending with Licinius in the early 4th century. Gibbon then touched on Christianity and Licinius’ nemesis – Constantine I (or The Great), he set up Volume II very nicely indeed. Gibbon commences Volume II with Christian persecution from the reigns of Nero to Constantine. That’s a long time, and the history is so dense and described so vividly. We then learn about Constantinople (used to be called Byzantium, now called Istanbul). Gibbons describes, in incredible detail the city, how it functioned, the politics, the people – the lot!! Beautiful Constantinople, on the majestic Bosporus Then it’s onto the man himself – Constantine the Great . The consequences of this man are still felt today. For a start, when he eventually disposed of Licinius (and it took a while) – he moved the capital of the Roman Empire to Byzantium and named it Constantinople. That’s no small decision, he was also instrumental in legitimising Christianity. The Edict of Milan which legislated toleration of Christianity was a seismic shift in the way the Romans saw themselves and each other. Constantine’s conversion from a polytheist is a hot topic of debate, when and how it happened, did he dream of the cross before the battle at the Milvian Bridge? Even his baptism on his deathbed – is that when it happened? It is fascinating. Constantine however was continually frustrated by the constant internal bickering within the church. Persistent arguments about theology, heresy, what to do with various sects of the church. Some of these splits still endure. But Constantine was right in the thick of it. This man was also a great general, and perhaps one of the 4 or 5 most successful and impactful Emperors of all-time. Naturally, he was also a cruel bastard – and totally Machiavellian. Scholars still argue about his possible use of Christianity for political purposes. Gibbons’ writing is outstanding and continues to be totally enjoyable. Regarding his conversion he says: “ It was an arduous task to eradicate the habits and prejudices of his education, to acknowledge the divine power of Christ, and to understand that the truth of his revelation was incompatible with the worship of the Roman gods ” My favourite statue of a Roman Emperor, Constantine the Great - you can just see him, pondering his next move during a rare moment of quiet solitude. Along with Trajan, Augustus and Hadrian - one of the greatest Emperors (in my humble opinion). I need to see this statue in York before I shuffle off this mortal coil Constantine obviously had to tread on a few toes (putting it mildly) to become the sole Emperor (remembering the Empire was emerging from a Tetrarchy) and promote this new religion…….. “ By the grateful zeal of the Christians, the deliverer of the church has been decorated with every attribute of a hero, and even of a saint; while the vanquished party has compared Constantine to the most abhorred of those tyrants who, by their vice and weakness, dishonoured the Imperial purple ”……..ahhhhh that is just so majestically explained. This volume has around 600 pages of this wonderful writing. Happy days. We also learn about other impactful characters such as Emperors Julian the Apostate and Jovian and so many more. The number and brutality of the civil wars make Game of Thrones look like a Sunday picnic - and it all ACTUALLY HAPPENED!!!! The story of Emperor Julian’s apostasy was fascinating, his refusal to yield to the passive obedience required to be a Christian was in my mind totally understandable. But it again illustrates the tumultuous period of the 4th century – the wars, the changes in edicts and religion, the re-emergence of paganism, more persecutions. It all sounds a bit dreadful really – something to be viewed from the safe distance of 2 millennia in one’s bed at night. Gibbons ends this volume at around 375 CE, at the time of Emperors Gratian and Valentinian II. The author spends the last 50 pages summarising the various wars in the Empire – Germany, Britain, Africa, Persia and the Goths. Now for a breather before starting Volume III. The Roman Empire is so fascinating and to think, when I started this journey (obsession) a few years ago, I thought it all started and ended with the Julio-Claudians and the city of Rome. There is so much more to know, understand and love about this subject. Thank you, Mr Gibbon. 5 Stars This review is a bit long, sorry
