Marilyn Harris put me through the wringer. Elizabeth’s story broke my heart. Major Spoilers: I bawled my eyes out after she was raped. I read books with rape and themes of abuse all the time yet Marilyn Harris wrote the most devastating scenes of rape that leave me more shaken than anything. I took a break from the book for weeks after Elizabeth’s ordeal. Harris left Elizabeth’s chapter on a cliff-hanger and switched to John Murray Eden; I skipped his chapter and skimmed to Elizabeth’s just to find out what happened to her. When she fell asleep holding Edward Eden’s clothes I almost cried. I’m glad that at least Marilyn Harris made Elizabeth into a high class prostitute and allowed her to retain a level of dignity. In a way she was living a better life than what she might have lived had she married Jack Willmot. Her reunion with John towards the end made me happy. Everything did come full circle for her towards the end. About the incest: Before I started reading The Prince of Eden, I was afraid Marilyn Harris would be inspired by Oedipus and add in an accidental incest plot. I called it! I even added that thought to my review in The Prince of Eden. It was very easy to predict this by the end of The Prince of Eden, but I totally felt she was going in that direction at the end of This Other Eden. I had a gut instinct she would be inspired by Oedipus. Harriet was even discussing Sophocles just a few pages before she found out John Murray Eden’s true identity and took the fork to her eye. I thought that was a nice touch of foreshadowing by Harris. Harriet remained unlikable even after she harmed herself. I can’t say I feel sorry for her whatsoever. She had it coming. There was some justice in John Murray Eden killing Humphrey Hills although Morley Johnson deserved to die a slow and painful death for what he did to Elizabeth. Morley Johnson never got the comeuppance he deserved, not even at the end. It makes me sick to my stomach that he swindled Richard and Mary of most of their inheritance. I simply didn’t like this book as much as This Other Eden or The Prince of Eden. I do like John Murray Eden (flaws and all) and will definitely read The Women of Eden. The ending did pick back up. I wasn't a fan of the cliff-hanger, and I've already started The Women of Eden and was disappointed the cliff-hanger from The Eden Passion wasn't immediately addressed. 4 stars for the first half, and 3.5 for the last third of the book. I skimmed pages and pages of John in Crimea and India. It took me over 3 months to read this book. After John left for Crimea the book was easily put down and forgotten about. Overall this was a solid 3 star read. I have hope The Women of Eden will be better.
