This book is like a nice painting splattered with mud. It's a great story - intrigue, war, love, mystery, politics, tension, regret, impending doom, death, surprises, clear good guys, clear bad guys, and some you aren't sure about. And the setting is nice if you like traditional fantasy of the medieval/Renaissance style - more swords and nobles than magic and monsters. I enjoyed it. But the author threw up a lot of unnecessary chaff between me and my enjoyment of the story. It wasn't enough to ruin it, but was enough to detract and annoy. The most notable interference comes from regular injections of overly florid language. He tries so hard to say something grand or majestic sometimes and it just comes out so cheezy and overdone that it makes you groan. Luckily most of the writing is just fine, good even. But every twenty pages or so a real turkey of a sentence comes out of nowhere to smack you like a log of bologna. To wit: "Lisseut of Vezet realized, with a cold dawning of despair, that her heart was gone from her. It had left without her knowing, like a bird in winter, flying north to a hopelessly wrong destination where no haven or warmth or welcome could even be imagined." Booooooo! Here's another: "Signe reached for sleep that night as a woman reaching for the last gentle lover of her days." Whaaat? Nooooo! I'm glad he didn't describe her brushing her teeth. "She polished each tooth like the cherished memories of a stolen child." Another distraction is the unnecessary use of the present tense to narrate action happening amongst the bad guy northerners while using the regular past tense everywhere else. So you get "Galbert scowls and walks out of the room" instead of "Galbert scowled and walked out of the room." It's strange to read the present tense in a story to start with, and the abrupt transition between tenses makes you stumble, un-immersing you temporarily each time. One thing that bothered me that might not bother others is the songs. I don't know what I was thinking - the word "song" is right there in the title. I guess I thought it was a metaphor or something. Nope, it's songs. I've disliked songs in books ever since The Hobbit:"Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!" Grrr, I choke you! Luckily there aren't more than a few songs in this book, but they're real stinkers, and we're supposed to get all wistful about them. One of them mentions "choice meats". Choice meats? Seriously?! Awful! Anyway, hooray for battles, family rivalries, court intrigue, etc. Boo for peacocky flourishes and meat songs.
