I feel compelled to try to negate the overwhelmingly negative atmosphere on this page of Goodreads reviews, and to try to do so as convincingly as one person can amidst such abundant ignorance. There is a lot of whining, derision, mockery, and whatever going on here, and it simply does the book one grave injustice after another. This is not a children's book, or even one for young adults, so if you approach this book set in an immature frame of mind, set in your own conception of how the world is and should be, unwilling to yield to an experience so alien, you'll get burned. Don't even bother with it. This is a man laying forth his naked soul, not just his, but the soul of a people that has been sickened, starved, beaten more thoroughly than any in history. It isn't so pretty, did you think it would be? It is in fact very ugly, Cleaver is somewhat extreme, but can you blame him? If you had even a basic realization of how horribly your kin have been abused for generations, would you be angry? Cleaver was an intelligent man, I think the book makes this obvious, and he became furious and indignant, because he realized. This fury, this incredible compassion, urgency.. imagine these things churning in Cleaver's soul. Imagine it aggravated by the hyperactive mind of a natural intellect, it's no secret what torture a powerful mind can wreak on the soul, and vice versa. Cleaver represents through his writing the tortured black, tortured intellect, tortured poor, tortured criminal... no wonder this writing hits so hard. It is a fearsome condemnation of America, both then, and today as well. Our society was and, judging by these reviews, still is well-anesthetized to the trauma of the black American. So from our numbness we can easily launch criticisms, judgments, without feeling what we say. It is a trauma that is manifest in the sickness of Eldridge Cleaver. The sickness of 'revolutionary' rape, for example. A sickness that Cleaver denounces as juvenile and misguided on the very next page. I don't want to call Cleaver a victim, but how else do you describe the black American? People like free will, and they like to condemn each other without acknowledging the system, the environment and its very real role in deciding what we become. Before so freely condemning Cleaver, I would recommend condemning white America. I find Cleaver's views on society accurate, some say they are too general, too illogical, etc. Welcome to segregated America. Welcome to the logic of separate but equal. This book is not about being rational. Cleaver is talking about people and how we relate, interact, coexist, clash; and he is talking about a very corrupt system, no ice-skating. I don't hate America, I almost love it. We have enjoyed privileges that are unrivaled. But consider the cost, because it is huge, and most of us today probably aren't paying it. These reviews seem indicative of the book's difficulty, but also of a popular alienation from the race question, or any such challenge for that matter. It seems that nowadays people think social issues in America are solved, have forgotten about it, and get confused when they read something that offends them. Well, if you're short on empathy, if your mind is bedsore, leave Cleaver alone. I have no answer for you. Read something else if you want to open your mind or something noble like that. Whatever you do, make sure you don't write a Goodreads review about it.
