"Cannibals and Kings" is a sort of strange book. It tackles a variety of seemingly unrelated topics of popular interest in a sort of seamless flow, all through the lenses of environmentally-centered determinist forces. Harris has an authoritative authorial voice - there is always "no doubt" that the explanation he gives is The Explanation to this human mystery. Harris is an environmental determinist, which I like, and his arguments often presage those of the later, more famous determinist Jared Diamond - for instance, regarding the lack of good domesticable animals in Mesoamerica and the role of environmental degradation in the Mayan collapse. He uses this nimble set of instruments to explain phenomena as varied as warfare, patriarchy, civilization, capitalism, the sacrality of cows in India, cannibalism in the Aztec empire, and vegetarianism. In all cases, the evolutionary-environmental model claims that cultural choices can't "maintain [themselves] successfully for any material period of time counter to fundamental economic resistance." They seek adaptive explanations for everything. Harris applies this model adroitly and provides intuitive, satisfying explanations for all the phenomena examined. That said, however, it's been 35 years since this book was published, so I'm sure much of it has been proven overly facile or wholly false in the interim. I read this as part of my Anthropology tutorial with Prof. Peregrine regarding the anthropological claims of Derrick Jensen . To that end, Harris' claim that "The majority of hunter-collectors known to modern observers carry out some sort of inter-group combat in which teams of warriors deliberately try to kill each other," swiftly refutes Jensen's claim that "even for many of the warlike indigenous peoples--that is, those who are ahistorical, uncivilized--to kill noncombatants was unthinkable, and even killing combatants was a rarity, an event." Jensen may be correct that some indigenous groups dealt with war in the way he claims, but portraying the whole thing as a matter of civilized v. indigenous conceals the diverse manifestations of war in indigenous peoples and the other factors that might be responsible for that diversity (e.g., certain manifestations of population pressure). Harris explains war as a result of population pressure through a creative mechanism: he believes wars control population by encouraging families to keep male children (to raise as warriors) but to kill female babies. This creates a culture that values men over women, resulting in all sorts of patriarchal nastiness. However, he also advances the idea that war cultures favor male combatants over females (rather than simply choosing the strongest, bravest individuals regardless of sex) is because they need war to justify female infanticide. This seems like an untenably circular argument to me, but perhaps I don't understand it fully.
