Writers like Woodrell who have multiple novels will usually have one (or two) that become a reader's favorite. In this case, Winter's Bone followed by The Death of Sweet Mister will likely be my 5 star reads of his. I have Tomato Red I'll get to at some point. He has other works as well, but this may be where I veer off and decide, okay, enough Woodrell (for now.) This was really good. The MC, Doyle Redmond, is a writer, and this set him apart from his kinfolk who tended to look at him as if he'd been struck with some kind of "otherness" that didn't quite fit the Redmond mold. Even so, he folds into the work his family asks him to do, dangerous or not. It was, at times, trying too hard for something, what I'm not sure. There was a word, "Imaru" that kept getting repeated when he was thinking about writing, but to be honest, I forgot who or what the hell Imaru is/was. 🫤 There were scenes that were cringe-worthy and the story could've done without these for a couple reasons. For one, a sex scene with Niagra (was her name like a play on Viagra (?) since she was way too young for Doyle who wasn't old, but still. I kept thinking that) was sometimes a tad cheesy. There's a scene with a dog named Tuffy that pissed me off - so maybe not cringe-worthy, but more like rage worthy. (think Michael Vick, if I'd known this was in here, I probably would not have read this book). The Redmonds aren't necessarily a loving family but by God they're loyal to one another. This is a story about doing one's duty by family, no matter what. Drugs are involved, the feud with the Dollys grows more and more intense with each interaction and there was absolutely some nail biting tension. Woodrell knows the Ozarks and all you have to do is read WB to know this. It's interesting to read his work and see, will there be any redemptive moments for the people of this place? Still waiting. I'll give them their loyalties, for sure. My agent said this book had one of the best opening chapters ever written which is why I read it. We might disagree on this. It was good, but not the greatest opening, IMO. 🤷🏻‍♀️
