I am reading Rosshalde (1914), Hermann Hesse's fourth novel, because I read that it was an important book for (Goodreads reviewer and friend) Fergus when he was growing up, and I suspect I had never read it. It's not seen as one of his major works. Hesse, a Nobel Prize winner in 1946 was, in addition to being a novelist and poet, a painter, and one of the attractions of his work is his "painterly" approach to writing, especially his description of nature. He also was a writer of deep emotions and spiritual exploration, perfect for 1914 and also the sixties and early seventies, romantic periods. His descriptions are often said to be approximations of the watercolor artworks he created, more focused on feeling that realistic detail. More impressionistic. I read that this novel captures the end of his relationship to his wife. Johan Veraguth, an artist of some note, is estranged from his wife and first son, and close to his youngest son, when he is visited by an old friend who encourages him to "free" himself from the rut he is and go to India with him. And he agrees, but can't go as a tragedy happens. Much of what Otto and Johann think about the need to be "free"--from his marriage, and even his son that he adores--reminds of that 1970's film with Dustin Hoffman and Meryl Streep, Kramer Vs. Kramer, where the Streep character runs off and leaves her husband and baby to "find herself." Johann is the Streep character in Rosshalde; if we see this more from the perspective of the wife, who also contributes to the estrangement, of course, we can see the marriage may have been reclaimed. Especially in certain moments of the tragedy that occurs. A romantic vision of the artist as somehow above the world. So it's different than Journey to the East or other books from Hesse; I expected this one would be another book from his about western vs eastern spirituality/religion, but it's really more a book about a failed marriage, and grief. You get the feeling Johann will never be fully happy in India, or anywhere, living as he is doing. I found it a lovely, sad book that of course made me reflect on my own failed relationships, what I could have done, and so on.
