Well, according to"The Georgette Heyer Theory of Regency Romance" assuming a very many constants in people's beliefs and perceptions and assumptions based on absurd coincidences and the unfailing and obviously expected conclusion of a happily ever after, False Colours is truly Georgette Heyer personified! Though this one is not my favourite of the lot, it has a few things I much admire. Kit, for instance, with his ingenuity and tact is a superb character. Secondly, The Fancot Twins together do capture my fancy. But one "feeling" what the other goes through is 'doing it much too brown'! But again, as I said it is 'The Georgette Heyer Theory of Regency Romance' and there ought to be the unbelievable and outrageous to make it an out and out endearing story! It seems impossible to believe in many things happening in the story in today's times, but taking things with a pinch of salt, why not?? After all it is fiction, and fiction is supposed to be just that: Fantastic! Kit is definitely one well thought after character. I liked him to say the least! He is intelligent, witty and has a sense of humour; all the things that are really appreciable. Plus the love for his mother and twin is kinda cute. For all his simplicity, you just can't ignore him! He is worth a dozen Evelyns! I read at many places about people's opinions regarding Lady Denville being really annoying; but I for my part found her amazing! I mean she is just so different. She sure must be difficult to bear with in real life circumstances, a challenge even; but there is no denying her being quite adorable! For all her carelessness she does love her sons! And she can cook up ingenious plans (read scarlet fever!) just to get her way. And how she takes things lightly is what really surprises me for how can a person with tremendous debts ever feel so light n without a jot of discernible care I couldn't fathom! Cressy is not one of my favourite Georgette Heyer heroines. I couldn't make up her character well (as I could say of Frederica or Sophy or Venetia or Kit from Cotillion). Could be my mistake or fault at reading between the lines, but being described as reserved in the beginning she is anything but that! Please correct me if I am wrong! Bonamy Ripple was fun to read about! What a couple he should form with Lady Denville! The scene of his undoing was hilarious! What a spot he is in! I did like him a lot! I also do like the twins' chemistry and love for each other. I am much inclined to accept the unbelievable gut feelings, or whatever those may be that they feel for each other, to be true because it gives the story the impetus necessary. I liked the Dowager excessively and she was very true to such real life tormentors that do exist! Also, I liked the secondary characters of Fimber and Challow. Overall Georgette Heyer took good care to plan and plot the story amazingly, just so that you are persuaded to believe in the unbelievable! No one can match her wit and humour with the pen. What I could actually want was an ending where everything was further elaborated and not just with Kit's plan for the same. Also how Evelyn's pursuance of Miss Askham is taken care of could of course give us the happily ever after details of Evelyn's story, but then Kit was the hero and he was shown to be achieving that! And then some things are best left on their own to be understood by the clever reader
