I love myth and so much of the baby pool we play our lives in can be seen, like Narcissus’ face, reflected in these classic tales. But it is time to retire most and rewrite the rest. Midas - the version i recall learning has King Midas, greedy and selfish, with a complete lack of foresight. All he cares for is gold; so he loses the most precious thing, when his daughter runs in and surprises him with a hug. In this version he is simply inconvenienced by hunger (darn those golden dolmas!) and Bacchus - old chap - reverses the wish. No lesson learned! You too can be Donald J. Trump and never suffer a consequence for a lifetime of crime, if you cultivate the right circle of god-like friends. Actually there are many tired themes. Lots of unquestioned philandering males and viciously jealous females - jealous of looks, attention, whatever. Many are brought down by their inability to obey - well, to adequately obey. Given directions, usually several steps - “But do NOT do…” the thing they simply MUST do. And the familiar “don’t over-reach” lesson which i’m not crazy about, now that i think of it, either. The story here is Helios’ son Phaeton demanding to drive the chariot and dying. But we all remember learning not to fly too close to the sun, or take on monsters we are not strong enough to slay. These are particularly bad messages for girls, who already hear way too much: “Smile, and just listen” when we should be teaching them to slay monsters and fly anywhere they want. Now i think of Elizabeth Warren saying “Why run for President just to state all the things we cannot change?” Take home message? Be obedient, fools. Never question authority. They’d never lie to you. Like poor Psyche - if she’d just listened to her husband, and not her sisters! A very unhealthy message for abused and isolated women. The story of Baucis and Philemon was new to me - and my favorite. It was a theme found in many cultures and every religion: charity and welcoming strangers (sans vetting!!) It was beautifully told. It also had a common myth - the cleansing of the evil world with a flood. But I particularly loved awarding the good by recognizing the superiority and intrinsic divinity of Trees. The illustrations are lovely and i read this with full lighting to appreciate those, and the smooth paper smells delightful for fellow book sniffers - but now i think i need some animal tales, Anansi maybe?
