Why isn't the innocent and beautiful girl reported missing? An inhumane storm is about to calm down. Carol and Paul are back at home safely after a meeting with the adoption agency. That same day, Paul discovers something through the window. Through the storm, he think he is seeing something or someone in the garden, but who would be out in this weather or is the storm just making him hallucinating? Later, Carol gets in a small car accident. Her car hits a girl who runs straight in front of the car without looking after herself. Carol feels sorry for the girl and get a very caring feeling for her and wants to meet her at the hospital. They immediately like each other and she finds it strange that her parents doesn't show up or even cared to report her as a missing person. The girl doesn't seem to remember who she is or where she's from. For now she gets the name Jane Doe. Carol pity her and feels protective. Since the hospital can't keep her there much longer even despite she has memory loss, Carol and Paul takes her home to take care of her. They have long longed for a child temselves and they decide to give her a home until someone report her as a missing person. Carol struggles with nightmares although she and Paul think it's wonderful to have Jane at home. Since Carol is a child psychiatrist, she wants to try hypnosis on the girl for short periods to see if they find some answers about who the girl really is. Later, they are planning a trip to Carol's cabin together, but Paul has to finish a part of a script for a book before he can leave anywhere, and Carol insists to go with Jane and suggest he can come a few days later. Even though Paul and Carol thinks Jane is a nice girl, does he trust the girls enough to let them leave on their own? Is it wise of him to let Carol go to a deserted place with a person they hardly know? Dean Koontz was often referred n the media as Stephen King's little brother since they often write in the same genre and is considered to be "competitors" by the media, but many believe that Koontz never come on the same level as Stephen King, even though they produce about the same amount of books. The Mask is one of the more unknown books by Koontz and he published the book under the pseudonym Owen West in 1981. This is a very short and atmospheric horror book, and Dean Koontz knows how to describe natural disasters. He makes it almost realistic. It's almost like being there and experiencing the power of the natural disaster. You can tell this novel is a bit old when the author in the book, Paul, is still using a typewriter. There's a hot sex scene in the book between Paul and Carol. It's supposed to be steamy and sexy but instead it becomes comical because it seems misplaced in the story, it's exaggerated, and it's almost like a scene from a soap opera. There's nothing wrong with soap operas since I watch a lot of it myself, but it was somehow comical to read it for some reason and I almost wanted to laugh. Several small sex scenes are included in this short book. Despite the corny sex scene, this is a good horror book in true Dean Koontz spirit. Although he's not on the same level as my faveorite author, Stephen King, Koontz is doing it really well. His writing is good, he creates a proper atmosphere and weird events. Although the story itself is not particularly original or stands out in any way, it doesn't matter. It's exciting and has some great horror moments that is worth checking out. He is good at creating atmosphere and uneasiness, which often isn't included in modern horror and thriller books in general. But here there's plenty of uneasiness and with the thought of how short this book is, one gets to know the characters well. What bothered me the most about them, especially with the main characters Carol and Paul, is that it's a bit too much of I love you. The Mask is an entertaining and a bit eerie horror book with a lot of atmosphere. The story itself is, as mentioned, a bit predictable, but it doesn't matter since the story is entertaining and you get engaged in the story. The story is solid to be a horror, and even if you have a feeling of what will happen in the end, you're curious enough to stick to the book until the last page is read. This is not Koontz's best book, but he can certainly create atmosphere. He should be praised for that. My faveorite by Koontz is still: Intensity.
