Original review from 2004 A book of short stories by one of my favourite authors, set in the same world as other stories of his that I have read, a world where humans have spread throughout the solar system, but are exiled from the earth which has been invaded by aliens. People routinely change sex many times in a lifetime and other surgical body modifications are common - such as replacing your feet with peds (large handlike appendages) as an adaptation to free-fall. The title story is a murder mystery set in a town populated by a religious sect all of whom have been surgically altered to look identical (like genderless barbie dolls), so that the police coming from a neighbouring town find it very hard to investigate a crime where the victim, purpetrator and witnesses are all identical. The barbies make things even harder for the police since they don't think of themselves as individuals and don't see why it matters if the wrong person is charged with the crime since they are all interchangeable. Added after 2012 re-read "I think we're being followed." "Wha'?" He looked behind him as he bounced along in her wake. There was someone back there, all right. They turned a corner and Solace hauled Quester into a dimly lit alcove, bumping his head roughly against the wall. He was getting fed up with this business of being dragged. If this was an adventure, he was Winnie-the-Pooh following Christopher Robin up the stairs. He started to object, but she clapped a hand around his mouth, holding him close. "Shhh," she hissed. I found the stories in this collection much less memorable than those in " Persistence of Vision", as the only two that I remembered at all from my previous read were the title story and "Picnic on Nearside". In the case of "Bagatelle", when I heard an audio version on a podcast a few months ago, it didn't ring any bells at all and I had no idea that I had ever read it before (even though you'd think that a cyborg bomb threatening to blow up a city on Luna would be fairly memorable). "Manikins", which isn't set in the Eight Worlds, was one of the most interesting (I always knew there was something odd about men!), but my favourites were probably "Bagatelle" and "Picnic on Nearside".
