The Tombs of Atuan by the American author Ursula K. Le Guin, was originally published in 1971. It is the second book in her “Earthsea” series of fantasy books, which began with “A Wizard of Earthsea” in 1969. Yet The Tombs of Atuan has never achieved the same popularity as its predecessor, and is often thought a lesser novel. I read each of “The Earthsea Trilogy” in turn, shortly after their first publication, but could remember little about The Tombs of Atuan now. How glad I am that I have come to read it again, after so many decades. It is an extraordinary work; a subtle and finely nuanced masterpiece, packed with atmosphere and symbolism. “In the great Treasury of the Tombs of Atuan, time did not pass. No light; no life; no least stir of spider in the dust or worm in the cold earth. Rock, and dark, and time not passing.” The Tombs of Atuan feels like a completion of the first book, although there were to be four more in total; three after the initial trilogy. The first two feel like two halves of the same tale, complementing, contrasting; fitting snugly together like pieces in a jigsaw puzzle. In the first book we viewed Ged objectively from the outside, but in The Tombs of Atuan we are very aware of the protagonist Tenar’s inner feelings and thoughts; thus outside and inside viewpoints form a complete picture. The equilibrium of Earthsea itself: “The world is in balance … To light a candle is to cast a shadow.” is exemplified by these two novels; they are perfectly balanced. Yin and yang. Both parts are necessary. “A Wizard of Earthsea” is essentially a bildungsroman, about a young boy, Ged, who has magic powers. We follow his voyages all over the archipelago of Earthsea, and the distant lands, learning all about the many islands, cultures, languages and races. And we see Ged’s struggles both with himself, and with the forces of magic, both for good and for evil. The Tombs of Atuan is also a coming of age story, but in contrast, is set almost wholly in a very small area of one city, in one of the outlying islands in the Kargish empire. In addition, the protagonist is not a young boy with red-brown skin, open to ideas and keen to learn all he can, but a young girl with white skin, severely restricted in her thinking, and determined to follow a hard and cruel tradition in a closed religious sect. Both are proud and arrogant in their youth, though feeling insecure in their roles, but their experiences — their “worlds” — are far apart. The Tombs of Atuan follows the story of Tenar, who was born on the Kargish island of Atuan. Because she had been born on the day that the high priestess of the Tombs of Atuan had died, the other priestesses believe Tenar to be her latest incarnation. They watch Tenar until she reaches the age of five, when she is taken from her family, to be trained as the high priestess to the “Nameless Ones” , unseen formless dark powers, at the tombs on the island. “[the throne] was empty. Nothing sat in it but shadows” The name “Tenar” is taken from her in a ceremony involving a symbolic sacrifice, and she is now called simply “Arha” , meaning “the one who has been devoured” , or the “Eaten One” . Arha is now consecrated to the service of the Nameless Ones and receives instruction in how to dedicate her life to them, through intricate ceremonies and duties, which she increasingly believes she is remembering from her previous many incarnations: “All human beings were forever reborn, but only she, Arha, was reborn forever as herself.” Because she is so young, Arha needs caring for, and a eunuch called Manan has been chosen to nurture her. The two develop an affectionate bond; nevertheless, Arha’s childhood is very lonely, as she lives apart from all the others. Her only friend is Penthe, a priestess of her own age. Arha receives instruction at the hands of Thar and Kossil, the priestesses of the two other major deities, who outwardly treat her with great respect, because of her position. Arha questions nothing, although the regime is strict, and the environment sterile and static, allowing for no growth. She tries to learn and remember her unique role as the highest ranking priestess. Thar tells Arha of the underground passages and rooms; the labyrinth beneath the Tombs, teaching her how to find her way around them. Arha spends much of her life underground in the maze of catacombs, groping to find the way, which in the most part is a secret known only to herself; memorising the routes and passages where all light is forbidden, even to her. “Touch was one’s whole guidance; one could not see the way but held it in one’s hands” ​“Here there was no wind, no season; it was close, it was still, it was safe.” Thar tells Arha of treasure which is hidden within the labyrinth, and which wizards from the archipelago have tried to steal reminding her that there are unbelievers who can work magic: “the Wizards of the West can raise and still the winds, and make them blow whither they will…it is said they can make light at will, and darkness; and change rock to diamonds; and lead to gold…at least in seeming” When she becomes fourteen, Arha takes on the full responsibilities of her position, as the highest ranked priestess in the Tombs. Yet for all her apparent power, her life is stifled by meaningless rituals, and by the pettiness of older, ambitious priestesses, who are more bitter and resentful of their very limited lives, and her privileged status. One in particular, Kossil, though High Priestess of the GodKing, in reality “holds nothing sacred but power” . Arha has now become inured to the casual cruelty of the blood sacrifices, and regards it as her duty to work out the most cruel and appropriate punishments for transgressors. Nobles who defy the GodKing, are sentenced to a death which is of as much political as religious value, and are sent to the Place of the Tombs to be human sacrifices. She orders prisoners who had been sent to the Tombs by the GodKing of the Kargad lands, to be killed by starvation. However, this is to haunt her for a long time, and very probably influences her later treatment of Ged. Thar eventually dies of old age, and Arha becomes increasingly isolated, as her other tutor, Kossil, despises Arha’s privileged position, seeing her as a threat to Kossil’s own power. Increasingly Kossil seems to disbelieve in the power of the Nameless Ones: “to her the temples were dark holes in the ground, terrible but empty. She would do away with the worship of the Empty Throne, if she could. She would do away with the First Priestess, if she dared.” And this is reflected in Arha’s first glimmering of thoughts and doubts about the beliefs she has been inculcated in. She begins to question and search for the truth. There is no magic in the tombs of Atuan, merely a series of closely guarded rituals. The community is isolated from the rest of Earthsea, viewing any mention of magic as blasphemy, and the Hardic folk as evil sorcerers. Anyone from the inner lands in turn, views Kargish peoples as barbarians. Not only do those in the Kargad lands have a distinct culture, and language, but they do not read or use written language, considering this to be evil. Thus the darkness of the tombs of Atuan covers far more than a simple lack of light. It is a closed, claustrophobic, deeply oppressed existence, with a rigid class system and cruel savage religion. Is is a small part of a wider society, the Kargad empire, which is depicted as militant, and patriarchal. This society neither believes in the equilibrium, which the rest of Earthsea believes in, nor has any belief in magic. It is a theocracy, with a monarch, the GodKing, who claims to represent the power of the “Nameless Ones”: “the powers of the dark, of ruin, of madness” . We see that Tenar, as the high priestess, rules over an order of lesser priestesses who do her bidding, but all are in service to the Nameless Ones and their GodKing. It is interesting that as early as 1971, a female author noted for Science Fiction and Fantasy, (which is unusual in itself), chose to portray a female protagonist, with a largely female set of characters. Both are against type, and much has been made of this, just as “A Wizard of Earthsea” is sometimes criticised for having few female characters. Interesting, yes, but perhaps only as a statistic. Speaking for myself, I am always relieved when the writing is gender-free, as invariably I know that if I can tell that the author is female, and “has a female voice” or male, and “sees things from a man’s point of view”, it is a book I will not enjoy. I usually discover either that it has an agenda, or that it is fitting into a jaded genre. In a similar way, my personal feeling is that both these main characters Ged, and Tenar, are fairly interchangeable. Their gender is in no way what the novels are about. The aspects of the characters which interest us are are their capacity for growth, and self-knowledge; their search for identity, how they move on from their individual difficulties — each is immensely proud initially — about the human qualities they learn to value, and about their tremendous struggles with good and evil. Just less than half way through the book, Arha has an encounter which will challenge her entire belief system, and her place in the world of Earthsea. The labyrinth under the Tombs is depicted as “the very heart of darkness” a place where light is forbidden. At the same time, it is decreed ”no man can enter the Dark Places of the Tombs” . Arha witnesses both sacrilege and defilement, as she glimpses a male intruder in the labyrinth under the Tombs. This is actually Ged, the protagonist of “A Wizard of Earthsea” , now a little older and wiser. Arha successfully traps him in the labyrinth, and watches as he tried to escape by using a spell. Realising that he must be a wizard, she is intrigued enough to rebel against her teaching, and keep him alive. Through him she learns more of the outside world, and begins to question her faith in the Nameless Ones, and her role at the Tombs. Whereas she used to shy away from using a single candle flame in the labyrinth, she now sees: … the great vaulted cavern beneath the Tombstones, not hollowed by man’s hand but by the powers of the Earth. It was jewelled with crystals and ornamented with pinnacles and filigree of white limestone where the waters under earth had worked, aeons since: immense, with glittering roof and walls, sparkling, delicate, intricate, a palace of diamonds, a house of amethyst and crystal from which the ancient darkness had been driven out by glory.” As the two grow to trust each other, Ged tells Arha that he is looking for the other half of a magical talisman: the long-lost half of the ring of Erreth-Akbe. It is necessary to restore peace in Earthsea, but had been broken and lost centuries before. Ged has one half, from a chance encounter in “A Wizard of Earthsea” , and he has learned its history from a dragon. The other half was believed to be buried in the Treasury of the Tombs. Arha knows that all she is doing in forbidden, and fears for her life: “As she stumbled forward she cried out in her mind, which was as dark, as shaken as the subterranean vault, “Forgive me. O my Masters, O unnamed ones, most ancient ones, forgive me, forgive me!” There was no answer. There had never been an answer.“ She is advised by Manan not to pursue this any longer, for her own safety. Arha gradually learns more of the truth about the outside world from Ged, keeping him prisoner in the tombs and bringing him food and water. Once Kossil learns of Ged’s existence, she forcefully insists to Arha that be Ged has to be sacrificed to the Nameless Ones. Her conscience now badly troubled, Arha tells Manan to dig a false grave underground, while she herself takes Ged to hide in the treasury of the Tombs. Arha is learning more and more about the world outside, and about Ged’s powers. Ged even tells Arha her true name, “Tenar”. When Arha and Kossil have a public falling out, in which Kossil says that nobody believes in the Nameless Ones any more, Arha is trapped into using the traditional responses, and curses her in the name of the Nameless Ones. But secretly, she is beginning to doubt whether they have any power, and is more in fear of Kossil herself, whom she knows will now be determined to kill her. Ged and Tenar now have both halves of Erreth-Akbe’s ring, and increasingly help and rely on each other. On learning Tenar’s plight, Ged advises that she must either kill him or escape with him. Ged reaffirms the power of the Nameless Ones, saying that they demand her service, but give nothing, and create nothing in return. He even tells her his own true name, Ged, the most precious gift one can give in the world of Earthsea, in return for the trust she has shown him. We see a more subtle, internal struggle with The Tombs of Atuan ’s protagonist than in “A Wizard of Earthsea” . Tenar is a more revolutionary character than Ged, as she rebels and struggles against the confines of her social role. Yet they both share elements of the story of an heroic quest, and work against type, exploring issues of race, political systems, anthropology and culture, and one having a female main character. From the author’s own remarks, this subversion of some of the tropes common to the genre of fantasy at the time, was quite deliberate. Her exploration of religious themes, ethical questions and gender issues within the framework of The Tombs of Atuan , is quite remarkable. It is perhaps inevitable that Tenar will want to escape from her incarceration, and the description of the two assisting each other is perfectly made. Ged is stumbling; effectively blind in some caves, and Tenar helps to lead him out through the labyrinth. She has spent virtually her whole life here, and is confident within these dark confines. Her aiding Ged through the dark is a metaphor for his own state of ignorance; he too is still learning, and not yet at the height of his powers. Later Ged is to lead Tenar into the outside world. It is a perfect juxtaposition and example of how both are needed. The two help each other, putting trust in each other, in order to achieve the good end: “I thought also of another thing between us. Call it trust… That is one of its names. It is a very great thing. Though each of us alone is weak, having that we are strong, stronger than the powers of the dark.” The climax before the end is a powerful piece of writing, as the tombs begin to collapse in on themselves. Ged has been holding off the power of the Nameless Ones, but it is now clear to Tenar that there is a very real power for evil. “She did feel it. A dark hand had let go its lifelong hold upon her heart. But she did not feel joy, as she had in the mountains. She put her head down in her arms and cried, and her cheeks were salt and wet. She cried for the waste of her years in bondage to a useless evil. She wept in pain, because she was free …” Tenar now feels bereft, and cannot see forward, keenly feeling the loss of her identity. It is a difficult task to abandon everything one has ever known, to rebel against the very society that nurtured her. But she now saw it as a stifling dogma, which had conditioned her beliefs and understanding of the world. Together she and Ged travel to the coast where his boat is hidden. She is briefly possessed by a malevolent force once more, and feels an urge to kill Ged for destroying her life. However she overcomes this, and Ged offers to take her to meet Ogion, who helped him realise his own destiny. Tenar agrees, and they sail to Havnor, bearing the talisman, the ring of Erreth-Akbe, newly restored to its whole, and the people receive them triumphantly. Both these first Earthsea novels are quite short, but rich in imagery and ideas. Just as in “A Wizard of Earthsea” , the writing is spare, with no excess, but the language is lyrical, so we find beautiful evocative passages in The Tombs of Atuan too. The description of the labyrinths, and of the oppressive regime, are very claustrophobic, and the later passages feel wonderfully fresh and open in contrast. This part was apparently was inspired by the Oregon deserts in her creation of Atuan, the author saying it was a similarly harsh and hauntingly beautiful landscape: “It was evening. The sun was down behind the mountains that loomed close and high to westward, but its afterglow filled all earth and sky: a vast, clear, wintry sky, a vast, barren, golden land of mountains and wide valleys. The wind was down. It was cold, and absolutely silent. Nothing moved. The leaves of the sagebrushes nearby were dry and grey, the stalks of tiny dried-up desert herbs prickled her hand. The huge silent glory of light burned on every twig and withered leaf and stem, on the hills, in the air.” It is a beautifully balanced book; a book to make us feel, and to make us think. “The Earth is beautiful, and bright, and kindly, but that is not all. The Earth is also terrible, and dark, and cruel. The rabbit shrieks dying in the green meadows. The mountains clench their great hands full of hidden fire. There are sharks in the sea, and there is cruelty in men’s eyes.” In both novels the protagonists feel an internal conflict, and learn to discover new ways of thinking and being. Their heroic quests are also both journeys of maturation, and in The Tombs of Atuan Tenar has profound regrets, and begins to understand that genuine freedom will be difficult, with many burdens and responsibilities. She has had power in her own sphere from the age of six; has known her gods, and their holy places for a very long time. Tenar has taken charge of her own destiny as it was laid down, from very early in the story. Because of this, the outcome of the story feels far more like a conscious decision, rather than something that simply happens to her. She shows great courage. The novel has a powerful sense of place, set in claustrophobic catacombs, and as we read we see that the darkness of the labyrinth is also a metaphor for ignorance, fear, and sterility. Yet although there seems to have been so much waste, cruelty and oppression, in the end there is much hope of enlightenment: “Listen Tenar. Heed me. You were the vessel for evil. The evil is poured out. It is done. It is buried in its own tomb. You were never made for cruelty and darkness; you were made to hold light, as a lamp burning holds and gives it light. I found the lamp unlit; I won’t leave it on some desert island like a thing found and cast away. I’ll take you to Havnor and say to the princes of Earthsea, ‘Look! In the place of darkness I found the light, her spirit. By her an old evil was brought to nothing. By her I was brought out of the grave. By her the broken was made whole, and where there was hatred there will be peace.” “Living, being in the world, was a much greater and stranger thing than she had ever dreamed.” “What she had begun to learn was the weight of liberty. Freedom is a heavy load, a great and strange burden for the spirit to undertake. It is not easy. It is not a gift given, but a choice made, and the choice may be a hard one. The road goes upward towards the light; but the laden traveller may never reach the end of it.”
