My fourth book by GGK and once again I liked the the world, story and the characters created by him. This is a beautiful story of love, loyalty, honor, family, courage, sacrifice, betrayal and survival. First I must confess I was not impressed in first five chapters but after that I was unable to put it down. It took me a little time to understand the plot. Arbonne a land famous for its troubadours which is ruled by a woman and worship a goddess. Their passion for their country is remarkable. It is a total contrast to the land of Gorhaut which has a patriarchal society. the high priest of Gorhaut, who hates women and despised the matriarchy in Arbonne, wants to destroy Arbonne and rule it. It is his hatred that bring these two nations on the cusp of the war and whole story revolve around this impending war. Kay is famous for using historical places. He used southeastern France for this one. The world that he has portrayed in this book is beautiful, unforgettable and very resonant. Characters are very good and their narrative describe the different events of past for us. Kay’s writing is very gorgeous, the way he describe people’s emotions is simply breathtaking. His writing is a reader’s delight. And again I couldn’t stop myself marveling upon how much strength he gives to his female characters. This was an enjoyable read for me but still it didn’t touched me like Tigana , didn’t made me cry like The Lions of Al-Rassan or kept me on the edge the whole time due its political drama like Under Heaven . A man whose hatred inspired him to end a country because they worship a Goddess and respect women did not settled well with me. My most favorite character in this book was Rosala. She was an extremely intelligent and clever woman. Her courage when she faced the most feared man in country was truly awesome. & then taking the most difficult decision of her life, putting herself and a country in a dangerous situation was very brave decision. Not GGK's best work but still an admirable read.
