Going After Cacciato O’Brien is the pre-eminent writer of the American soldier’s experience in Vietnam. This novel won the National Book Award for Fiction in 1979. A soldier Cacciato goes AWOL while on patrol in Vietnam. He tells the squad that he’s had enough of the horror and is going to walk to Paris, France. We learn that the squad is determined to hunt him down even across the continent. It shortly becomes clear that the search is really a fantasy in one of the soldier’s head who is jealous of Caciatto’s plan. This surviving soldier’s fantasy is interspersed with the realistic, and often horrific, experiences of what happened to wipe out half the squad in the weeks prior. One of the most powerful chapters in this novel, or any other war novel, was entitled Landing Zone Bravo. Pedersen, one of the squad members, is scared of heights and freaks out as they head to the landing zone. When the chopper lands the crew chief has to shove Pedersen out of the chopper into the rice paddies. The whole area is taking heavy fire. Pedersen is shot in the leg moments after landing and then shot again. He is unable to continue. It seems that he has been shot inadvertently or even intentionally by the gunners from his own chopper. Pedersen composes himself and begins to shoot back at the chopper as it leaves the zone. He makes several directs hit into the fuselage leading the reader to believe that it may crash. Instead the chopper flies over Pedersen and he continues to fire until the chopper is just a shadow against the setting sun. This chapter and others highlight the plight of the infantryman and the lack of a clear line between the VietCong soldiers and American soldiers as they experience many of the same horrors. 4.5 stars. This novel is on par with The Things They Carried, O’Brien’s blockbuster compilation of Vietnam short stories. The writing here borders on the beautiful and flows really well. In part because O’Brien describes the scenes and imagery without going overboard on the short choppy vernacular often used in other Vietnam books.
