[As a first grader] I just knew from the very beginning they were going to return to their old nest, just like Bernard in "A Bed for Bear." Mr. Bird loved their old nest and thought it was the best in the whole world. However, Mrs. Bird thought it was too old and hated it. She wanted something new, so they left to look for one. It was not easy. Mrs. Bird thought Mr. Bird made too many mistakes, so she picked their next house. It was inside a church but right above the big bell! They spent a lot of time building a new nest there. I laughed so much at how they collected hay, soda straws, broom straws, sweater strings, stocking string, mattress stuffing, and even horse hair and man hair for their new home. They thought it was their best nest, but when the big bell rang, their new home became a mess. The birds got separated, and Mr. Bird even thought Mrs. Bird was eaten by a cat. Finally, he bumped into his old nest and found Mrs. Bird there with their baby egg bird. She was happy about their old nest, and thought it was the best in the whole world. I think Mrs. Bird was too bossy and too picky, but maybe she did it for their baby? Mr. Bird makes me think of the Fisherman in "The Fisherman and His Wife," but he appeared to be happy about what they already have. The baby bird looked so cute! What makes the best nest? For me, I would like a nest that is comfortable, shady, with a little bit of sunlight and a lot of yummy worms. [As the parent helping my first-grader read and write] I think this is a great beginner book, which was vividly written and illustrated by P.D. Eastman. The text is big and easy to read, and the pictures blend well and add more to the fun. What makes the best nest? That was the question we focused on while reading and discussing about the book. My first grader was able to relate to other children's books, and even tried to find a pattern. For example, Mrs. Bird and Bernard, the bear, were dissatisfied with what they had, but after searching for a new place, they finally realized what they had was the best. It may not always be the case, especially in the real world, but at least the characters reached a state of closure after having spent time to explore different options. For that, I applaud their curiosity, courage, and temperance.
