It’s a Noir World When Barbara Stanwyck slowly descends the stairs, sultrily displaying her legs and Fred McMurray has not yet realized that murder can smell like honeysuckle; when Joe Garfield watches a lipstick rolling across the floor and is finally thunderstruck by Lana Turner, dressed all in deceptive white; when Raymond Burr watches Steve Brodie take a sound and brutal beating under the glaring light of a swinging naked light-bulb; when Burt Lancaster, tired and dispirited, waits for the wise-cracking hitmen to force their way into his crummy apartment and gun him down, we are in the world of film noir. As well as many of the classic noirs are known to people, at least to those of my generation, as little film scholars seem able to agree on whether film noir is a genre in its own right, or rather a certain style or movement, whether it was limited to the 40s and 50s or still can justly be said to incorporate what is today referred to as neo-noir , and neither do film critics feel at ease when having to decide if a certain film fulfils the requirements that would make it noir or if it doesn’t. To be sure, you do not have to get into this academic brush-wood in order to be able to enjoy the films, but the more of them you know the more you would like to learn about what the common denominator of all those hauntingly beautiful films is, and how it came to pass that in the 1940s suddenly elements of a new visual style and new, often disenchanted, outlooks on life combined to cast the shadow of noir over Hollywood. Alain Silver and James Ursini, in their first Film Noir Reader , have collected some of the most ground-breaking essays on film noir, ranging, for instance, from Raymond Borde and Étienne Chaumeton’s 1955 definition of film noir over Raymond Durgnat’s family tree of the film noir – which lists certain noir themes – to Janey Place and Lowell Peterson’s very intriguing foray into visual motifs of the noir. The second part of the book offers a selection of essays that either focus on particular films, and it would definitely be useless to read these if you have not watched the respective films before. These include Preminger’s Angel Face , Siodmak’s Phantom Lady and The Killers , Dassin’s Night and the City as well as Aldrich’s Kiss Me Deadly . There are also two essays on the films noir made by directors John Farrow and – my personal favourite – Anthony Mann respectively. The third section of the book comprises articles that are, for example, concerned with the interplay of voice-over and gender roles, as exemplified by the femme fatale, with noir TV series, with Miami Vice as a show that was especially influenced by the legacy of the noir or with how the noir movement turned into a genre (especially as directors grew more and more conscious of actually contributing to something that was called “noir”). Most of these essays, especially those of the second part of the book, are written in an intelligible and fluent style, which makes them a pleasure to read. A few, though, suffer from a rather overblown and stilted way of putting things, obfuscating rather than elucidating them, so that I did not bother to read them to the end – but these were, luckily, few and far between. All in all, the Film Noir Reader is a very intriguing book to everyone who wants to know more about film noir and who is ready to concentrate a bit in order to know more than just star trivia and the like. Apart from that, it might be possible that after reading most of the essays in this book you will look at some of those classic and seemingly well-known movies in a new light.
