If you are not a foodie, then move along, this book is not for you. I am a foodie, and so is my wife. She surprised me with this very cool book at Christmas. It is a non-fiction tale told in 3 parts: the first is about the Culinary Institute of America's (CIA) certified Master Chef examination; the second part is a case study of a rising-star modern chef (who is a graduate of the CIA but who does not hold a CMC title); the third part is about an established top American chef and his number-one restaurant. The writing follows an arc through these seemingly unconnected vignettes, examining the journey toward perfection in cooking. Most interestingly, the author isn't interested in "what it takes", but rather "why does it matter"? Of course, there is the constant probing of "what is perfection" throughout all parts of the book. I loved this book for many reasons. I would say though, that each of the three parts held my interest in a different way and for different reasons. The first part is un-put-downable, fascinating, suspenseful. It is a peek into a secret world of elite cooking, and it is totally fascinating. It helps that there are seven candidates taking the 10-day examination, and statistically speaking less than 30% will pass. So obviously you become tied up in each persons story, holding your breath knowing that there is a doomsday prophecy to this whole rigorous painful endeavour. Very cool. The author takes a very balanced approach to his observations and openly airs his biases-- he is a CIA graduate too, but has not faced the CMC exam. He openly acknowledges that most professional chefs disparage the CMC exam, siting that it is antiquated, unnecessarily complex, and irrelevant. He also makes a pretty solid case for why the test is in fact important. The second part of the book is a look into the success of a rising star in the chef industry, and how he has ushered in a new era of fine dining in the Cleveland area. it is the personality of the chef himself that seems to fascinate the author, and how this chef's has embraced much of the teachings of the CIA but has also left himself room to be relaxed, extroverted, generous, even boisterous. In a sense, he brings a sense of balance to the sterile and puritan ways taught at the CIA (and he does so without sacrificing technique or skill). We are left asking "Is this closer to true perfection in the culinary world?". The third part exams yet another successful American chef (Thomas Keller) and his monumentally successful and highly lauded French Laundry restaurant in California. Here we are shown the crazy amount of work that goes into "being the best" on a daily basis. The French Laundry is Thomas Keller and vice-versa. He routinely works 14 hour days and longer, because he HAS to have things this certain way. His attention to every detail, including the actual design, layout, and daily functioning of the kitchen makes the restaurant attractive to work in. This attracts top sous-chefs and staff. This top-calibre team all strive to personify and deliver the vision that is Keller's, because thy believe in it too. His idea of perfection becomes their idea. Is this kind of drive required for perfection? Perhaps in terms of a nationally recognized restaurant. Keller spends a lot of time mentoring, teaching, correcting, managing, and mentally evaluating his staff. But in a quiet moment with the author, Keller himself confesses that despite his unparallelled success, his idea of perfection is different from his French Laundry. He speaks of a kitchen in which all the chefs and staff share an unspoken conviction to upholding an exact standard of excellence, such that communication about where things should be, how things should be done, and what should take priority all become unnecessary. Things would "just flow". Excellence would just "be". Perhaps such harmony within a busy kitchen is the ultimate form of perfection for a chef at Keller's level. In an environment of perfect harmony, the only thing that requires attention is the transformation of food into new and wonderful flavour experiences, provided the skills, techniques, and knowledge have all been acquired beforehand (...which connects the theme back to the CIA and classical training). Cool book.
