Love's Own Reward is a timeless contemporary romance that had me quickly turning pages as I became engrossed in this couple's story. A horrific accident brings about Jess & Charley's first meeting, though she will not remember that meeting for some time. Afterwards, she is hounded by a sea of reporters, each looking for their next big story and for the moment, she is it. Charley is both a hero and a half million dollars richer - all because of saving a young child from a burning car. Everyone wants a slice of her pie...and everyone wants to know what she plans to do with the money? Extravagant shopping trips? New cars? Exotic vacations? Jess seems to be in the right place at the right time to rescue Charley from the horde of piranhas vying for her story and money. Coincidence or carefully planned? Is her rescuer too good to be true? He admits to being a writer and professor, so what secret is Jess hiding from Charley that begins eating him alive as their relationship develops? Can a relationship founded on half truths survive? What is the ultimate cost of deception? What a beautiful story about trusting enough to open your mind and heart to possibilities - to what can be if you're willing to let go and live life - love enough, trust enough, and yes, even forgive enough. Charley has lived her life caring for everyone else - she's learning to let go and live her own dreams. I loved watching her transformation from a shy, innocent victim of circumstance to a take charge of her own happiness woman. Jess has lived his life being someone he's not very proud of, and he's been burned by love before - he knows it doesn't last. Both of them fear betrayal most of all, as they explore the possibility of a future together. Promises are made but is a promise binding when it is pledged without knowing the whole truth? The tension and suspense continue building in this one as the reader is privy to the truth that Jess fights to keep hidden and the devastating effect it will have on Charley when it is ultimately revealed. My heart raced through the latter pages as I watched it all unravel and was screaming, "For God's sakes, Jess, tell her the truth!" Love's Own Reward is beautifully written, mesmerizing, and emotionally touching - a lesson in redemption and forgiveness. Be prepare for it to engage you, seduce you, break your heart, give you hope, and make you laugh. I loved the humorous banter between characters that I have come to know as a trademark of author Nancy Gideon. Kudos to the author for also bringing much deserved attention to the disease, diabetes, through the warm, funny character of Robert - Charley's brother. He's the perfect role model of what it means to live life with the disease instead of letting it steal your life from you. This is a must read for fans of romance...contemporary or otherwise. I eagerly await the release of the next 3 books in this line by Dana Ransom. http://crossmyheartbookreviews.blogsp...
