John Sandford is one of those best-selling authors whose name appears on his book covers in bigger letters than the title. I have always been leery of writers like that. It's usually because they are ridiculously prolific and popular, two qualities that don't necessarily equate with "good". After reading "Rules of Prey", though, I can say with certainty that Sandford is good. "Rules" was published in 1989. It does what "CSI" and "Criminal Minds" does just about every week. I have seen "Criminal Minds" episodes that are probably more intense and have more elaborate plot twists than "Rules", but keep in mind that Sandford wrote this at a time when serial killer fiction wasn't an over-saturated market and TV shows and movies weren't dealing with serial killers or graphic murders to the extent that they are today. "Rules" is the first in Sandford's long-running series to feature his detective, Lucas Davenport. Other than the fact that he is named after a piece of furniture, there is a lot to like about Davenport. First off, he is NOT a 6'11" 250-pound superhero cop who drives a Ferrari, has sex with a dozen women in the first 50 pages, cooks his own rigatoni, and can shoot a perp 10 yards away with his Smith & Wesson. A davenport is a fancy American term for an upholstered sofa, not to be confused with... a small antique writing desk in British parlance Davenport is a pretty believable cop. He doesn't always solve the case. He isn't unlucky with women, but he's definitely no man-whore. He is dependent on the back-up of his fellow boys (and girls) in blue. He's also a bit of a nerd, as he spends much of his off-time playing role-playing games, including a Civil War game that he helped create. In the beginning of "Rules", a serial killer underestimates one of his potential victims. Carla Ruiz is the only victim to survive an attack by the "Maddog Killer". Over the course of the investigation, she and Davenport start a relationship, one that is complicated by the fact that Davenport's on-again-off-again girlfriend has just told him that she's pregnant with his child. The case is also moving slow, as the killer is constantly changing his m.o. and knows not to leave hair and fibers, which leads Davenport to suspect that the police are dealing with someone intimately familiar with police procedural and/or technicalities of the law. "Rules" is suspenseful, well-written, and entertaining. I will definitely be reading more of Sandford.
