Portia is a real estate agent who sells pricey properties to posh clients. She gets a call from Luc, who wants to see a big ugly house by the sea, and she has to go show it to him on the weekend. So Portia drives down to the house and she’s a bit nervous about the whole thing, because she has a history with that house. Luc picks up on the fact that something is wrong, and Portia agrees to tell him what it is if he agrees to buy the house. Luc agrees to buy the house. I executed my first, and arguably my best, revenge plot when I was seven. It was against a girl at school named Wendy. I don’t remember what her crime against me was, but I’m sure it was heinous. I wrote ‘Wendy is a poo’ in pencil above a toilet roll holder in the girl’s toilets. I wrote it in pencil because I knew I would want to erase it some day (which I did). I waited, I don’t know how long, for an opportunity to point out to Wendy in front of others that someone hated her enough to write that about her in the girl’s toilets. I said it with my best faux-sympathy, and I don’t remember her reaction. I’m sure it hasn’t had any devastating and far reaching consequences on Wendy’s psyche, but I’m sure I had great fun at the time, and thought I was being a genius of subtlety. I mention this because my lame revenge plot is at least equivalent in sophistication to Luc’s lame revenge plot. His consists of phoning up a real estate agency to get Portia, who works there, to show him a house he intends to buy. I had to sneak a pencil into the girl’s toilets and wait ages before I could use the insult to devastating effect. That’s a big deal when you’re seven. If you have come to this book expecting some emotional stuff where the hero believes the heroine has done something terrible but she hasn’t, and he starts feeling tortured about going ahead with planning to destroy her because he likes her, and then he does go ahead and destroys her and finds out that she’s blameless, and there’s a good grovel and then they fall into each other’s arms at the end, you are going to be disappointed. When the ink is dry on the sale Portia explains that she once lived in that ugly house because her mother was housekeeper to the old man who owned the place. The house has sad associations in Portia’s memory, because her mother died. It’s not the whole story. Portia is pretty and fun to be with, and Luc is French and handsome and also fun. She has commitment issues, he is pushy. She initially pretends that she’s more involved with a guy she’s dating than she actually is, but they flirt their way into dating, and then into spending the weekends together and being a couple. It’s all really nice, but this is not a relationship for the romance protagonists. Usually, this is the relationship the heroine’s best friend or sister has, specifically to torture the heroine when she compares it with what it’s like for her and the hero. What Portia doesn’t reveal in her story about her involvement with the house to Luc, and what is behind her commitment issues, is that she has amnesia. Years ago, something terrible happened in that ugly house, and Portia can’t remember what it was. When she came to her senses, a man was dead. If you join those dots with Luc being so pushy about getting to know Portia and her connection to the ugly house, you would form a reasonable idea about what might have happened … but you would be wrong. You would also have to wait ages to get to this point, because the story is almost entirely devoted to Portia getting over her commitment issues enough to trust Luc, and then having lovely weekends cooking great food and watching sports and going to bed with him. It’s a quite a sweet relationship story, but the revenge plot is about as juicy as mildly insulting graffiti in a primary school bathroom. Show more
