I stayed up super late finishing The Watsons Go to Brimingham-1963 by Christopher Paul Curtis, and I can’t stop thinking about it. I can’t tell you how artful I thought it was… well, let me try. First, I have a big problem with history (so much so that it is truly embarrassing) and I always have had this problem —I need to know the people and stories behind the events to remember anything. I also have a big problem with reading historical fiction. It often seems so “fixed”—--"Tell some story around the facts you want to present!" I want to read a story that is a story before it is about any time period or historical events. I have to get to know history from the inside out, and that is just what this great book allows me to do—through all my own strengths: feelings, nuances, humor, imagination….through story. I will never forget these characters. They are people I know. Character development is paramount in this book. It is their growth that pulls the story along, not events. Best of all, it is an enjoyable ride. I am not quite sure how Curtis crafted such a lovely book. It is in his storytelling. I don’t doubt for a moment any word on any page. I was especially touched by the ideas that could have only come from some childhood somewhere because they were, so oddly, kid. So many of his ideas must have come from some childhood he did know intimately. They seem impossible to make up because they are so perfectly how children’s minds work, like the Watson’s pet hospital behind the couch. Some kids must have invented that idea! Did Curtis really create these ideas?! Also, the idea of the Wool Pooh. That is just how a kid interprets (or misinterprets) things…and how it becomes a real entity in his mind. The way Kenny plays with his friends with the dinosaurs and they talk about the “radioactiveness” and the looking sideways at things so his lazy eye looked straight. All these little things that TELL the story, and tell the characters, and make it so real. The big question is: How can what he writes ring so true to me, someone who has known no life such as this. That is his everyman secret. Curtis just tells his story; he disappears and the characters lead you through by the hand. It is seamless. You never doubt for a moment, or “come out of it” and become self-aware that you are just reading a book… or wonder “why?” or ask if that sounds realistic. Curtis never “narrates.” His voice is one with the story. You never hear him. We experience for ourselves each character’s emotional struggles by being in the story ourselves. I was so involved with every thought Kenny had, they were my own thoughts. He doesn’t tell us Kenny was depressed…Kenny doesn’t know what he, himself, is feeling! We just feel it sink into us. You just absorb this book. In this way, this book is almost like a poem, or a ballad, or a song. You have to just experience it. You have to experience their family life. And if you never had a family before, this book would show you what family is (—that abstract part you can’t put your finger on)…just by how it feels. Sure it is rough, sure it is messy, but each character is imperfectly perfect, and… it is what it is. The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963 is immediately one of my all-time favorite books now. And for all those reasons that are hard to define in words. I like that it has no feeling of tidiness, of preconceieved ideas of how to tell a story, with no real beginning or end of a story. You just enter into it as the Watsons are living their lives. It has no clean little moral or happy ever after or lesson learned, or plotted-out literary devices and tie-up-the-loose-ends conclusion. That is how a real story is. That is how life is. We just enter it, and it unfolds. That is part of the fluidity of this book. The seamless, unselfconscious telling of a story that just tells itself. Simply, it is artful. The book fits the (vague) Newberry criteria just fine; it fits the Coretta Scottt King criteria exceptionally well. The book does indeed help the reader to question and understand his own attitudes as a citizen of a pluralistic society, and includes well drawn characters that portray growth. Thank you, Christopher Paul Curtis.
