Turbulence Ahead Like its predecessor, The Captains has an oblique summary that reveals little more than the decade in which this historical fiction occurs. As the Korean People’s Army marches across the 38th parallel, the cast of The Lieutenants find themselves embroiled in the war. It’s an exciting, dynamic start to the novel. The US Army’s response is slow and haphazard, but there are plenty of opportunities for our heroes to show their finest attributes and be all they can be. The author worships his alma mater and presents a compelling argument that the armed forces did a great deal for diversity. The representation of African-American soldiers is nuanced and balanced. Their successes and flaws are on display, but no one gives them the benefit of the doubt. The author captures the US Army as a complex, living organism that’s the sum of its parts. Unfortunately, this level of realism hampers the narrative of The Captains as it — like the war — loses momentum after breaking out of Pusan. World events fade from relevance as it abruptly switches to a character-driven story. Disappointingly, that character is Lowell. It was always a challenge to make this returning character sympathetic: he’s handsome, rich and politically privileged. He repeatedly makes mistakes due to deep personal flaws that never get addressed. Instead, those connections see him rescued time and time again, and we’re supposed to sympathize because of his aw-shucks I-didn’t-ask-for-special-treatment attitude. The focus on Lowell is infuriating when his friend and partner-in-crime Felter comes from a humble background with principled motivations. He’s smart, works hard and takes many personal risks. Yet we’re saddled with the arrogant ubermensch. The author loves stories about heroic soldiers with personality flaws that clash with leadership. Repeated use of this theme grows tiresome, especially as there’s no overarching plot. I remain a fan of the realistic portrayal of the US Army, but grow cautious as issues with the cast grow. I love all the side characters, but the treatment of women took a steep dive and I’ve started to hate the main character. Recommended, with Reservations. Here’s hoping for a swift recovery in the next.
