I read this immediately after A Rough Shoot, to which this book is something of a sequel, and found it very disappointing by contrast. Roger Taine, the central character of A Rough Shoot, is the hero of this book too. The story follows directly on from the events described in A Rough Shoot and two of the minor characters from the previous book recur in this volume. Unlike the three other Household novels I have read so far, this one has a very pedestrian beginning. Taine visits his MI5 'handler' Roland and is informed that Pink, who was on the side of the Fascists in A Rough Shoot, is now helping the British government. He has overheard some Germans discussing a plot to spread foot and mouth disease throughout Britain and Taine is asked by MI5 to help Pink foil the foreign miscreants. Reluctantly, Taine agrees. We are almost a third of the way through the book before Pink has outlined to Taine what he knows about the plot and the two men have decided how to proceed against it. This is rather dull and unnecessary as Roland has already told Taine all he really needs to know and seems to have been included by Household more or less as padding to bulk the novel up to the requisite length (it is only 168 pages long in this edition even so). Pink then breaks into a house where the deadly, disease-infected ticks are being harboured while Taine keeps watch and things pick up. But the story then becomes predominantly languorous again in its middle section before we are treated to a final smuggling-and-sailing climax which reminded me quite a lot of The Riddle of the Sands. Pink is nowhere near as engaging a character as Sandorski was in the prequel and the narrative is slower-paced, less interesting and somehow more obvious than that of A Rough Shoot. The Dorset countryside gets less of a look in than it did in the previous book, partly because most of the events take place either in the dark or at sea. A dud therefore but this will not dissuade me from reading more Household this year.
