Between the end of the high school and the time I became active on Goodreads, I did not read a lot of classics. That encompasses many years when the majority of my reading was basic kids books that I read to my kids, mysteries that did not require much thinking on my part, and the same few favorite books over and over again. One reason is because I resented the required reading foisted upon me by English and history teachers who, while they had the best of intentions, did not necessarily choose books that I enjoyed. Over the last two years I have had made it a point to revisit many of these classic novels through adult eyes. In light of the current world situation, I decided to revisit Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis by Robert F. Kennedy , his account of a time when the world was on edge. "On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962, shortly after 9:00, President Kennedy called and asked me to come to the White House." So begins Senator Robert F. Kennedy's one hundred page memoir on the thirteen days in October that pitted the United States against the Soviet Union and had the entire world watching. Senator Kennedy writes from a unique perspective in that he was a member of the President's cabinet and present for all of the meetings in regards to this crisis yet, being the President's brother, the two also met away from the political troubles of the day. An American U-2 plane had discovered that Russia was placing, or had already placed, atomic missiles and weapons in Cuba. And the back and forth between the United States and Russia began, here documented in a fast paced first person account worthy of thriller status. As President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev volleyed back and forth, the world waited. Over 35,000 troops were sent to the southeast just in case. American armed forces were on call, just in case. Senator Kennedy notes that President Kennedy did not fear what he referred to as step one, but steps 3, 4, 5, and 6, which could result in millions of Americans killed and a worldwide nuclear winter. The President urged Premier Khrushchev that if he pulled missiles out of Cuba, then the United States would follow suit and take missiles out of Turkey and Italy. All of these locations were close enough to annihilate the opponent and start world war three. With World War Two still fresh enough in people's minds, neither leader wanted to be the one responsible for another armed conflict. Unlike today's climate, the two leaders were able to talk out their disputes through letter writing, televised addresses, and messengers. Yet, for those thirteen days in October, the world stood waiting. At only one hundred pages in length, Senator Kennedy's account of the Cuban Missile Crisis packs a punch as he details each council meeting, each step, and each private meeting with the President in quick snapshots. Even though I know the resolution of this conflict, the book read like a thriller and had me on edge. A bonus is that the edition I read contained a forward by Arthur Schlesinger and an afterward of two essays by Richard Neustadt and Graham Allison, neither of which were available in the paperback I read for school years ago. Most interestingly, Neustadt and Allison point out that had the conflict gone on for a third week, the result would have most likely resulted in all out war. With people on constant alert, the crisis could not have lasted longer than it did without someone breaking down and calling the first shot. Thankfully, this crisis did not amount to an all-out global armed conflict. Today's world leaders live in a different political climate than the one from fifty five years ago. It was eye opening to revisit Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis and witness how a global conflict was defused by talking out steps to de-arm potential conflict zones as well as by letter writing. In today's media age, as every move by world leaders is scrutinized, it is little wonder that talking out differences or sending memos is not as effective as it was during the Cuban crisis. As over time I continue to reread novels and political discourses foisted upon me in school, I have discovered the merits of each one. While I am uncertain whether or not the average teenager can appreciate the depths of the works they are reading, I have enjoyed my time revisiting these classic works. The adult me rates Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis 4.5 thrilling stars and is excited to reread more books from her school days.
