Be a Part of It I left New York City in 2016 after 10 years. My time there had long since played out, and despite some excellent people, I was feeling isolated and directionless. But the reasoning isn't important. All you need to know is that I left for Chicago, and it was the right choice. Since then, my mother has asked me no less than once a month whether I miss New York. The answer every time has been "No." I miss certain people and access to certain experiences -- a book club I was in and the energy of our bar nights; being able to run downstairs at 2 a.m. for a grape Crush and a pint of peach sorbet at the little bodega (my current Walgreens is a shocking 2 blocks away); a constant supply of social events due to the network of people I had established over a decade -- but I never missed the city itself. Everything is just more difficult there. The amount of planning and work involved in a trip to Bed, Bath & Beyond is amazing, and the bus, subway, and taxis are all terrible options for lugging home an inconveniently-shaped box with a stock pot inside. Living quarters are smaller, food is more expensive, and everything is just more exhausting. Now, I can hop in the car and park for free at the Bed, Bath & Beyond that I used to go to before I hooked up with a weirdo who works there in 2019. The indie bookstore scene is way better in Chicago, and my favorite is the one just a few blocks away that I used to go to before I asked out and got shot down by a dude who works there in 2019. And the bars and restaurants are cheaper and more spacious. The Rule of Threes compels me to mention my favorite local bar that makes a good Manhattan but which I haven't to in a long time as it's the regular haunt of someone whose engagement I nearly destroyed in 2019. So despite 2019 not being an amazing year (in honesty, all these events took place within a 2-month span towards the end of it), I'm very happy with where I live and disinclined to think back on where I was before. Really, what's to miss? Well that was my attitude until I read Stacey's Mistake last week. You will think I am making this up, but the book made me so wistful and nostalgic for New York that I teared up a little. Stacey, who has been living in New York for a number of months at this point, invites the 4 other primary members of the Club to a long weekend visit where they will babysit 10 kids for a day and otherwise just have a good time. The conflict comes from her Connecticut friends being super overexcited and touristy. To cool, jaded, 12-year-old Stacey, this is mortifying. Wackiness and some reconciliation ensue, and Stacey learns that she has become way too unappreciative of the city she lives in, taking the culture and people for granted. Her friends reopen her eyes to how colorful and exciting New York is. And this is what resonated with me. When I think back on New York, I think about how life was after years of being there. When I visit, it feels as though I never left. But if I cast my mind further back, I remember a sense of novelty and discovery and magic that I think is unique to New York. Obviously I'm not excited by the same things as a bunch of 12-year-old girls. Serendipity and the Hard Rock Cafe don't exactly butter my eggroll. But their excitement reminded me of my own substitutes for these things: My first midnight cab ride home driving up the FDR gazing at Queens. A commute to work where I could reliably see the woman with the warbly voice singing in the 42nd St. subway corridor, the dude with the Casio keyboard on the Time Square shuttle who ONLY knows the Song of Storms from Ocarina of Time, and the sweet Jehovah's witness lady who I always said "Good morning" to but never took a copy of the Watchtower from. Walking 90 blocks from Battery Park to my apartment with no interruption in the string of restaurants, shops, people, and activity. I read somewhere recently that some folks who experience good sleight-of-hand magic later describe the sky seeming bluer and sounds and smells more acute. Forcing yourself out of your usual perceptions can make the world seem more vibrant by causing you to experience things fresh rather than allowing your senses to be clouded by expectations. Stacey was shaken out of her usual experience by coming to understand her friends' point-of-view. I guess this works for memories too because watching Stacey go through that shook things up for me as well. Next time my mom asks me if I miss New York... I'll still probably say "No." But I'll be lying. ************************************* Homework: Choose something that doesn't excite you like it used to and try to remember exactly what you loved about it. Then go do it like it's the last time you ever will. << #17: Mary Anne's Bad-Luck Mystery #19: Claudia and the Bad Joke >>
