So how is perfection decided? Is it by looks? Is it by choices? Is it by God's standards? Or perhaps by the human's opinions? Do children pay for their parents' decisions? Why should they? And who in this motherf*cking universe is entitled to do just that? So here's the deal. I'm going to start with the mother of the story. She gets the honors because she's really something. So let me get this straight. You decide, after the death of your husband and your childrens'father, to grab your kids and lead and leave them at the mercy of your mother, to whom the Devil wouldn't hold a candle to, and who has thrown you out of her life after you eloped with your half-uncle, because that was the best decision. THE.BEST.DECISION. Why is this the best decision? Because you want to get back to your father's good graces so that the prodigal daughter can be re-installed in the will. So what's reason? F*CKING MONEY. Que bitter laugh. And hear this. You lock up your children in a secluded room , with the only pacing opening towards an ATTIC, lie incessantly to them about the time they are going to be trapped in that hell-hole and then gradually abandon them, forget they need their mother after losing their father so recently, and drop them like a sack of sh*t. And what's the reason of that? TO GET BACK THE F*CKING MONEY. Why? BECAUSE YOU WON'T RECEIVE NOT ONE F*UCKING PENNY IF YOUR FATHER FINDS OUT ABOUT YOUR KIDS. So the woman does something brilliant. Really great parent advice. Not only does she leave her beautiful and most caring children at the mercy of a flogging,relentless,grey-haired monster with the lamest excuse of all that she will get them out as soon her father is dead and the fortune is hers. But. She fails to inform them that her father has already been dead for a whole year, during which time one of her kids dies, she gets remarried and then flees without so much as an explanation. Do you thing that's it? NO. Because she actually poisons her own kids little by little with arsenic hidden in candy. Why is that? BECAUSE THE F*CKING MONEY WILL BE TAKEN FROM HER IF SHE'S FOUND OUT TO HAVE HAD CHILDREN FROM HER FIRST MARRIAGE. This must be one of the most outrageous things I have ever read. Now as far as the brother ans sister, Chris and Cathy are concerned, I have to say this. If they can manage in such an appaling condition to find love despite what their blood is telling them, then so be it. Circumstances make us who we are. Feeling that this relationship is a taboo would be solely hypocritical when the true disgust stems from the actions of those considered older and wiser. That young love had no part in the atrocities that were bestowed upon them. Nobody was ever going to make me hate my father or my mother! Nobody was going to have the power of life and death over menot while I was alive and could still fight back! “What have we done so sinful?” he asked. "Do you think we can live in one room, year after year, and not see each other? You helped put us here. You have locked this wing so the servants cannot enter. You want to catch us doing something you consider evil. You want Cathy and me to prove your judgment of our mother's marriage is right! Look at you, standing there in your iron- gray dress, feeling pious and self- righteous while you starve small children!“ “I'm going to get even one day, old woman,” I said. “There's going to come a day when you are going to be the helpless one, and I'm going to hold the whip in my hands. And there's going to be food in the kitchen that you are never going to eat, for, as you incessantly say, God sees everything, and he has his way of working justice, an eye for an eye is his way, Grandmother!” “Wrong?” he repeated. “Momma, what can be right about living in one room? You said I don't sound like myselflook me over good. Am I a little boy now? Look at Cathyis she still a child? Look longest at the twins; notice in particular how tall they've grown. Then turn your eyes back on me, and tell me that Cathy and I are still children to be treated with condescension, and are incapable of understanding adult subjects. We haven't remained idle, twiddling our thumbs while you were off having a good time. Through books Cathy and I have lived a zillion lives . . . our vicarious way to feel alive.” “I love you,” was his reply. “I make myself keep on loving you, despite what you do. I've got to love you. We all have to love you, and believe in you, and think you are looking out for our best interests. But look at us, Momma, and really see us." “Momma, whether or not you inherit your father's immense fortune, we want out of this room! Not next week, or tomorrowbut today! Now! This minute! You turn that key over to me, and we'll go away, far away. And you can send us money, if you care to, or send nothing, if that's what you want, and you need never see us again, if that is your choice, and that will solve all your problems, we'll be gone from your life, and your father need never know we existed, and you can have what he leaves you, all to yourself.” “Damn you to hell, Corrine Foxworth,” I shouted at the top of my lungs, “if you don't take your son to a hospital! You think you can do anything you want with us, and no one will find out! Well, you can throw away that security blanket, for I'll find a way for revenge, if it takes me the rest of my life, I'll see that you pay, and dearly pay, if you don't do something right now to save Cory's life. Go on, glare your eyes at me, and cry and plead, and talk to me about money and what it can buy. But it can't buy back a child once he's dead! And if that happens, don't think I won't find a way to get to your husband and tell him you have four children you have kept hidden in a locked room with their only playground an attic . . . and you've kept them there for years and years! See if he loves you then! Watch his face and wait to see how much respect and admiration he has for you then!” She winced, but her eyes shot deadly looks at me. “And what's more, I'll go to the grandfather and tell him, too!” I yelled even louder. “And you won't inherit one damned red pennyand I'll be glad, glad, glad!” “And when I fall in love,” I began, "I will build a mountain to touch the sky. Then, my lover and I will have the best of both worlds, reality firmly under our feet, while we have our heads in the clouds with all our illusions still intact. And the purple grass will grow all around, high enough to reach our eyes." So this is my gift to you. STUNNING.PARENT.MODEL.
