The book, similar to the previous one, expresses some very alarming worldviews that help explain many of the beliefs and behaviors that permeate right wing thought leaders today. The book takes a clear stance that any concept of peace and/or global unity is to immediately be approached with mistrust and hatred. The book takes intensely sexist stances with its female characters. It attacks Catholics and what it calls “dead churches.” Finally, it continues with the antisemitism similarly expressed in the previous novel. The most striking political message the book asserts is that any person approaching politics from a stance of peace or global unity is completely untrustworthy. It shows actions that in the real world would never be performed by any nation-state as enabling the Antichrist to consolidate power and leave every other country helpless against him. The book also continues its sinister framing of the UN that began with the last one. Additionally, the book has a highly romanticized approach to the militia movement seen in the United States. It shows the militias as being righteous and the last viable defense against the Antichrist’s ascension to power. In the real world militias are mostly guided by bored people with specific persecution and power fantasies driven by paranoid conspiracy theories. This ultimately leads to events like the Oklahoma City bombing and the insurrection at the capitol, not gallant stances against oppressive world leaders. The most insulting element of this book is its portrayal of women. There are three prominent female characters in this book and none of them are portrayed as realistic or even fully fleshed out as legitimate human beings. The first prominent character is Chloe Steele. She is shown running into a random woman at Buck’s, who she has developed feelings for, apartment and sees her bringing his household goods. The woman makes mention of seeing her fiancé and Chloe immediately decides that Buck has a secret fiancée and has been lying to her the entire time. She cuts him out of her life, throws flowers she assumes are from him in the trash and refuses to even talk to him. The woman Chloe saw was simply working for Buck’s employer and assisting in his move from New York. The fiancé she referenced was a different person entirely. This is not the way a real person, male or female, would respond to this situation. It is the most insultingly irrational response to a slight confusion ever seen and speaks volumes to how the authors view a woman’s ability at rationality. The next prominent female character is Hattie Durham, the flight attendant Rayford was tempted by in the previous book. She is shown to act in bizarrely conniving ways. She was the actual person who sent the flowers to Chloe and then sent her a box of chocolate mints afterward. She pulls strings with the Antichrist to make Rayford his personal pilot, and she presents herself in oddly sexual ways to demonstrate how she ties her self worth to her relationship with Carpathia and his position. The novel also continues its negative depiction of Hattie by showing her pregnant with Carpathia’s baby while not married to him because of course the book would find an unmarried mother something to be scorned. The final prominent woman is Amanda White, who was very briefly mentioned early in the book but is not seen as an actual character until the last two chapters. She is seen as independent, though saddened by the loss of her family (They began going to one of those “dead churches” but moved to the fundamentalist church. Amanda’s family adopted the fundamentalist ideology and were raptured, but Amanda did not, resulting in her being left behind). She is seen in one scene as being u happy with her job and the only thing keeping her in it is that a man hasn’t come to take her away from it. This is incredibly insulting in regards to the agency a woman has in making up her own mind regarding her career. These are the only real female characters seen at all, and collectively they make a statement to the reader that a woman is irrationally emotional which leads her to jump to wild conclusions on the flimsiest evidence or act out of pure petty jealousy and vindictiveness, and the only real worth a woman can build is in the men with whom she has relationships. The book also reflects the authors’ attitude toward interdenominational matters within the Christian faith. It perceives that only its fundamentalist interpretation of the Bible to be the correct interpretation and all others to be evil. It shows how Catholics were left behind except for those who secretly left the faith to be “real” Christians and other faiths are “dead churches” not teaching real faith. There are plenty of problems regarding the teachings and behavior of plenty of churches besides the fundamentalist faith. But it’s derisive attitude toward other churches shows the strict interpretation the writers have toward their faith and how unquestioning they are toward how that interpretation came to be. Finally, much like the last book, this book reeks of antisemitism. Any of the Jewish characters give names are given the most stereotypical names imaginable. The two main Jewish characters are Chaim Rosensweig and Tsion Ben-Judah (See what I mean about the stereotypical names?) Chaim developed a (magical) miracle fertilizer that can grow robust crops even in the middle of the desert. He is heavily charmed by Carpathia, who uses the formula for this fertilizer to strong-arm every country into giving up its weapons. Chaim is the most uncritical eye imaginable. Tsion is introduced as a rabbinical scholar, ready to reveal the true messiah the Jews have been waiting literal millennia for. After lots of surface level description of the prophesies of the Old Testament, Tsion declares Jesus to be this messiah. This creates a rift in the Jewish community with the 143,000 converts arising as the book needs based on its biblical interpretation. It tends to show a heavily infantilized depiction of Jewish people, acting like they have simply never heard of Jesus and would accept him if they had. All in all, the book, aside from the aforementioned atrocious world view it peddles, is just really boring. Most of its narrative is dedicated to using its painfully one dimensional characters to push its ideology while failing to have any real, engaging action to keep your attention. This book was painful to read for two very big reasons, but I have 14 of these books left to go. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
