A detailed and rich novel, with the author showing a flair for the English language and a deep understanding of medieval English history. Colourful wording, and a balance between passionate scenes and descriptive tracing of the events of the life of the incredibly interesting and beautiful Katherine Swynford. One may have to reread parts, but if you focus you will find this a rewarding historical page turner, and understand why after 55 years it is still a best loved classic of historical literature. The author meticulously researched her sources, and even for minor characters, used where she could, those mentioned in the chronicles. Hence we definitely do gain an insight into the lives of royalty and nobility as well as the ordinary people of the England of that time. Katherine Swynford was born from a humble background, the daughter of a herald. While her older sister Phillipa gained a position in the royal court, Katherine through her beauty and charm, beguiled the powerful nobleman John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, father of Henry IV, and ancestor of most of today's royal family, through his eventual marriage to Katherine, his long time paramour. Katherine is first pressured into marriage to the boorish and brutish knight, Hugh Swynford. She gains the friendship and gives her loyalty to Blanche, John of Gaunt's first wife. After the deaths of Blanche and Hugh, so begins the passionate liaison between the flame haired beauty Katherine, and the charismatic Duke of Lancaster and player in the power of England's politics of the time. John is haunted by malevolent slander of being a changeling while he determines to revenge himself on those behind this false charge. Katherine of course was dogged by the charge of the time often levelled against beautiful and passionate women, of harlotry. But instead of marrying his love Katherine john married the Spanish princess Constance of Castile Only years later did the lovers meet again after much pain and turmoil and spend three years of marriage before John of Gaunt's death. Covers events such as the Black Death, and the rebellion of the time led by Wat Tyler, during the reign of the boy king Richard II. We also get to meet characters such as John Chaucer (married to Katherine's sister) and the mystic Nun, St Julian. A great work of literature, well worth the effort
