I remember learning about the Stanislaski clan soon after I first started reading Nora Roberts' books in 2001, but I was unsuccessful in finding new or old copies of the series. That is why I have only now gotten my hands on Taming Natasha , twenty-seven years after it's original Silhouette Special Edition release. Taming Natasha is a Category Romance Nora Roberts book, meaning it is roughly half the length of her typical Single Title novels (400+ pages) of the day. Because of how short the book is in length, Spence and Natasha's relationship moves at an accelerated pace (e.g., proposal, pregnancy, and marriage are all features of this book!) . To put things simply, Natasha is a former ballerina who escaped Ukraine as a child to come to New York with her family, and who now runs a toy store in a small town in West Virginia. Spence is the son of a wealthy New York family, and former composer turned music professor who moves from New York to West Virginia with his young daughter several years after the death of his estranged wife. Natasha is immediately put off by Spence because he ogles her in front of a woman she believes is his wife when they first meet. Spence is confused by her brusque treatment of him, but is determined to get to know her. Luckily for him, Natasha enrolls in random classes at the local college where he's teaching, and winds up in his class. Fancy that! Their interactions bring them close due to class and his daughter's frequent visits to her toy store, but Natasha is against a relationship, with him or with anyone, because of painful past experiences. Spence has his own painful past (i.e., ignoring his child in her first year of life because his wife wanted to continue her lavish lifestyle) , but together they help each other overcome their grief so they can begin a new life, all within three months of meeting. Like I said, things move very fast. If this book had been a Single Title novel, you can be sure we would've received lengthy flashbacks of Natasha's childhood in Ukraine and days in ballet, as well as Spence's marriage and past in music composition. This book contains none of the thorough research that Nora Roberts demonstrates when writing about the hobbies and professions of her characters, as she does in Single Title works, but the book does not lack because of it - it is simply solely focused on the romance. Nora Roberts' old writings rarely disappoints me, so I will come back for the remainder of the series after I chip away at some of the other books on my reading list.
