The second reading of the 4.50 from Paddington improved my first impressions of the novel. However, I still maintain my grievance of its slow-paced middle section. It had a brilliant start, very much exciting and promising to be one of the best in Marple series. But as the story progressed, it fell into a comfortable monotony. The regular police inquiries and a few twist and turns triggered by red herrings followed at a very slow pace until the excitement was renewed towards the end. Even after this second reading, I couldn't shake off my disappointment that the ending was rushed. It would have been much better if there was more time to let it all sink in. The final revealation of the criminal and the motive came as a surpise. I never saw that coming. I first thought perhaps I missed vital clues because my attention considerably wavered in my first reading, especially in the middle section. But even after paying closer attention this time, I didn't find any that would have given them away. It is a true testament to Christie ingenuity as a mystery writer. The story in 4.50 from Paddington is unique in the sense that the police investigation begins later in the novel, and that too after Miss Marple finds the body. The crime (committed in a passing train) was witnessed and duly reported by a friend of Miss Marple, but in the absence of a body, no investigation was opened. So it falls on Miss Marple to discover the body and opens up the path to the police investigation. Though in this case Miss Marple acts through a proxy (Lucy Eyelesbarrow), she does an admirable job. Once the police investigation begins, Miss Marple's role as a detective is slightly diminished, but it's her cleverness and astute observation of human nature that help the baffled police uncover the criminal. I still maintain that this could easily have been one of the best Marple stories if Christie has kept up the initial excitement throughout. However, I appreciated the novel more this time. I had better connection with the characters and I liked them in my own way. I wanted to return to the novel after enjoying the movie. Maybe that was a mistake since the movie version I watched was different from the original and more fast-paced. But on the other hand, I'm glad I took another chance to confirm myself of how I felt about it. In any case, I enjoyed the novel more this time. 3.5 stars. More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/
