If Ernest Becker can show that psychoanalysis is both a science and a mythic belief system, he will have found a way around man’s anxiety over death. Or maybe not. This book is a card trick that conjures sham religion out of sham science, with death playing a supporting role. Becker tells us that the idea that man can give his life meaning through self-creation is wrong. Only a “mythico-religious” perspective will provide what’s needed to face the “terror of death.” That’s an interesting idea, but Becker makes a steaming mess of it. He uses pragmatic theory to show that science and religion make equivalent claims. It also implies the mythico-religious outlook is true if it works. He runs a teeny-tiny risk of nihilism here, but hey, when was the last time that ever got anyone into trouble? So off he goes. First comes a hunt for human nature, an elusive quarry. Anything man does is part of his nature, so from the concept we can deduce only trivialities. But that doesn’t stop Becker, who at every turn represents his own alchemy as scientifically proven. From “the empirical science of psychology,” he proclaims, “we know everything important about human nature that there is to know...”. Oh, gosh. Already I’m getting nervous. What he knows is that meaning cannot be self-created because it amounts to a transparent act of transference. Man cannot mask mortality with some “vital lie.” Stronger medicine is needed, a belief system. For if a man fails to repose his psyche within such a system, the result will be the “annihilation” of the ego, whatever that means. Anyhow, it’s a proven fact. This stronger medicine needs the survival instinct, Becker’s terror of death. To establish it he mortifies the sex instinct. Several chapters document the dismal findings of psychoanalytic research. “Personality is ultimately destroyed by and through sex,” he reports. The sex act, or fornication as he calls it, is modern man’s failed effort to replace the god-ideal. Males with sex drives are guilty of “phallic narcissism.” Anything beyond missionary sex with the lights out is perversion. Not even love and marriage help. “We might say the more guilt-free sex the better,” he explains, “ but only up to a certain point. In Hitlerism, we saw the misery that resulted when man confused two worlds ... Personal relationships carry the same danger...” Becker smears the lens through which we view sex with a thin ordure, counseling us, in effect, just to close our eyes and think of the British Empire. This reductio of the sex drive thus exalts the survival instinct, and the author installs his psycho-mythic add-on to assuage the terror of death. Yet he concedes at the end that “... there is really no way to overcome the real dilemma of existence... ”, and baffled readers are left to wonder what the point of the book was. That’s the big picture. The details are quite odd. No biological basis is allowed for mental disorders; all are amenable to psychotherapy, even schizophrenia, whose sufferers need only organize their jumbled symbolism into a mythic structure. That no schizophrenic patient has ever been cured by psychoanalysis is beside the point. So much for if it works, it’s true. Nowhere does Becker mention women, either, except to leer four or five times over the fright of children upon seeing mommy’s nudity: the boys don’t want to be castrated and not even little girls want to be the sex of their mothers. An Original Guilt replaces Original Sin, and women are still on the hook for it. Then there’s Freud, “...a man who is always unhappy, helpless, anxious, bitter, looking into nothingness with fright ...”. Becker dwells for pages on the fact that Freud fainted, proving it was caused by his inability to accept religion and even linking Freud’s cancer to this. I myself have problems with Freud; so do many. But by the time this writer gets through there’s nothing left of Freud but litter. Then still, explaining the minds of “primitives,” Becker notes: “Many of the older American Indians were relieved when the Big Chiefs in Ottawa and Washington took control and prevented them from warring and feuding. It was a relief from the constant anxiety of death for their loved ones, if not for themselves.” In light of what actually happened to the Indians this comes as a cruelty that runs for cover under its analytic context. The author’s style, indeed, uses analysis as a shield for many of his little jabs. The largely general nature of his claims would have worked better in a long essay format, but the psychoanalysis does appear to buttress the more caustic remarks. Only psychiatry and religion can deal with the meaning of life, says Becker, who avoids philosophy. But this is one book where even a whiff of critical thinking helps, and not just with the reductio . Even assuming his premises, if truth really amounts to faith, then self-created meanings cannot be mistaken so long as man has faith in them. Most important, though, is a glaring lack of conceptual clarity. What exactly does he mean by religion and myth ? There’s a world’s difference between a theological and an idealistic basis for belief. The author never explains why he conflates those terms. As a result he cannot meaningfully elucidate a subjective experience halfway between the temporal and the spiritual. This vagueness hurts because the endeavor to state facts about another person’s mind isn’t as farfetched as it seems. Becker’s pragmatic brew, on the other hand, fizzes into nihilism. His claim to scientific proof of the psyche's functions is pseudoscience, and the pretense to authority has borne sour fruit. The false memory hysteria fanned by psychoanalysts 20 years ago derailed lives and careers, and sent innocent people to prison. And the author adds not one new insight on the subject of death, although I can’t deny the entertainment value of Victorian clichés dressed in psychedelic drag. Unwilling to acknowledge either science or religion, The Denial of Death is neither fish nor fowl, but rather a foul and fishy fraud seasoned with petty barbs. Cautious readers will want to step back and let the white suits decontaminate this metaphysical meth lab and its doubtful dregs.
