*Independent Reading Project* Dead Girls Don't Write Letters written by Gail Giles is a very catchy book. It's been a while since i haven't read it. This book is also confusing since it's mysterious and while you are reading you have to keep up with it. The main character, Sunny, was living with her whole family but was never feeling loved by her parents. Unfortunately, Sunny's sister, Jazz, was said to be one of the people who didn't survive this fire in her college. Before this fire Sunny and Jazz didn't have a very good relationship. They would always argue. When the family was told that Jazz was dead, the parents got really heartbroken and devastated. A few days later, Sunny received a letter from "Jazz". In this yellow letter, written in Jazz's handwriting and ink, she stated that she was not dead and that in reality she had gone to a trip. It also said that she was going to come home the next day. This startled Sunny because it didn't seem reasonable for her to do that plus, she was enjoying herself without Jazz. When "Jazz" arrived home Sunny still couldn't believe it but her parents did and gave her a great welcome. Sunny started seeing that even though this "Jazz" looked like the real Jazz there was something very fishy about this one. "Jazz" seems to know everything about this family but she has her own secrets. That's when Sunny suspects that this "Jazz" is an impostor. It's up to Sunny to prove that fact so she always kept her eyes wide open. In the end we see how she has tried to persuade her parents that she is an impostor and that the real Jazz is dead. We also get to see that in the end Sunny receives a letter. What this means is that everything that she has been saying and seeing is actually all part of her imagination. She has some mental problems. I recommend this book to all the mystery lovers. If you have read the book Catcher in The Rye, i would say it is kind of similar specially in the end. This book makes you want to read none stop so that you could figure out if what Sunny was saying is true or false. There are many details to prove that she is or that she isn't. This book can also be self relating since all families have problems. Sunny's mother was using anti depressants and her father was a drunk. If you want even more details then I would suggest to read this suspenseful story. :) This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
