The edition I read came with an introduction by the author in which he wrote: ...we live in a world ruled by fictions of every kind - mass-merchandizing, advertising, politics conducted as a branch of advertising, the pre-empting of any original response to experience by the television screen. We live inside an enormous novel. It is now less and less necessary for the writer to invent the fictional content of his novel. The fiction is already there. The writer's task is to invent the reality. In the past we have always assumed that the external world around us has represented reality, however confusing or uncertain, and that the inner world of our minds, its dreams, hopes, ambitions, represented the realms of fantasy and the imagination. These roles, it seems to me, have been reversed... A few years ago a group of young men deliberately piloted aeroplanes into a number of buildings in the USA killing all in all 2,996 people. Aside from the considerable political fallout from this, a more everyday result of this was that people in the USA were understandably more jittery than usual about air travel and an increasing number turned to travel by road instead. However in that same year of 2011 a total of 32,479 people died on US roads in accidents, a death toll that had no political consequences what so ever. Deaths by homicide, which from time to time appears to bring out a burst of soul searching in the USA, come to only about half the number of people killed in road deaths. This mass slaughter on the roads was, is, in fact a phenomenon that is tacitly accepted as a completely normal part of everyday life in all countries. No army is mobilised, no mass public campaign, no presidential blue ribbon committee of Nobel prize winners and boxing champions. And of course even the number of road deaths are nothing compared to how effectively and efficiently we kill ourselves through the diets we pursue and the lifestyles we adopt. This to my mind is an illustration of what Ballard is writing about. Our daily reality is deeply weird, and weirdest of all we never notice it unless jolted by a sudden crash, forcing us to see life from a different perspective. In Ballard's case this came from his wartime experience in Shanghai described in Empire of the Sun when a middle class, colonial childhood was turned upside down by a war which revealed the artificiality of daily life. How we play out our scripted roles in a theatre wilfully blind to the props and flimsy stage sets that we mistake for a solid, unchanging bedrock to everyday life. This is a book in which you feel the alien nature of the cars, planes and ever growing networks of multi-lane roads that are so typical of our everyday existence and more to the point the alien influences that they have on our lives. The flyovers overlaid one another like copulating giants, immense legs straddling each other's backs (p59). Of course this is a man made and hence an artificial landscape but that misses the point, almost all the landscapes in Britain are man (and women) made, the camber of the fields, where trees are and where they aren't, the sunken stony paths, the line of the rivers and the absence of marsh is all unnatural. The difference is that the London that Ballard describes in Crash is a roadscape designed for cars not people. A scaled up child's playmat, a mega toy garage, our squidgy human lives simply the figurines inside the cars that we exist to decorate, everything reduced to objects to be toyed with. In this game the only interest, the only lasting, intense contact comes from the crash which alone penetrates and abrades. In line with the whole perspective of the novel people and machines parallel each other, slide in and out of each other and come to represent a continuum of existence rather than separate states. Bodily fluids and mechanical lubricants mix together. The scarred, damaged cars and the battered, scraped people who drive them. The two seek a union, sex between people is an approximation of that union that increasingly doesn't satisfy the characters. The complete release, of course, can only be achieved in the fatal car crash. Given how the book is about the unleashing of new sexualities based on car accidents - the combination of human and machine in an accident, the new geographies of injured bodies etc - this isn't a book I'd recommend to those with innocent and sweet hearts or a tender disposition. The sex in the book, and there is a lot of it, is described from the narrator’s point of view, clinically, with a curious lack of passion as if describing cars parking and reversing as though the new sexualities have come at the cost of some deeper disengagement. If you have sat in the communion of our time in a modern cathedral, that is to say in a traffic jam on a major concrete intersection at the edge of a great city, then you can recognise the reality in Ballard's story. Recently I noticed someone reading Homo Faber on this site and that brought this book back to me with a different sharpness, there in Frisch's work we have technology..the knack of so arranging the world that we don't have to experience it. Ballard hears that and responds: yes, but. In this book to live is to experience. Closing off via technology one way of experiencing the world, in fact necessitates that people will seek to experience the world in new ways through technology, will we like it, probably not, are we in the end succeeding only in achieving alienation from ourselves and from our own potential for happiness? Probably, types someone sitting indoors interacting with different people via a keyboard and a screen!
