‘I dislike ninnyhammers, and that she must certainly be if she imagines for one moment that a man of his consequences would entertain the thought of marriage with her!’ The Nonesuch is a 1962 Regency romance set in 1816 London. The title is a reference to the hero’s perfection in sports and manners. Besides having an enjoyable mix of characters to love and loathe, the last quarter of the book has delightfully witty dialogue that made me laugh. Single, wealthy, philanthropic Sir Waldo Hawkridge (35) recognized as the Nonesuch by London society has just inherited a country estate, Broom Hall, from his late cousin Joseph. He intends to use this place for another of his charity orphanages, but no one outside his family knows his plan. When he visits this estate in Oversett, he brings his “especial charge,” an aristocratic cousin, Julian Lindeth (23) who “prefers the country to the ton parties.” While there overseeing the renovations to the hall, they meet several local families. In fact, everyone has been in an uproar over Waldo’s arrival, and they all wish to be the first to meet him. Mrs. Charlotte Underhill, owner of Staples House, has two older children, her son Courtenay (19) and daughter Charlotte (15), and an orphaned niece Tiffany Wield (17), and Tiffany’s governess Miss Ancilla Trent (26). And the local rector and his daughter Miss Patience Chartley. Among several other families and youths that aim to emulate Waldo’s Corinthian fashions. Waldo and Julian socialize by attending dinners, outings, and dances. Julian, as most males are, is enthralled by Tiffany’s unsurpassed beauty until he realizes her true nature. Ancilla is aware of Waldo’s strength upon their first meeting; she “beheld the embodiment of her ideal,” but she does not allow herself to forget her station as governess despite her birth. Waldo is attracted by Ancilla’s intelligence and sense of humor. Gentle amicable Patience is quietly overlooked. When Waldo and Julian don’t return to London as their cousin Mr. Laurence “Laurie” Calver expected, he tramps after them. Laurie, a young dandy whose had been unsuccessful in becoming independent and is accustomed to monetary loans from Waldo, was received coolly but allowed to stay. Laurie schemes about how to make Waldo beholding to him because he wants a loan of money to fund another venture that Waldo has already refused. During the social activities, the characters see conflict and jealous behavior emerge. “Hostesses who had previously vied with one another only in the mildest ways became imbued with the spirit of fierce competition.” Surpassing the behavior of the hostesses, Tiffany who expects to be heroine of every situation, displays her tendency to ‘indulge a fit of hysterics’ anytime she receives the mildest neglect. With Laurie scheming, Julian being fickle, Ancilla denying herself, Tiffany being ridiculous, and Waldo being secretive, it’s no wonder this story snowballs into misconceptions. Only by effort and chance does everything become settled. I found all the characters enjoyable, no matter if their behavior was positive or negative; they served a purpose in the story. I didn’t find their ridiculousness over the top because I knew it was meant as a caricature; besides, without it, the misconceptions in the last quarter of the book would not have had as much “fuel” to burn. The layered confusion set up pages of the wittiest dialogue I’ve read in a Heyer book. It is my favorite kind of humor in a romance, when characters have a conversation, and they are both talking about different topics yet don’t realize it at the time. As usual, the writing is superb, even with the moderate amount of Regency cant terms. Some dialogue between Waldo and one of his cousins got a little muddled because I didn’t know the cant terms used, but it wasn’t in parts that were vital to the story. However, I got a good laugh from the cant! “Ape your modes,” “We are in the Basket,” “Top-of-the-Trees,” “I cry craven!” “Take a damper!” “Tulip of the first stare,” – oh, a fav of mine – “Vulgar mushroom!” The romance is quite chaste and the couple(s) likable but not outstanding individually. I liked that the hero(s) were not spoken of as the rakish type. The Nonesuch was simply a charming and witty book. I’ve added it to my favorite list for the fantastic ending and banter. It is a rare book that I tolerate to reread, but this is one of them.
