RATING 4.5 STARS The Ghost is a stand alone romance by Danielle Steel. I read this as part of my personal challenge to read one of my paperbacks off my shelf per month. This was originally written in 1997. I’ve had the paperback which I picked up at a book sale for probably twenty years. This completely took me by surprise. It’s actually two romances in one. You get the current couple, and through a set of journals, you also get the story of the woman the house was originally built for in the late 1700’s. I’m getting ahead of myself so let me explain. Charlie Waterston is forty two years old and is a successful architect in London. He’s been married for nearly ten years and thought it was a happy marriage. Until his wife informed him she was in love with someone else and wanted a divorce. Charlie’s world is turned upside down. He still loves his wife and is having trouble accepting everything. At the same time, his company is transferring him back to their New York office. Once in New York, the new office is not what he expected, and he is very unhappy there. So he took a leave of absence and traveled up the coast, ending up in the tiny town of Shelburne Falls, Massachusetts. A snow storm forces him to stop at a quaint B&B where he meets the elderly owner. As they become friends, she agrees to rent him her beloved chateau hidden in the woods, a place that holds deep meaning for her. Charlie feels it immediately, the presence of the woman the beautiful home was originally built for, and he knows he is home. Charlie is still struggling with his divorce when he finds a set of journals written by Sarah Ferguson, the woman who lived in his home two centuries ago. It tells of her flight from England, crossing the ocean and coming to a new land, alone, and starting a new life, where she would eventually meet the love of her life. It is through these journals that Charlie gains the strength to face his own new life. And gives him the courage to open his heart when he meets someone new, a woman who is also facing her own demons. As I read this, I first felt so much for Charlie and what his soon to be ex wife was doing to him. When he discovered and began to read the journals, I found myself grabbing this book whenever I had a few extra minutes to see what happened next in Sara Ferguson’s life. I was spellbound. Now that I’ve finished, I’m a bit of an emotional wreck! This is one of those books that will stay with me for a long time. There is a questionable use of the word, “and” throughout the story that bothered me a bit but I’m chalking that up to the fact that this is nearly thirty years old. This is a story of courage, strength, healing and love, both in the present day, and two hundred years ago. It’s a beautiful story that I won’t soon forget.
