I decided it was time to find out for myself what Machiavelli was about. After all, he is one of a small group of writers who have lent their names to an adjective in the English language (Dickens, Orwell and Kafka are others I can think of). “The Prince” is a short tract, and whilst it had its moments, I found much of it quite dull. I hadn’t expected that. In the edition I read, the translator says in a foreword that “my aim has been to achieve at all costs an exact literal rendering of the original, rather than a fluent paraphrase adapted to the modern notions of style and expression.” He argues that the conditions under which Machiavelli wrote meant he had to weigh every word very carefully, and we should respect that in any translation. Fair enough, but it does result in some archaic language. For example, at one point the text refers to the “foundations and correspondencies” of States. In the notes the translator explains that the original was “Le radici e corrispondenze” and that in modern English “corrispondenze” would probably be rendered as “relations with other States”. I suppose a translation in the style of this edition is truer to the period than one rendered into modern English. I think the book has limited relevance to today’s politics, at least in western democracies where the actions of governments are restrained by law. In Machiavelli’s time state power was exercised in arbitrary fashion. Probably the most relevant sections today are where Machiavelli discusses the necessity of a ruler projecting an image: “Everyone sees what you appear to be, few really know what you are” Machiavelli had a very cynical view of human nature, and personally I quite enjoyed his biting comments on this subject; “Because this is to be asserted in general of men, that they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cowardly, covetous, and as long as you succeed they are yours entirely”. Probably the best known part of the book is where he discusses whether a ruler should try to be loved or feared (he thinks that ideally, it should be both), but he thinks a ruler should take care not to be hated, adding that he won’t be unless he is rapacious of women and property (he clearly views women as “belonging” to their menfolk, an attitude that would have been typical of his time). To illustrate his case he suggests the execution of a family patriarch would lead to a ruler being feared but not hated, but the ruler would be hated if he robbed the family of their wealth, “men more quickly forget the death of their father than the loss of their patrimony.” Ouch! I understand that, despite his theorising, in his own time Machiavelli was rather unsuccessful as a diplomat. It’s a pity he never got to know of his worldwide fame today.
