Wonderful story with lively and interesting characters that is as entertaining nowadays as when I first read it 20 odd years ago. I have to admit it has been one of my favourites that I love rereading. No matter how many times I read it I always enjoy it from start to finish. This starts off with a fun scenario and continues to be interesting throughout. Just a lovely sweet intriguing romance that encapsulates a wonderful feel good factor that is seldom found nowadays. The Tallchiefs are a Native American family of five siblings who have suffered the worst sort of loss. The personalities of Duncan and Sybil are complex and both are untrusting due to their ex’s. Sybil has suffered something no woman ever should. She is a top genealogist researcher whose daughter is kidnapped, so she researches to hunt down the best person to get her back. This person is Duncan, the eldest Tallchief. He is a rancher who works quietly on the side doing specialised bounty hunts. All the Tallchiefs are fantastic trackers due to their father teaching them. The legends surrounding the Tallchief family grips you and intrigues at the same time. You also feel the pain they suffered due to the loss of their parents. Their quest for Una’s dowry is lovely. Sybil is such a strong and capable individual but you can see Duncan gives her a balance and strength. I loved the scene in the bar where Sybil has to step in. Duncan, OMG, tall dark and broody was written for him. But once again there are depths that slowly rise as Sybil and her gorgeous daughter slip into his life. All the characters draw you in but Duncan and Sybil have you cheering them on to their HEA. There is real interaction described and feelings portrayed in such a heart-warming way that you feel like you are part of the action. My only dislike is the parents. I cannot get my head around Sybil even wanting a relationship with her cold parents. Also a bit confusing as Sybil states the house is hers when she marries, but she was married to Frank for 6 years. I bought this book in paperback 20 years ago and still have it to this day. This series of books has moved through many houses and countries with me. Cannot wait to have them all in ebook format for easier rereading.
