Little Jamaica is a young girl who loves playing at the park. Whenever there is extra time, regardless of if she is alone or not, Jamaica will ride her bicycle to the park and swing on the swings, slide down the slide, or climb the jungle gym. One day, Jamaica is playing at the park alone after school when she comes across a small stuffed dog, worn from hugging, full of grass stains and missing a button nose. Jamaica quickly picks up the dog and places it into her bicycle basket, traveling home. At her house, her parents and brother quickly comment on the dog, even saying how it must belong to a girl “just like Jamaica”. The next morning, Jamaica decides to return the dog to the lost-and-found at the park, and the book continues with a somewhat clear ending that leaves the reader feeling both joy and pride for Jamaica. In Jamaica’s Find, author Juanita Havill provides a book packed with themes and lessons. The story explores human nature, in that Jamaica — just like any child — enjoys finding new things, especially toys. It explores how people are naturally inclined to take things for themselves, only to realize the repercussions later. Continuing with that theme of human nature, the book provides readers with a sense of empowerment in that it shows how rewarding it is to do the right thing. Jamaica is a strong, attractive character because of her innately good morals and sense of what’s right and wrong — she realizes the significance of her actions and decides to return the dog without any pressure from her parents. The illustrations in Jamaica’s Find are somewhat plain. They depict basic elements of the story — the physical characteristics of Jamaica and her family, the park, her house, and the stuffed dog. The color range is limited, although the details in Jamaica’s facial expressions — done in watercolor — show a high quality of craftsmanship and artistic skill. The illustrations are overall realistic and assist the text in displaying to the reader the specific qualities of the setting at hand. Overall, the story, told in third person, portrays a situation in which children may come across often in their lives, and teaches a universal lesson that both younger and older children can apply to many different circumstances. The simplicity and feel-good nature of this book make it a story that children continue to enjoy.
