The book that started my lifetime obsession with serialized Girl detective books. I had already read Nancy Drew when I discovered Trixie. Trix was far more appealing to me as she was younger and more accessible than Nancy who was elusively glamorous, poised, wore smart suits and drove a car. Trixie was a farm girl in "dungarees" who ride a bike or her horse as her mode of transport. Trixie, 13, exits in that fleeting period between childhood and teenagerdom, when girls and boys still co exist as friends and are not ready to be adults. Trixie is 100% a kid and a completely average in every way except for in her ability to solves mysteries. She's short and sturdy, clumsy, bright but a bad student, quick tempered, fiercely loyal, resourceful and happy. Trixie and her family which includes 3 brothers, live in a farmhouse called "Crabapple Farm", in a fictional town delightfully called "Sleepyside on the Hudson in upstate New York. She and her friends and brothers form a detective club called the "Bob Whites of the Glen". (One of her friends whom I particularly obsessed with is Di, the newly rich, Elizabeth Taylor-esque beauty with black hair and "flashing violet eyes"). I discovered Secret of the Mansion in an antique store when I was 11. The story is simple and perfectly formulated for pre teen readers. After unsuccessfully begging for a horse her own from "Moms", Trix spies a horse trailer outside a nearby empty mansion. The new tenants, the Wheeler are a rich and glamorous family from NYC with a pretty daughter Trixie's age. Trixie quickly labels Honey a priss for riding in fancy breeches but soon learns she has been sickly and sheltered, having been raised by her loyal governess Miss Trask. Honey and Trixie soon become best friends. Upon "exploring" (breaking into) an old miser's spooky mansion, the girls discover a teenage boy name Jim Frayne asleep on a mattress on the floor. It turns out Jim is the old man's grandnephew who had run away from his abusive stepfather. Local legend is Jim's miserly uncle hid a fortune in the mansion but it has never been found. The half a million dollars is eventually discovered to be stuffed in the old mattress that jim had been sleeping. Trite but satisfying. I would recommend the Trixie Belden series to any young girl. Put down that Twilight book, read Trixie instead.
