Dang those profligate "TwenCen" forebears of ours! They went and burned off the ozone layer and depleted the water tables and used up all the petroleum, and consequently just a few decades later people lead stunted lives, devoid of privacy and required by law to maintain a near-zero environmental footprint. Those who are smart wear goggles to protect their vision from "sleeting ultraviolet radiation" (and also to record, and to upload if they wish, whatever they see). That's the background situation. But now, researchers have noticed that there is a tiny but growing artificially created black hole orbiting the center of the Earth, thousands of miles below the crust. Had some clever idiot not put it there (assuming it's of human origin), civilization, or better yet "swarming, pestilential humanity" itself, could take a long-overdue exit, allowing Mother Gaia to recover and try again over the geological ages to come. But even that bet is off the table if this subterranean threat cannot be stopped: The entire planet will be swallowed up. The author, a scientist, mentions in a brief preface that the grim circumstances depicted here represent his best-case scenario for the near future (year 2038). I don't think he's seriously predicting a feral black hole, although no doubt something totally unexpected like that could very well show up at any time, either as a result of human stupidity or fate. Writing in 1990, he did project a course for the Internet that is very close to what it has become, as well as depicting users of that Net who publicly humiliate one another or appoint themselves agents of "the side of righteousness," justified in undermining the work of anyone who fails to meet their arbitrary standards. Kudos to Brin for that vision. But I think he's far more concerned about a near-term general decline, affecting not only the "Earth-rapists" who may deserve it but the Earth herself. As a personal aside, throughout my adult life I've worried about the numerous negative side effects of modern civilization -- air and water pollution, habitat destruction, vanishing species, over-fishing of the oceans, etc. etc. I've noticed, too, that concern for certain environmental issues is far more fashionable than for others, for reasons that don't seem closely related to the immediacy of the threat or our capacity to do anything about it, and suspect that some advocates may be motivated primarily by the perceived nobility they acquire from the cause. Then there's the self-reinforcing system in which government agencies pay researchers to provide data that justifies consolidation of more and more power by said agencies. So, despite acknowledging the importance of conservation and good stewardship, I also understand and sympathize with voices such as that of this online curmudgeon : "Let’s try to survive the complete, total, insane, idiotic, out of touch, killing, controlling, taxing assholes that run our governments by educating our fellow humans about REAL issues instead of scaring them silly and driving them insane with what is at best pseudo science and at worst the exact same thing the church did in the dark ages." Therefore, I decided to view Earth simply as sci-fi and not as a prophetic warning of dire times just around the corner. As a story, it has potential, although I'm not fond of the practice of using alternating chapters to cycle through a large cast of characters (interspersed in this case with what another reviewer calls "expositions and infodumps"). A third of the way into the book I still felt uncertain as to who were the main protagonists. Then I slapped my forehead and said, Of course. The Earth is the protagonist. Given that even its oceans are mere films of moisture in comparison with its massive bulk, individual humans rate about the same as bacteria. Among them are Alex, a very bright physicist who thinks at first that he's responsible for that black hole; Teresa, an astronaut who finds herself investigating whether some kind of conspiracy is afoot; Jen (Alex's grandmother), a biologist destined for a very unusual fate; Logan, a scientist who playfully tosses out a wild theory that prompts a surprise visit from a scary government representative; Nelson, an earnest young African with pet baboons; and a trio of reckless young men who reminded me somewhat of the misfits in A Clockwork Orange . (Actually, all of these characters are more likable than bacteria, even if none rises to the level of being a main character.) By the end of the second third of the book, I had wearied of the continual transitions between the many threads of the plot, and felt sure that Brin could have wrapped things up by now. I began taking away points for every page that did not obviously contribute to the story. The prose meanwhile was just passable, if you overlook occasional forays into meaningless jargon, such as: "The bogeys," Ruby said, referring to their unknown foes. "They're uniting on a lambda band now, fourteen hundred megacycles, with what looks like a Koonin-style metric impedance match." Say what? That sort of thing led me to think that perhaps instead of being published this work ought to have remained a cross-discipline creative writing project. I assume some actual science does underly the tale. But the business of dueling beams that cut through the Earth suggests the light-sabres in Star Wars , and while struggling down the homestretch to the finish I had the sense that I'd wasted far too much time on a geek's runaway fantasies.
