As I grew up during the 1990’s, I know for a fact that no one gave a shit about kids back then but the way the book’s supposed hero keeps dragging his murdered brother’s adoptive son, who is severely traumatized and non-verbal, across the country to active crime scenes, police questionings and new temporary residences is really taking the cake. Throughout the story, he is also very adamant about returning the boy to the orphanage from whence he came and nullifying the adoption as soon as he has caught the killer and hence has no more use of a witness. It is implied that he grows more and more attached to the boy as the story progresses, but it is never made clear if he actually decides to keep him around or not. Another big problem is Jake’s wife, Sally. The way she is written indicates that Charles King might not have the most positive view of women. She first meets Jake when he intervenes as she is being raped. She then becomes obsessed with him and basically stalks him until he gives in and three weeks later, they are married. This is not problematized at all. Just a fun, cutesy way for a couple to meet. She is also an aspiring crime writer and weaves in Jakes work-stories into her writing. She is unpublished and lacks representation but does not want to write an entire book until she has secured a publisher. She keeps sending chapters and getting rejection letters but feels it would be a waste of her time to actually finish the book until she is sure that it will get published. Seems like an unrealistic expectation to have as an aspiring writer. She gives up information about the case at a party which sets off a chain of events erupting with the police arresting the wrong man and closing the case, Jake getting shot and an author she wanted to help boost her literary career getting tortured and killed. She is also duped SO EASILY by the killer when he infiltrates a dinner party her parents are hosting. He offers to give her notes on her writing, and she immediately gives him a short story she’s been working on based on the goings-on of the book and by doing so helps the killer immensely with critical information. When Jake finally is about to confront the killer and take him by surprise, he is in the middle of “helping” Sally with her story and when she sees Jake with a gun, she gets hysterical as she thinks he’s just in a jealous rage about her spending time with another man. She proceeds to stop Jake which causes both Jake and Winston to get pretty badly beaten and hurt before they actually manage to get the upper hand. Ditsy dames, right? No, not right Charles King. Shape up!
