*** 4.75 *** A Buddy Read with the Fantasy Buddy Reads Group, because we love G. G. Kay! Have you ever read a book and felt completely inadequate to write a review for it? Not that the book was that overwhelming in scope or plot lines, nor because it tackled some deep philosophical issues whose gravity would be impossible to put in several paragraphs. The ineptitude I find myself in, is because this is the forth book written by Kay I have read in the last couple of months and with each volume I become more and more enamored with his way of balancing Historical Fiction, some Fantasy elements, Romance, and Artistic expression in a hybrid which could not be put into a box, but feels like each of its parent's genres most favorite child. Even his unique outlook on Historical Fantasy is not enough to explain the magic he has woven in his tales. It is the way he tells the story, with an obvious nod to the old Bards, but with an updated language, using a prose which is open for all levels of readers - from novices to sages, using finesse and complexity more in the plot-lines than in the way he conveys them, crafting characters whose personalities vary on the gray scale of attributes, none of them perfect, none of them completely villainous, and makes us care for them even when we don't particularly want to. His ability to use simple words and moments, in a sea of overwhelming action and intrigue, which are so devastatingly poignant and touching, that make you want to weep with their raw exposure of the humanity in everyone, big or small, significant or just one of the crowd... His biggest talent lays with the knowledge of how to employee the writing style of the old masters and amplify the effect with his ability to pull it back and punctuate it by stripping the prose down to bare bones in the most consequential of junctures. "..."“He was still on his feet, and before him was a man who stood in the path of...what? Of a great many things, his own dream of Gorhaut not least of all. Of what his home should be, in the eyes of the world, in the sight of Corannos, in his own soul. He had said this two nights ago, words very like this, King Daufridi of Valensa. He's been asked if he loved his country. He did. He loved it with a heart that ached like an old man's fingers in rain, hurting for the Gorhaut of his own vision, a land worthy of the god who had chosen it, and of the honor of men. Not a place of scheming wiles, of a degraded, sensuously corrupt king, of people dispossessed of their lands by a cowardly treaty, or of ugly designs under the false, perverted aegis of Corannos for nothing less than annihilation here south of the mountains.”..." As with the previous books, this one takes place in a Fantasy world, whose England, Normandy and Provence are reflected in Valensa, Gorhaut and Arbonne around the 11-13th centuries. It is inspired by the culture of Provence at the time of the Troubadours and the age of gallantry, leading to the first cultural introduction of love as that of a young man pining for a married woman of status, as the ideal for true love, even if it is unrequited... It also speaks of the very heavily Pagan and matriarchal culture of the land, despite the introduction of the more male-oriented and homogeneous. Once again, by invoking the history of the Albigensian Crusade in spirit, and the influence of the never ending wars between the Anglo-Saxons and Normans, as well as the later political maneuvers in order to bring the South to France, we are given a microcosm of those events served with the nuances of the eternal battle between the Feminine and Masculine, be it in human culture or in celestial divinity. G. G. Kay always gives us a juxtaposition between the Male and Female, but he never gives us his answers as to which side he is on, or does he push us into choosing. In my opinion, he makes a beautiful argument for their complimentary strengths and weaknesses, advocating in his unobtrusive way for the need of their balance. "..."“We must be what we are, or we become our enemies. ” ..." Equal to his incredible ability of finding beauty even in the ugliest of situations, Kay views the world with a dose of irony and cynicism, which attributes the Male and Female sides with as many devious and uncompromising choices for achieving their goals as their counterparts. They do not shy from using every weapon in their arsenal, be it a weapon, poison, sex, flirtation, deception or political manipulation, disfigurement or murder, each with equal ruthlessness, that we see they only differ in the manner they are performed and the ultimate ideal they strive for, but not in the paths of obtaining them... Women and men are equally beautiful, desirable, smart, talented and strong, the author being able to show us positive qualities even in the most despicable of characters, that every loss, no matter on which side, becomes a wound in the reader's heart... If I only had one wish, it would be for more authors to be as thoughtful and purposeful in the way they structure a story, so I may never ever again read a book which might let me down:):):) "..."“For all his frustrations and his chronic sense of being overburdened. He was proud of that; he’d always felt that it was worth doing a task properly if it was worth doing at all. That was part of his problem, of course; that was why he ended up with so much to do. It was also the source of his own particular pride: he knew--and he was certain they knew that there was no one else who could handle details such as these as well as he.” ..." Now I wish you all Happy Reading and may you always find what you Need in the pages of a Good Book!!!
