UNREDEEMABLE MALE LEAD SPOILERS AHEAD I'm really trying to resist having a rant about this book. I've heard much about this author and being a lover of historical romances I'm not sure how I've not read anything by her before, needless to say this is my first and last book by her. Gavin Montgomery is in love with Alice Valence their secret meetings cannot go on, marriage is what he wants to the beautiful and doe eyed Alice. But what Gavin doesn't realise is that she has no intention of marrying him, she wants a title, money and lands. But with little or no dowry she must rely on her beauty. So she coaches her drunken father to refuse Gavin's request for her hand then plays the tearful victim to his face. She's cold and manipulative, but Gavin is blind to this. When a rich Earl asks for her hand she's ecstatic. Gavin in turn is offered the hand of Judith Revedoune, she's the daughter of an Earl and will bring many riches and lands to the marriage, no one knew that she existed she has been hidden away from the outside world as her father despises females. But with the death of his two sons he will rely on her to give him grandsons. Judith who had always been meant for a covent is devastated that she is to be married Judith does not lay eyes on Gavin till the day of their wedding, but is pleasantly surprised at this tall handsome man who is to be her husband. In turn Gavin is overwhelmed by Judith's beauty. Things look bright till during the wedding festivities she overhears Gavin promising his undying devotion to Alice. Judith confronts him, but all she gets for her trouble is a backhander and to be forced on her wedding night. My goodness this book is awful. The villainess Alice was OTT and better suited to a part in a pantomime. Judith was a better character, but even she grated on my nerves, even after he had forced her on their wedding night she melted into a puddle every time he touched her. But it was Gavin that I hated the most, he was as thick as two short planks. How on earth he didn't see Alice for what she was beggared belief. It never seemed to occur to him that giving it up to him without marriage meant that she was doing the same with numerous other men was so annoying. Worse when others tried on many occasions to set him straight he wouldn't hear a word against her. I kept hoping he would fall off his horse and break his neck.
