Actual rating is 3.5/5 stars, but mostly reflects only my dislike for the whole Demelza storyline in this book. Because yes, I'm that pissed about all of that. So I'm going to get that out of the way right away. I loved Demelza so much until now, she was my pride and joy and I felt like this storyline achieved nothing but make me love her less and I cannot for the life of me understand why it was good to have this storyline in the book. Ross and Demelza are supposed to be the main pairing of these books, so why do you make both of them cheat at one point or another? With Ross, I understood. That was four books and several years in the making, it was the very basis of the beginning of the story. I didn't agree with Ross doing it, I certainly didn't like the way it was done and how Ross went about it and pretty much raped Elizabeth (more on that later), but still, that was a decision of the author I understood. This, I could not. I felt like Demelza turned into a hypocrite after her reaction to Ross cheating and I felt like, unlike Ross, she didn't even feel bad about the cheating or the fact that she hurt Ross deeply in the process. Ross did wrong too, he cheated as well, but at least he fucking felt bad about it, not went on and then cried his eyes out to Demelza when Elizabeth married George. Honestly, this storyline achieved nothing but make me like Demelza less and like Ross even more. Just- gaaaaah. I'm so mad and pissed about this storyline. Also, I sort of didn't understand why Demelza fell for Hugh? I understand that there was a great physical attraction, but I didn't see anything else and I could not for the life of me understand this undying love she felt for the guy. Welp. I would have been happier if this ended with Demelza realizing that she loved Ross more and that she send Hugh on his way, but I guess him dying was ok too. At least I won't have to put up with him anymore. And now that that's out of the way, let's get into the next episode of Enci ranting about whether or not Ross cheating in the fourth book was rape. Lemme tell you, it was. But I think I said that enough times already. The reason I'm bringing this up again (I promise, it was not my intention in the beginning of the book) are because of two quotes that so contradict what the author says, that it was an act of love and totally consensual. First Ross says: "I have an uneasy conscience about her for the two misdeeds I committed against her. One, I took her against her will - though in the end I do not believe it was so much against her will.[...]" Even Ross says that he took her against her will. Yes, he adds that he doesn't think it was so much against her will in the end, but I honestly didn't feel like he was so fucking sure of that and the fact that 99% of the time she struggled and at the very end she didn't doesn't mean that it's not rape. It is. And the other thing was a bit later, when Elizabeth confronts George about his suspicions. She says: "Listen to this, George. Listen to it, I say! I swear on this bible, as a believing Christion and in the hope of my ultimate salvation, that I have never, never given my body to any man except to my first husband, Francis and to you, George. [...]" Now, I know that a lot of people might understand this as Elizabeth lying to George just to ease his mind and save her marriage - but if you think of it, she didn't say she never slept with anyone. She said she never gave her body freely. And what Ross did was take it against her will. Which is a nice way of saying he raped her. And I know this is all speculation but these two quotes were pretty much screaming rape for me so I just had to talk about that because it bothers me and pissed me off so much that what happened is even considered anything but rape. Moving on. Even though I gave this book a 3.5 stars rating, most of the book was pretty fucking good and I enjoyed the shit out of it. Like I said before, that rating is mostly because of that stupid Demelza storyline and I couldn't have given the book a higher rating with a clear conscious. I loved Ossy as a character and his entire storyline. He's a psycho and his obsessive behavior was so well written and I loved reading about him so much, especially because in the very beginning I thought I was going to hate him with passion, and he turned out to be one of the most interesting character for me. I know how his story will go in the next book and I can honestly say that I can't wait to read all about it. Also, Morwenna was fucking badass with him. That conversation they had at the end of the second part of the book was fucking amazing, I loved it so much I just can't. I seriously loved Morwenna sticking up for herself and telling him off. I also really loved Sam and Emma's story and their slowly developing romance. Sam is a cutey so he deserves all the love and I can't wait to see more of them. But the high of the book for me was Elizabeth comforting George about his suspicions. Going into this book I thought what Agatha threw it in George's face was going to be in the forefront of the book, and it was, though not in a way I was expecting it. It was interesting to see George doubting himself and Elizabeth and seeing a little bit of his vulnerable side, one that we didn't really get to see yet. And then that entire scene happened, and I was eating up every single word. It was so nicely put together and I just-- ahhhhhh, it was just amazing, ok? And I wish I could say that I can't wait to see that soon in the new episodes but based on what I saw in the first episode of season 3, they're probably going to butcher the whole thing, they already kind of butchered it, so ugh. I'm pissed about it. Another great scene was the vote at the end of the book. I was sitting on the edge of my seat and laughing out loud at the same time. I love how Winston Graham can build up suspense and weave all these stories together in such nice and awesome climatic scenes. Basically, I really loved that book, except for that one fucking storyline that destroyed Demelza's character for me. Oh, and I wish we would have gotten more Dwight and Caroline, but I guess I can't have anything, right?
