In general, I am very reluctant to take on a series read. What often happens is that you begin the series with great expectations and as it progresses, the writer gets lazy, runs out of storyline, or loses touch with his characters...like a tv series that is on its last leg and is just inventing a reason to continue. THIS IS NOT THE CASE with Winston Graham. He is such a skillful and thoughtful writer that he never gives us an inconsistency in the character that cannot be explained or that is foreign to what he has already told us about them; he finds new plot twists that are in total keeping with the realities of life and seem brilliantly surprising; and he adds new characters when they make sense and has them interact with the old characters without overshadowing them. Everything is so seamless that you cannot believe he did not envision this story in its entirety from the first written line. I guess it is obvious that I am a fan. The Four Swans is one of the best books in this series, but then I say that about each one as I close it, because this series is always building momentum. It cannot be read in anything other than chronological order and it is twelve books total. So, it is an investment, but oh my does it pay dividends. Ross and Demelza Poldark are so real to me that I feel I know them intimately, but along with my attachment to the Poldarks themselves, Graham has given us the perfect foil in George Warleggan, a second villain who, for me, defines evil and makes me appreciate that George isn’t quite the bottom of the sludge of life barrel. Elizabeth, whose beauty might be stunning but whose soul needs a little work, epitomizes the woman who has it all and then finds that it is nothing. Dr. Dwight Enys, with whom I am hopelessly enamored, the good man but not the perfect one, and his spirited and witty Caroline; Morweena, Drake and Geoffrey Charles, Sam and Emma, and Hugh Armitage, who managed to break my heart and show me that a sad heart is large enough to include more than one love. I must say that the joy of reading these books has been increased tenfold by the sharing of it with the wonderful ladies of the RFP group. I sat up way past my bedtime to finish this novel, because I knew that putting it down would ensure that I got no sleep in any case. So, I am on to the next volume and hopes that Mr. Graham can sustain this wonderful ride for me until we reach the farthest shore. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
