This is Henry Miller, narrating from the inside of his beautiful buzzing soul, details of his personal disappointment. The US is dying having scarcely lived. He is angry. As if he was lord of some manor come back after a decade of neglect to find his ancestral home a wasteland. He is storming with complicated personal rage about it. It is hard to see what responsibility he has himself for this outcome. Does he see himself anywhere in it? It seems as though the concept of this book was solid, but he veered so far into a refined idea and no one sought him out to salvage it. He rolls on, to where it can be hard to see where you are in it, until suddenly you are in the middle of a set piece whose characters appear and whose origins will remain obscure. Mostly what we receive here is his unmitigated bitterness at his struggle as a man in this world without the respect or really the admiration of the powerful and mighty which he so obviously (and somewhat painfully) craves. (To drive home this point, in the afterward he makes a list of those Guggenheim Awardees that stood in front of him and received awards the year he made his application to write this book. It's mostly scientists, economists, and so forth -- lesser creatures than artists is the implication. The point is to urge you to register a written complaint about passing him over for the honor he so obviously deserved above these callow narrow academics. So confident you share his view on the matter he helpfully provides the Guggenheim director's mailing address.) Miller is a patriarch, a dispatched, discarded and peripatetic one for sure, but he loves us, his errant readers. He is blessed with insight and understanding, and willing to generously share it with us in the form of a series of strenuously expressed warnings. He doesn't want us to be driven to insanity by the falseness of the ever encroaching commercial world which dominates the US and threatens to dumb down "civilization" everywhere. His subject is the creation of empire and it's effect on the Natural Man. We didn't do it right in America. Vive la France! He is longing to be considered prodigal and therefore potentially in receipt of some long withheld fortune to which he so obviously feels entitled. He doesn't actually want to come back and run anything. This is not James Baldwin returning to America from a fruitful career as an artist in Europe out of a sense of personal responsibility for the outcome of the fight he left behind to explore his voice. This is instead the absent father who remembers he had a family and returns to see what's become of it since he left. There are few women in his book that merit more than a sentence or two. That is irritating. He alludes to great stories he could tell, but doesn't. That is also irritating. I could write an entire review about the racism of this book, but in the end it's like having dinner in the old folks home with your uncle Bob; what do you say to dinosaurs like this? And of course, more pertinently this particular dinosaur is actually dead. His version of racism lives on and doesn't seem to die off. But we knew that and know it better now then ever. What is the best hackneyed phrase here?: He was "a creature of his time"? He 'means well'? Like all white people in America, he fucks all this shit up from top to bottom. It could make the book unreadable for some of you. His trip across the US is a couch surfing type affair, with him setting up with a series of boon companions (read: drinking buddies) a hateful device which allows him to quote himself liberally from their conversations. He looks often with naked adolescent hatred at America. To him what is marvelous about it is at best is ignored, at worst wrecked or at least (in his telling) spoiled. As, by implication, he was himself. There are some passages of poignance and clarity about the many hypocrisies and lost opportunities of The American Dream and I got something out of reading it. Despite his lack of rigor, (He seems to say "Details? Why bother! You know what I'm talking about here!" *Wink, nod*) There is a recounting of a dinner party in Hollywood that he stumbled into that is priceless. There are some dark themes about American life that will look extremely accurate from this point in time but so few of them. You still need to read DeTocqueville. He tells you who his artistic heroes are and details his FEELINGS about their greatness. Trust me you've never heard of them and never will. He choses friends first and then finds the light in their work; which in itself is endearing. He probably was a generous, if occasionally domineering, friend. Miller is a crank, a morsel of his time, the "Man Artist". Muscular, freebooting, charming, and a bit of caustic narcissism thrown in for good measure. But I'm a lifelong fan of his and won't give him totally up for all the doting on him I did in my 20's. A precursor of the Beats, he is better then most of them. He prides himself on being unabridged, idiosyncratic, a bit of a lovable monster. This book is about him, nothing but him, wandering through a few episodes in this country which he barely fathoms. America is a mirror and what he sees in it finally is mostly Henry.
