Like a lot of other reviewers I think I would have given this a 3.5 stars out of 5 but I couldn't quite nudge it over the line to 'really liked it'. Yes I 'liked it' definitely, but like many theorists on this topic, Seltzer gets stuck on whether murderers and victims are both alike. This conflation of victims and murderers is a popular one, especially among intellectuals so if you are looking to write your thesis on how degraded and horrible everything is, society and all the people it swallows up on a daily basis then really this is a book for you. Ever since Charlie Manson hit the scene this is a popular take, evidenced by such luminaries as Žižek and all those Foucault types, that we are all equally awful. Certainly so far as descriptions of modern society can go, there is a lot here that rings true, even if it is ultimately hollow, particularly about the 'statistical' person and systems of communication being self-generating - Seltzer actually cites Niklas Luhmann the famed German sociologist who developed his theory of autopoietic social systems so I will give him that. Yet I don't think Seltzer gave Luhmann much more than a cursory glance, otherwise he would know that Luhmann's theory on society does not really support the thesis of this book - i.e. "the inseparability of materialities of communication and forms of violence in machine culture[.]" If Seltzer had read Luhmann more closely, he might understand that for Luhmann, communication and society are not the same as "materialities" ... so to paraphrase Luhmann, 'we can talk using a telephone, but a telephone is not communication.' Ultimately, Seltzer falls victim to the same collapse of distinctions which the serial killer experiences, a failure to accurately separate fantasy from reality, or society from violence. Certaintly violence may function as communication, as we can see with terrorism for example. Yet the bodies of its victims are not identical or 'inseparable' from the human psyches (or 'psychic systems' as Luhmann calls us) which are fundamentally located outside of society according to Luhmann's theory. Serial killers and theorists have trouble understanding 'interiors', so they dissect - people in the case of serial killers and society or 'subjects' in the case of theorists like Seltzer. These 'interiors' or psychic systems which are so troubling for Seltzer and society remain forever unknowable or indescribable. When Seltzer speaks of 'interiors' then he is confusing 'psychic systems' with 'descriptions' of those inner states of consciousness, which as Luhmann points out, remain forever a mystery, no matter how many MRI scans one cares to run. From this failure to truly appreciate the distinction or 'separability' between society and individuals, Seltzer arrives at this popular notion that inside 'we are all killers' and all that separates us from them is the thin line between fantasy and reality, etc. etc. ad nauseum. I will only say this idea is tiresome and ultimately shallow. I'm writing a little sloppy now so forgive me. I don't have time anymore for scholarly analysis. As for whether we are all the same, all the murderers and victims equally alike, I think Primo Levi refutes this notion quite successfully, and that's all I will say. So far as you can throw Foucault and Žižek and all those other intellectuals, I will say yes this is worth a read if you are studying modern society, but if you are wondering about God or truth then look elsewhere. Show more
