this is first time I've read this book! mary anne's perpetual kitten, tigger, disappears. the baby-sitters (and the kids they sit!) all go into overdrive trying to find him. meanwhile logan is being a jerk to mary anne. these plotlines resolve themselves in frustrating ways that don't leave me feeling any better. the end. highlights: -mini animal rights activists: mary anne is happy that dawn calls tigger a someone, not a something. cats are people too. -jamie newton calls tigger "pounsive" -- I'm definitely going to use this in the future. -a really cute perkins girls chapter, where claudia babysits for them and they know way more old songs than she does. they want to sing elvis and claudia notes that she thought his name was elbow presley. -when logan the jerk tells mary anne she is too sensitive and that she's acting like a girl, mary anne says there's nothing wrong with being sensitive and that she IS a girl. heck yes! lowlights: -logan is an unacceptable level of dick in this book. that plotline gets resolved, at least sort of, but it doesn't make me feel any better. he is bummed that he is getting kicked off the baseball team. okay. that makes sense when you think about how preoccupied he's seemed. but that doesn't explain him telling mary anne she's overreacting when she says tigger's disappearance is the worst thing that's happened to her. that doesn't make it better that he calls her sensitive (meaning it as a bad thing) and says she's being such a girl. logan, screw you. -mary anne says tigger doesn't wear a collar with tags. and she lets him roam free outside. and he's a kitten. I kind of think his getting catnapped is mary anne's own fault. -the bruno parents only vaguely punish kerry and then they let her get a pet. she's proven that she's responsible enough to keep a pet, by keeping tigger alive and fed and all, but YOU ARE REWARDING HER AWFUL BEHAVIOR. maybe she can take care of another living being, but that doesn't mean she's responsible enough to not bring a furry animal (that her brother is allergic to) into her house, and it doesn't mean that she's responsible enough to not steal someone else's pet. bruno parents, you are bad parents. kristy's cafeteria food description: -'"anyone care for some fish eyes and glue?" she asked, holding out her dish of tapioca pudding.' one claudia outfit: - "Like a loose blouse with a fake coat of arms on it worn over a very short black skirt. Around her waist, a scarf. On her feet, short black boots. Dangling from her ears, dinosaurs. And her hair might be piled on top of her head and held in place with hairpins that look like seahorses." one snack in claudia's room: -double stuf oreos under her bed
