Hannah Lovekin has always been a little shy about commitment. So when Jason, her boyfriend of five years, pops the question, Hannah turns him down. When Jason becomes engaged to another woman a short time later, Hannah looks at herself a bit more critically. She asks Jason for another chance, and the shell-shocked guy pulls out his only defense - Hannah needs to go back and clear up unresolved issues from her past, namely her relationship with her ex-husband. Hannah married James when they were both very young, and split up after a big misunderstanding and a tumultous fight. Due to immaturity and wrong ideas about their relationship, Hannah has never tried to clear the air. Now is her big chance. What will happen if James doesn't want to revisit the past? Is there hope for Hannah to have a committed relationship? Being Committed is a gem! It's funny, sad and thoughtful, all rolled up into one, a book that I did not want to end. Hannah is legitimately afraid of commitment, and the reader discovers the reasons behind this right along with her. The supporting characters, from Hannah's boss to her parents, her brother and his wife, all bring additional depth and dimension to the story. This book is laugh-out-loud hilarious. I woke my husband up twice when I dissolved in giggles about something Hannah did or said. The humor tempers the serious nature of some of the deeper emotional struggles. Anna Maxted is known for her wit and warmth. This is the first of her books I have read - after turning the last page, I rushed out and found two others. The brisk pace keeps the reader entranced, and multiple related storylines all come together for a satisfying ending. Besides being entertaining, the story is a lesson in self-examination, i.e. looking at our past critically to see how it shapes our present. Maxted handles some tough issues in a lighthearted, yet sensitive manner. Whether you are a longtime fan or just discovering this author for the first time, I heartily recommend putting Being Committed at the top of your 'to be read' list.
