Small reflections on a small – but highly enjoyable – book from Alexander Theroux. Treat yourself to a three-course feast of delicious factoids, anecdotes, and ruminations on the colors Blue, Yellow and Red, in these three essays compiled in one volume, The Primary Colors. Theroux draws from movies, fiction, poetry, history, myth, anthropology, chemistry, physics, music, religion – well, you get the idea, it's Theroux. Theroux begins with the color Blue: “Blue is a mysterious color, hue of illness and nobility, the rarest color in nature. It is the color of ambiguous depth, of the heavens and of the abyss at once; blue is the color of the shadow side, the tint of the marvelous and the inexplicable, of desire, of knowledge, of the blue movie, of blue talk, of raw meat and rare steak, of melancholy and the unexpected (once in a blue moon, out of the blue).” [1] When discussing the color Red, Theroux asks the burning questions, things we've all wondered: “But could someone straighten me out here? The Thing – a 'super carrot' of a vegetable – in the movie of that name has no blood ('no arterial structure'), yet it needs it in order to live, or so it's explained, and so it goes about its mad plasmatic way killing. Why?” [178] And, “In 1923, when the picture The Spanish Dancer was being shot, the popular but imperious Pola Negri stopped production and left thousands of extras in the film waiting because the red of her satin dress ruffles failed to match the red of her slippers. (It was a black-and-white film.)” [243] “War is red. Soldiers in India habitually carry red amulets as preparation for death, and Fiji islanders paint themselves red after killing a man. The combat uniforms of the Spartan army -- right down to their leather shoes -- were red, their rough tunics of wool dyed with madder. [214] As I read, I found myself playing a mind game with Theroux to see if I could think of a prominent cultural reference to the color at hand that he might have missed. And in fact, he is so thorough in mining his examples, both familiar and obscure, I thought of only two. In the case of the color yellow, it was Aldous Huxley's first novel 'Crome Yellow' that came to mind – Theroux didn't mention it. For the color Red, it was the dreaded event-stopping Red Flag in auto racing (thinking here of my own passion, F1) that came to mind – Theroux didn't explicitly cite it, though, to be fair, he did proclaim red as signaling stop. Does that count? As with any Theroux I've read, fiction or non-fiction, I was dazzled by his erudition, dictionary-bound by his expansive vocabulary, and always entertained and a bit more enlightened. Great fun!
