When I read a Simak story, I imagine the following scene. Clifford and I are seated in rocking chairs on a large wraparound porch, at a rustic log cabin deep in the Wisconsin woods. He has a piece of grass that’s gone to seed in the corner of his mouth. It’s past dusk and we’ve just finished a fine dinner of venison and root vegetables. A wisp of smoke rises from the stone chimney, as Clifford likes to keep a modest fire burning continuously. You can smell the fire in the air along with the earthy and musty scents of the deep forest. A guitar and a shotgun lean against the cabin behind us. I ask Clifford to tell me another tale. He refuses at first, but after some requisite pleading, he begrudgingly agrees. As he tells the tale, first the forest, then the cabin dissolve and the story plays out all around us . . . “When it came to hope, you do not write off even the faintest hope of all. You held on to every hope; you cherish all, you let none get away.” This is not Simak’s best book. It’s not in the top five. I’m sure many would dislike it as it has some flaws. But I enjoyed its leisurely pace and Simak’s trademark ability to evoke nostalgia. It reminds me of his ‘Cemetery World,’ as both stories have a similar structure of introducing a set of mysteries, then following an odd cast of characters as they journey to the answers. For me, the best parts are the travels through nature as Simak is at his best describing the Midwest wilderness. His love of nature shines through his prose. The story is set thousands of years in the future on a post-apocalyptic earth. All technology has been destroyed and mankind is in a dark age with scattered settlements and roaming bands of barbarians. The beginning of the tale does indeed establish some mystery and wonder and provides the curiosity to carry us through a subdued wilderness journey, where the main character picks up a band of odd fellow travelers along the way. It delighted me that the University where I teach (University of Minnesota), plays a key role in the tale. It’s not only the last remaining University, but possible the last remaining stronghold of intellectuals and cache of knowledge. However, I wasn’t impressed with Simak’s character building in this book as some of the characters border on silly. The ending is rich with ideas and provides plenty of closure, but it’s abrupt and more telling than show. The book begins and ends with large sections of exposition that first explain the world-building and at the end, explain the resolution of the mysteries. But a passage at the end of Chapter 15 might sum it up best: “It doesn’t matter, laddie boy,” she told him. “It’s been a lovely trip.” I love the serenity and melancholy that Simak educes. I enjoy his descriptions of nature. I like the questions he asks and appreciate his storytelling skill. A wonder-filled adventure, set in a relatively tame post-apocalyptic future, where the journey exceeds the destination. Three and a half stars.
