'The Wandering Hill', book 2, has a much different tone than the first book, 'Sin Killer', in the Berrybender series. It reads more like straightforward western adventure romance, similar to 19th century American dime novels https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weste... , but modernized by contemporary scholarship. The author's intentional undertone of satire in the first Berrybender book is completely gone. What remained of the Berrybender party journeyed across America from the Missouri to Yellowstone (gentle reader, we are not told of this trip). As the book opens, the Berrybender troupe are resting amongst new friends, primarily mountain men, at a Yellowstone River trading post. One of those new friends is Kit Carson! However, dear reader, in this more realistic rendering of Carson, he is more of a man than manly. The intent of the mountain men is a trip to an annual meeting of fur sellers and buyers, particularly the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, but the word 'intent' feels almost like too strong of a word to use. The fur animals have almost been trapped out, so the yield is low. The men have been noticing also everywhere they travel they run into people. Besides other mountain men, the west is full (to their eyes) of peculiar European aristocrats, painters and proto-scientists. Indians are about as well, but they are becoming an anachronism already, shadows of their former selves. The chapters alternate between viewpoints of the Berrybender party characters and various Indians, and through their observations we learn a bit about the social customs and historical adventures of 1833. The true main character, though, is Travel in the American West. While using humor is often how these hardy people handle the terrors and adversarial conditions of living together in the Wild, many of them are mourning how the territories are changing. Mourning is not for the Berrybenders, however. The surviving family members are continuing to follow Lord Berrybender as he struggles through an alcoholic fog to remember the point of his vacation in the West - hunting and shooting everything that moves while camping out. Tasmin, spirited eldest daughter, is continuing to stir up trouble with her feisty ways. The fact she is pregnant barely registers - until, whether she, and especially her mountain man husband, Jim Snow, wants it or not, the baby is born! This book is a fun informative entertainment, but I would recommend reading 'Sin Killer' first, although it is not entirely necessary. However, reading in order provides the backstory which does fill in a bit more information about the Berrybenders. Personally, I am finding the Berrybender characters very comic and two-dimensional, but The Dying Wild West Adventure is the real story.
