I had to be very careful with this review because I had to remember that I was reviewing the book and not assessing Eldridge Cleaver as a person. But in all fairness, I have to say the book was great. However, Eldridge Cleaver was a highly confused, highly disturbed, extremely awkward predator who later became a drug addicted contradiction. But I digress. The book. That's what I'm reviewing. I have a hard time considering this an autobiography. Although it contains a wealth of exposure to many of Eldridge Cleaver's life experiences, it really is a collection of essays/letters he wrote while incarcerated, therefore making it less of an autobiography and more of a collection of essays. Consider Martin Luther King, Jr's Letters from a Birmingham Jail. That wasn't classified as an autobiography. Just a book of letters. That's what this is, too. But if we are to go forward with considering this an autobiography, it certainly is an autobiographical prose examining and revealing the development of Cleaver's soul rather than simply his being. Therefore, the title Soul on Ice is appropriate and reflective of the contents of this book. This book is possibly one of the most complex books I've ever read. Not complex in the writing style or in terms of semantics. Complex in terms of how I felt throughout the read. Complex in terms of finding myself highly disturbed by some of the content, while loving the book at the same time. I've settled on the idea that Eldridge Cleaver was nuts and genius at the same time. To be honest, I am still unsettled with the fact that I absolutely loved this book. A book written by a homophobic rapist. But I do. Here's what drove me to love this book: 1. Cleaver's pure and unapologetic honesty 2. The book is incredibly well-written 3. Several aspects of the book are eye-opening and informative 4. The book was written at the right time. A very important time in American History 5. The perspective it offers to the reader. Whether you agree or disagree with it, this book does an amazing job offering a pure and unfiltered presentation of Cleaver's perspective. How you choose to swallow his perspective is your own business, but the book allows a clear look into it and allows room for the reader to react whether they are shocked, pissed off or in agreement. I was never in agreement, but I appreciated the opportunity to explore why I wasn't. He gave me many reasons to support this. 6. And my favorite aspect of the book is that it demonstrates my firm belief that education (whether formal or informal) shapes how one experiences the world. It was beautiful to see how exposure to different ideologies and theories helped shape Cleaver's life experiences Not that his soul was beautiful, but the process of soul-shaping is, in general, and is demonstrated so wonderfully in this text. I'm not cool with Cleaver, but I'm cool with this good book. Sounds weird. I know. I'm still trying to come to terms with that.
