It is a life sentence, seven decades long, the week that Dr Adam was talking about. I'm living it, dreaming it. [...] I run my bare hands over my ruined body, this wreck of my rocket I am still locked into after my crash, after my bonedeep burning with cobalt, my operations with their disastrous anaesthetics and my other accidents mishaps misadventures and misdirections, a long life and a glorious one. They say I complain and I do but let's leave that for later. I've had a good, even a great run for my money. I've run through a great deal of life and a great deal of money. I was loved in my time and I loved. I did not love myself, never. Those who do not love themselves are always right. I expected this novel to be raucous, rambunctious, tumultuous and hilarious, and I wasn't disappointed. It also has longueurs, especially when the narrator gets into those complaints, railing against the world in general and (tiresomely) feminists in particular. But for the most part it was funny and full of energy. If I'd written this review straight after finishing it yesterday afternoon, it would have been three stars. What I hadn't expected was that it would also turn out to be heartbreaking, in ways that haunted me overnight. This narrator tumbling through the bardo is so evidently, so painfully, the real-life Gysin, hurtling through torment towards death. The "accidents mishaps misadventures" he recounts are only superficially fictionalised, and once you stop laughing and sober up you realise how horrific they are. The most riotous set piece is a description of a colostomy with rectal surgery, a bleakly comic tour de force that is also completely devastating . I don't know which version of The Tibetan Book Of The Dead inspired The Last Museum. At the time Gysin was writing, there were two English translations available, neither of them complete. The most likely candidate is the Evans-Wentz translation, which was the standard edition for several decades. It's now regarded as a bit off-beam, not least because of the misleading parallels Evans-Wentz drew with the so-called Egyptian Book Of The Dead (although in reality neither sacred text even has that title, let alone any other similarities). That may or may not matter from a literary-historical point of view, but for me it was part of the heartbreak. The Last Museum's bitter narrator experiences all of the suffering of a Buddhist worldview, but little of the compassion. Especially not for himself. As he asks helplessly at the end of the book: "A story like this can have no happy ending. Can it?"
