"Hell don't have any boundaries. Don't you understand that?" It's hard to explain just how much I've grown to love James Lee Burke, and here he's delivered another terrific edition in the series. He hit his stride back on the sixth novel and has never looked back. In Burning Angel, JLB returned to two things he's done with great success before: interwoven multiple plotlines involving crimes past and present, and added just a touch of the unexplained, this time in the form of an unlikely guardian angel. The book starts with Detective Dave Robicheaux receiving a personal journal from Sonny Marsallus, a lower-level fixer currently working out of NOLA. The notebook contains Sonny's experiences in Vietnam, which a lot of people would rather never see the light of day. In a second storyline, a black woman claims her family has long owned their home, but white attorney Moline Bertrand, whose family has owned the land since before the Civil War, has begun a proceeding to get all the sharecropper families evicted, even though they've lived on Bertrand land for generations. Could an old legend that Jean Lafitte buried his gold in the area have something to do with Moline's sudden legal actions? In classic Burke style, a list of criminal characters enters the plots. Some are reformed and trying to do the right things; others are out to do the greatest harm possible. What Burke does exceptionally well is characterization. You get the sense that even the most standard goon has a backstory for how he got to this point in his life. What clicks with me about Burke's books is the recurring theme that "law" does not mean "justice," especially with rampant corruption and a system that overpunishes the underprivileged and underpunishes everybody else. In such a world, the good guys have to be pretty bad themselves. Dave and his sidekick Clete Purcell are, in many ways, what circumstances have made them: tough enough to swim with the sharks and survive. And I haven't yet mentioned that all this yummy goodness is wrapped up in some really gorgeous prose. Burke has the heart of a poet, which only seems like a juxtaposition for a Crime Thriller series, but it's not. It's unexpectedly satisfying. This piece of land was our original sin, except we had found no baptismal rite to expunge it from our lives. That green-purple field of new cane was rooted in rib cage and eye socket. But what of the others whose lives had begun here and ended in other places? The ones who became prostitutes in cribs on Hopkins Street in New Iberia and Jane’s Alley in New Orleans, sliced their hands open with oyster knives, laid bare their shin bones with the cane sickle, learned the twelve-string blues on the Red Hat gang and in the camps at Angola with Leadbelly and Hogman Matthew Maxey, were virtually cooked alive in the castiron sweatboxes of Camp A, and rode Jim Crow trains North, as in a biblical exodus, to southside Chicago and the magic of 1925 Harlem, where they filled the air with the music of the South and the smell of cornbread and greens and pork chops fixed in sweet potatoes, as though they were still willing to forgive if we would only acknowledge their capacity for forgiveness. Tolstoy asked how much land did a man need. Just enough to let him feel the pull of the earth on his ankles and the claim it lays on the quick as well as the dead. Onto the next book, Cadillac Jukebox.
