an incredible countr usa novel. like joyce carol oates or "marleybone marble company" (whos radical precher VISITS maine and tells them about a "better", older way of living, the only anecdote to captialism is to be local.) and like the best novel of 2010 "agaat", place is 110% of us humans existence, like all the sounds, trees roaring, local geography, local food, lloyd the fox and gwen and alleka and just fill in your friends name, are trying to live in this world we have made. and its a fucked up world ya gotta admit. it is imperative taht you read "the old weird america"" chapter in the book "the old weird america" by greil marcus 9who by the way has just written a new american literature book and its a fucking masterpice)because it some weird wqays bob dylan helps you understand rurual novels. if you have ever cared about one grain of sand you have smelled between your fingers, then you must read both these novels ( and listen to the fiction while doing so) because super tree man could change your life. it did mine. i forgot to say, both these books are about 700 pages, so, i dunnno, its totally worth it, you sorta wish there were MORE pages, and then, things sorta of start falling in place, big-picture, militarycapital complex, geo-view sort of a outlook, but also how important it is to live in the place you live. sounds corny, but true too. but also to MAKE CONNEXIONS where you live. while im writing this the trees are raoring with wind. them so recently denuded from kick ass fall reds and oranges and outrgeous yellows with pecans falling for you to just pick up and eat, singing as loud as 6music sturat marconi 'freak zone' at #9 on your netbook bullshit speaker(s), THAT'S HOW loud the trees are in the neighborhood, even the cedar waxwings are still enjoying the pertanaural warm gale, and singing in it, with joe strummer adjoining. well anyway what im sayin is its a comitmnet and could just very well re-commit your mind to what we have here, which is the earth and all that lives here, even rocks, or more say, THE ROCKS FIRST, and trees of course, they are first too. so they are novels about rocks and trees, and they things that live on them, under them. so when you read these novel, YOU start living whit these sef-same trees in the novels, but also the trees in your OWN LIFE. its cool too how they talk about the internet, in 1994 usa, and 1994 south africa. in the country, the county of faulnker, and aO WILSONS, 'ANTHILL" , well. just warning you and encouring you to read these novels soon cause it seems to EXPLAIN a lot of how it is today. nov 28 2010
