If this novel impresses from the very beginning it is because of the openness in which Lessing plays her cards in the first chapter. The voice of the omniscient narrator glows with the clarity of objective facts that is missing in the rest of the novel, replaced by an increasingly suffocating account of two doomed lives that slowly disintegrate in polarized madness. The tragic end of Mary Turner, a white woman, in the hands of Moses, her black servant, in a remote, hostile South African hell is reported in crushing detachment by a young farmer, recently arrived from Great Britain, who cannot digest the unwritten laws of the Apartheid. His silent revulsion acts like a metaphor for the unspeakable horror that has ransacked a barren, parched land that the imposed supremacy of the white civilization has failed to subjugate. Showcasting an indisputable mastery of descriptive skills, the daily life of the Turners, a couple whacked without mercy by the gender and racial prejudices imposed on them by the rules of a segregated society, unfolds mercilessly in front of the increasingly horrified reader. The gradual mental decline of Mary and Dick Turner runs in parallel to the growing menace of the African landscape and its severe climatic conditions. The maddening chirping of cicadas, the extreme heat that accumulates on the tin roof of the decrepit farm-hut and the poisonous dynamics between natives and whites present a recurrent pattern of symbols that infuse the narration with a morbid undertone, erasing all traces of light, of hope for a better future. Both oppressors and victims at once, the characters never dwell in self-pity; rather the opposite, they abuse themselves until they lose touch with a reality that becomes more and more distorted as years pile up in front of the unchanged shapes, scents and noises of the indifferent savannah. The collective psychological portrait that Lessing paints with unfaltering resolve is a blunt criticism to the system of racial segregation that proved to be equally destructive both for the perpetrators and the tyrannized. Blacks who despise white women, who in turn, never miss an opportunity to humiliate their servants as means to evince their unquestioned racial superiority. Ironically, the white man remains impervious in the apex of the social pyramid, looking down on both groups condescendingly, keeping the wheels of a perverse social scheme going round inexorably regardless of the terrifying consequences of dehumanization on a major scale. When a woman, deranged by prolonged loneliness, turns to “an inferior man” for solace, a disquieting attraction shifts the scales of power and exposes the fragility of artificially set boundaries. When the white mistress looks the black servant in the eye and recognizes the human being staring back, insolent, reproachful, his blood boiling with barely contained rage, the whole system collapses in a pool of murky, diluted color. “What is madness, but a refuge, a retreating from the world?” Witnessing the inevitable decomposition of a woman locked in a world that chokes her to death is nothing short of appalling, but doing so through Lessing’s unnerving prose-poetry allows us to come to terms with the beastly outcome of this novel, which appositely exposes everything that makes us disgustingly, questionably and undeniably human. The man is hollow, the land might be wasted; but the grass is singing.
