This one was a little tedious for the first two-thirds of the novel. In terms of formula, author MacDonald makes a big deviation in setting, as much of the story takes place outside McGee’s Florida habitat and places him on the streets of Chicago, a few northern suburbs, and the desolate rural towns west of the city, in the onset of winter. McGee is asked for help by an old friend (yet another ‘lost lamb’ of a woman he saved from despair and death several years prior). After her fling with McGee, Glory Doyle married a rich brain surgeon who succumbed to cancer and died tragically. Shortly before his death, he secretly liquidated his assets, and dumped the cash in unknown accounts and locations. Blackmail is the obvious reason, and MacDonald/McGee spends a great deal of time inquiring many possible suspects and motives. The story builds to a satisfying conclusion, but it takes a while to get there. The story was of interest to me, since I’m very familiar with the setting. What would MacDonald, in all his typical cynicism and disdain for modern life, have to say about the Windy City? Not surprisingly, MacDonald is quite critical, commenting on the “nine bridges crossing the central sewer,” slums south and west that ‘make Harlem look like Scarsdale’, etc. Plenty of jibes on the weather, air quality, and lack of culture etc. As always, remind yourself that this was written in 1966 for a male audience, and as such is typically misogynistic. There is also some unsavory sexual content here that is intended to titillate the target audience. Deep down though, McGee has a heart, and MacDonald makes him vulnerable. For the first time in the series, we see McGee questioning his skills and instincts, and twice he's sandbagged from behind. At his core, he’s just a salvage expert, not an invincible secret agent or private eye. Despite the tedium as McGee unravels the mystery, there is always the author’s imitable writing style, which set this series part in the genre. Some wry humor, philosophizing and a few curve balls thrown in for fun. There’s a plot point that seems to come out of left field at the end, but I should have seen in coming. (I’m no spoiler, but hopefully that piques your interest). But overall, after reading the previous seven, this one was a bit of a misfire.
