Breena Clarke 's debut novel is an intimate and haunting look at the ramifications of the death of a child on her family members and neighbours. Set in an African-American neighbourhood in Georgetown, DC in the 1920s, River, Cross My Heart is also the coming-of-age story of Johnnie Mae Bynum and her attempts to deal with grief. The novel opens when Johnnie Mae is 12-years-old and is babysitting her six-year-old sister, Clara. They are down at the Potomac river, where Johnnie Mae loves to swim. Clara slips and falls into the water and despite her efforts, Johnnie Mae fails to rescue her. It is a heart-breaking opening to a story, one that sets up a poignant and haunting atmosphere that continues right through to this story's conclusion. Johnnie Mae struggles to cope with the death of Clara. She experiences guilt, fear and loss, endures dreams and imaginings, and sees visions of her sister everywhere: in a new friend who wears braids like Clara's and even in the steam from a boiling pot of green beans that resembles her sister's face. On top of that, Johnnie Mae is of an age where she is dealing with puberty and race issues, as well as institutional and family expectations. Her parents, Alice and Willie also struggle with their own extinguishable grief, but ultimately hope arrives when Johnnie Mae finds her strength in swimming and her family support her newfound passion. This is a story where beyond the initial drowning incident, nothing much happens. It is very much a family-centred, domestic drama that focuses on a collection of characters as they deal with the death of a young child. Minor characters are introduced and chapters often stand alone as set pieces, but in its entirety River, Cross My Heart is beautifully tender novel with lyric prose and wonderful attention to detail, particularly around emotional responses and human nature. It is a truly intimate look at grief and loss, and how a family cope under the most traumatic experiences. Reminiscent of the work of Toni Morrison and Gloria Naylor, this was a joy to read.
