In Thomas Tryon we were blessed with a marvelous story teller, the likes of which a reader does not often come across. His writing is like a warm fleece blanket unless you are reading one of his 'horror' stories. Then this reader finds his writing to be terrifying. With Lady, even though there are mysterious aspects to the tale, I found myself wrapped up in a Southern Comfort story. It is the coming of age story of our young protagonist, Woody, who lives across the town 'green' from a widowed woman known to all the community as simply Lady, short for Adelaide. She is beautiful, smart, sophisticated, and sometimes both fun and funny but always mysterious about certain areas of her life. She lives in a large, beautiful and magnificent house and keeps largely to herself and her servants, a houseman and his wife, her housekeeper. Our lad watches the goings on across the green and is fascinated and curious about Lady. He is just one member of a family consisting of a widowed mother and several children. The story becomes even more interesting when Woody and Lady meet, befriend one another and carry the story on to new levels for the better Woody comes to know Lady and the closer they become, the more curious he gets about her life and her past. Over time she reveals more to him than she ever has to anyone excepting perhaps her servants who have been with her for many years. She takes his family under her wing, so to speak, and they attempt to watch out over her. That is, when she is not suffering from one of her spells for our Lady has frequent spells brought on by memories of unhappy times and/or relationships gone by and is brought quite low by them. Often she remains reclusive for lengthy periods of time. During these times she sees and speaks with no one but her servants. I have heard this book compared with To Kill a Mockingbird many times and yet I fail to see or to feel the comparison unless one is only comparing the writing which is marvelous in both. I have always loved TKaM but I find Lady to be superior to the former. I loved reading this story and also loved the way Tryon grows his characters, even the minor ones, into fully rounded and fleshed out roles in his novel. It is sad that we do not have a larger body of work from him to appreciate.
