I was going to give this book two stars, because until the end it was merely bland and inoffensive, about like Finney describes modern food to be. But the ending threw me into a rage, so one star it is. Fnney's book has a few redeeming features - chiefly, his painstaking research into the period he attempts to depict. And by 'depict' I man depict, literally; the entire book is filled with photographs, newspaper cuttings, illustrations, sketches... to which the author painstakingly refers, and which he sometimes also painstakingly describes. The pain, in this instance, is not only the author's, but also the reader's, as he has to plough through debris of descriptions with the machete of 'can we please move on'. The plot and characters begin inoffensively enough - so inoffensively, in fact, that I may have trouble, having finished the book, describing just who was who and what was what. There are a couple of bland women-love-interests, one of them less bland - and immediately discarded - and one more bland - and therefore kept. The protagonist is a man of no apparent emotional processes besides, occasionally, wonder or stupour. His falling in love with his preserved-love-interest is a complete mystery to the reader; we see none of it happening, even in terms of romantic cliches such as, well, 'lightning struck me, and I was smitten for life.' Events are loosely connected to each other, and, if the reader is sufficiently accommodating, all sorts of things can be tolerated. For example, the existence and likelihood of millions of dollars in army financing going to a project of, pardon me, self-hypnosis. The probability that an absolutely un-second-glance-worthy twenty-something with no personality would be the most suitable person to travel through time, and the infuriating moment that comes when you realise that his then-girlfriend is, in fact, much better at this whole thing than he is, but, by virtue of being only the protagonist's girlfriend, is not recruited to the program by the starved-for-candidates leadership. The writing, itself, pained me from the start. The writer's one virtue - meticulous research - rapidly turned into a vice, as, like with every pedantic and geeky person who has read too many books, he can not help but let the readers see just how much meticulous research he had done. On Every. Single. Page. There really is a point at which we, as the readers, do not need to hear about the draperies and curlicues in a carriage in the middle of a climactic scene, and there are only so many pages of descriptions of streets, people, and houses that one can take. It is towards the end that my hackles started rising. Especially once the hero and his girlfriend finally (what took them so long to think about it? I was screaming at them to just time-travel out of there for about seventy pages) got to the present. The horrible horrible present, filled with air conditioners and other trivial luxurious minutiae, but apparently devoid of a single good thing to be said for it on the significant and global grand scale. Instead we are treated to the inevitable scene of "What? A World war??" from a resident of the 19th century, which had known a good number of horrible and shattering wars, including the incredibly traumatic American Civil War just twenty years previous, a whole slew of independence wars in the Spring of Nations, not to mention the entire barrage of the Napoleonic Wars which (just like the World Wars) reshaped the political and military world map and engulfed all of Europe just at the beginning of the century. And all the author could come up with in terms of what good happened between 1882 and 1970 is.. air-conditioners. Okay, Mr. Finney, let me give you a hand here and count a few of the mild improvements we've managed to install since that period: -Most of the monarchies of the time are democracies now -A good chunk of the peoples who at the time were colonial subjects have actual countries now -When people go to a hospital, they actually stand a good chance of coming out of it alive due to antibiotics, anesthesia, and anti-sepsis practices which at the time were virtually unknown -The Human rights movement -The Geneva Convention -Abolition of child labour, mandating of minimal wages and working conditions, the eight-hour workday -The cleaning-up of police practices and brutality. That thing that sent you guys to the future in the first place? It would have a lot less chance of actually happening now. These are just a few off-the-cuff things. Plus, we went to the moon, and if for the author it somehow seems paltry and bleak, well, that's hardly our fault. To top it all off, the author's basic premise in the end seems to be that, if our time is broken, the best way to deal with that is to abscond into the past, where none of these events happened yet, and then pretend that they never will. How the protagonist would ever manage to live with himself, fleeing the world knowing that, only thirty years in his future, is that dreaded World-War-Eye ...they knew Roman numerals and used them more frequently than we did, by the way) he avoided thinking or talking about. The year is 1882. In 1914 he and his wife will be in their fifties and, hey presto, here is modernity, come to claim you again. The author's message that the world of our time is not worth living in is acceptable, but instead of attempting to say something like, it needs to be fixed, or changed, or improved, maybe even brought back to past values and vigour, he says it needs to be dropped, abandoned. We've ruined our world with pollution - let's flee to the 1880s, where pollution did not exist (barring, of course, all that coal they burned that turned the air into smog over half the world). And what if time travel is not available? No answer. And this, more than anything, is my issue. We cannot run away from an imperfect world to a romanticized - heavily, I should say - Luddite utopia of the past. If only because we can't. Finney concludes his story by extolling the virtue of running, and I cannot condone that. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
