I waged an internal battle with myself last night on how to properly rate this book. I rated it, finally, with a decided 4-star after much debate. I suppose, if I cannot articulately wrap my head around the reasons I disliked it at all, then it's probably a tiny pet-peeve that won't matter overall. Blake had the capacity of fleshing out the most taboo subjects, and glossing it over to appear almost acceptable . Any author who can shine a beautiful light on a dark matter, maintaining a certain grace and dignity, has my undying admiration. Needless to say, Jennifer Blake's historical accuracy, writing eloquence and style were impeccable. At times, the descriptions of the attire in that time period, were bogging down the story a tidbit, but I shrugged it off as poetic license. She's definitely one of the best historical fiction writers I've stumbled across, but I do think the plotline suffered a tidbit. I know it picked up mid-way through the book, but I was tad-bit let down by the mediocre plot overall. Morgan was a believable hero as well. He showed a remarkable depth of remorse for his actions, and I think in a fictional sense, he had made amends. If someone had blatantly plotted to have me murdered, I'd rape the hell out of them, too. He showed a great deal more restraint and decency than 99% of other bodice ripper key figures & villain oriented heroes. Some may consider him a weakling for that, but it suited me just fine. Despite the obvious, sexual assault, I genuinely felt he cared for her greatly, by the end of the book. As for her elusive brother Valcour, in some manner of speaking, he was utterly predictable. You realized, from the very beginning, that he was going to be trouble, but some of the things he reminisces about, and does--is twisted enough that it surpasses the expectations in him. As for Felicite(the heroine), her co-dependent persona, and Princess syndrome slacked off by the end of the book, and I truly felt as though she could handle her own. Brava, ladybird! Courageous for picking up a sword, having never done so before, and immediately took-on trained blade-masters; a bit farfetched, however--decidedly acceptable. :D
