I discovered this book the way I do most books — by way of someone wiser who placed it in my hands. Nora Gallagher, a journalist, returned to organized religion at mid-life and traced her life at Trinity Episcopal Church in Santa Barbara, Ca., through the calendar of the church year. As we move from Advent, to Christmas, to Epiphany, Lent, Easter, and Pentecost, she tells us the state of her soul and faith journey as she volunteers for the soup kitchen, serves on vestry, and helps call an openly gay man to be the rector. (This was quite bold in the mid-1990s.) This is a perfect read for someone like me. I, too, returned to my Christian roots, at almost mid-life. I was 37 and it was the year after my father died. I was ripe for the prayer and quiet and a way to understand the seasons of life. I was ready to be an Episcopalian and move into a faith more in line with my liberal leanings. As the woman who was to become my spouse said, "Come to my church, we have women clergy. Our rector is a woman and so is our deacon." I went. At first, only for the "important" days. Eventually I came to believe every day is important. I was received in the church. I got involved. I let it into my heart. Gallagher writes with humor and healthy questioning. It is a relief to know that I can still have faith and be comforted by a loving God while still not embracing every line of every prayer. There are many great passages. Here are a few that stood out for me: "All that Jesus said is to love God, love others, and forgive your enemies. If you do these things, you will have eternal life. Ethernal life is not a reward in heaven for being good; it's what you experience when you really love. People of other faiths who practice loving certainly must experience the same thing." "Karen Torjesen, in her book When Women Were Priests, describes 'house churches,' which were the meeting places for the early Christians. Torjesen believed the early church was countercultural in tone, and was marked by a fluidity and flexibility that allowed women, slaves, and artisans to assume leadership roles. ... the fate of people, of the world demands that one not be merely a good listener, or a good friend, but yes, to be in trouble. — Fr. Daniel Berrigan, Jesuit priest and activist "When I interviewed him I asked him how many times he had been jail. He replied, 'Not enough.'" "I think of Mary Magdelene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, those whom Jesus befriended: the marginal, the outcast, the oppressed. And, not to forget, the hopeful. They stood in that tomb and endured its emptiness. Then they ran outside to tell the others. They gave all they had for something new."
