First things first: This book is terrible. One of the things I loathe most is poorly written second-person narrative. The only way to write a good second-person narrative is to string along a specific path that you want the audience to follow; you, as the author, have to make it so compelling for a member of your audience to want to act in the manner in which you describe that they can't imagine the character making another choice. You have to actually set things up so well that the overwhelming majority of people, in the case of this book, would have to override their natural instincts. (Unless, of course, the primary audience for this book are all awful men who drug women without their knowledge and engage in shady drug deals and military runs as a Rogue Journalist.) This book doesn't do this in any capacity. At no point would I ever act like MM because MM has absolutely no redeeming qualities, and there are absolutely no compelling reasons to make me rationalise a situation the way the author presumes his audience should. Second: This book is not written in a way that intends for any women to ever read it. That's fine, write it from a male perspective. That isn't the problem. We're used to reading books in that manner and can easily relate. But honestly, this book actively seeks to make women not want to continue with it because of its treatment of every female character (nearly 100% of them are there for sex props). This leads me to... Third: The sex scenes are atrocious. Here are a few pages for examples . It deserves an award with more emphasis than the 'Bad Sex in Fiction'. The scenes are unimaginable. They are so completely rubbish that I cannot even picture them in my mind at all. And the phrasing . I swear, if you want to write bad porn/erotica, write bad porn/erotica. Just stop pretending you're writing a Serious Book. Fourth: You could take almost every single non-sex chapter and swap them around and have almost no change in the story. That's a bad sign . I don't remember where or who gave this to me, but I just know that whoever said this is 'like Catch-22' has done Heller a disservice. This book is an atrocity.
