A REVISISION (AND MODERATION) OF HIS EARLIER MEMOIR, "JUDGMENT DAY" Nathaniel Branden (born 1930) is a Canadian psychotherapist and writer who was Rand's chief spokesman, until their break in 1968. He has written many other books (an earlier and less moderate version of this book is 'Judgment Day'), such as 'The Psychology of Self-Esteem: A Revolutionary Approach to Self-Understanding that Launched a New Era in Modern Psychology.' In the "Author's Note" to this 1999 book, he states, "This new publication has offered me the opportunity ... to add some new material that adds... to the story's richness... (and) present a more balanced portrait of certain people with whom my relationships were at times adversarial." Later, he adds, "I wanted to write as accurate a portrait of my relationship with Ayn Rand as I could... I wanted to capture the essence of a brilliant, innovative thinker and artist, an exalted and tortured woman... I wanted to examine anew the choices I made and the actions I took during those years; some of those decisions were disastrous..." (Pg. 2) He recounts how after a fateful car trip with Barbara and Ayn Rand, his/Rand's feelings for each other surfaced: "I looked at the woman who had been my idol since I was fourteen years old... Suddenly, I had the sense that everything I had ever done, every choice I ever made, had led me to this moment. Part of me wanted to escape... But the more dominant part said, 'Leap!' [He said] 'Ayn, you misunderstood nothing. Of course I am in love with you.'" (Pg. 123-125) He details how he and Rand obtained the "consent" of their respective spouses to an affair (Pg. 131-136; they originally proposed the relationship would be "non-sexual," but this soon changed). He records his reaction to Rand's telling a journalist that he was her "intellectual heir... the most consistent embodiment ... he understands my philosophy better than anyone"; he says, "I felt foolish. And yet, I wanted desperately to be worthy of Ayn's confidence." (Pg. 197) But he later admits, "In the two years following the publication of Atlas Shrugged... The joy and excitement between us had vanished... Our affair died not by conscious decision but by default, as a casualty of Ayn's depression." (Pg. 219) He suggests that "I was never the passionate moralist---or moralizer---that Ayn was... there was a streak of Objectivist puritanism in all the Collective members that at times drove out normal human warmth." (Pg. 259) And he records in detail the violently emotional breakup with Rand (Branden was in an affair with a younger woman, at this point); "When Allan finally told Ayn of my love for Patrecia, she immediately announced that under no circumstances would she ever speak to me again" (pg. 339); "I had heard Barbara's comment that my goal was to precipitate a crisis and... some part of me had known precisely what I was doing and how all this was meant to end. I had engineered it." (Pg. 341). Perhaps the most interesting addition to this book is the relatively cordial meeting between Branden's third wife Devers and Ayn Rand in 1980 (Pg. 391-402), in which Rand said about their relationship, "A gentleman would have carried it to his grave." (Pg. 399) For anyone interested in Ayn Rand, this book (combined with 'The Passion of Ayn Rand' and 'The Passion of Ayn Rand's Critics;) is essential reading... sometimes with a grain of salt, however.
