Irvine Welsh's Trainspotting must be one of the most challenging novels I have read. Starting with the totally obscure title, which does not give you a single clue to what the book is about; the Scottish dialect which is a pain in the posterior, especially for someone for whom English is not the first language; the constantly shifting POV's between the various characters, and from first person to third person; the vile language full of cusswords (especially the totally politically incorrect c-word peppered throughout); the absolute dregs of society that the book portrays - junkies, AIDS patients, thieves, prostitutes; the graphically scatological scenes... there is nary a ray of light in this bleak, bleak book. I have taken up this book many a time, tried to read the first page, and put it down - and I see that many fellow readers have had the same experience. But once you get over the initial resistance, you can't put the book down. Trainspotting is an obscure hobby in the UK, where train enthusiasts watch trains and try to spot various types of engines, bogeys etc. and note them down religiously. It is also a slang term for shooting up on heroin, the name deriving from the similarity of the blackened veins to the train tracks. In this book, a multitude of extremely flawed young men and women spend most of their time doing that; they thieve and sell their bodies to earn money for their fix. Many of them contact HIV. Some of them die miserable deaths. Why do they do this? In "Rent Boy" Mark Renton's words: Choose us. Choose life. Choose mortgage payments; choose washing machines; choose cars; choose sitting on a couch watching mind-numbing and spirit- crushing game shows, stuffing fuckin junk food intae yir mooth. Choose rotting away, pishing and shiteing yersel in a home, a total fuckin embarrassment tae the selfish, fucked-up brats ye've produced. Choose life. This is Thatcherite Britain, in which neoliberal "paradise" life has lost all meaning for middle-class Scotsmen. They have the choice between an insipid life of extreme mediocrity laced with chronic genteel poverty - or a short but vivid one, flying on the wings of intoxication. The characters in this book choose the second. Ah don't really know, Tam, ah just dinnae. It kinday makes things seem mair real to us. Life's boring and futile. We start oaf wi high hopes, then we bottle it. We realise that we're aw gaunnae die, withoot really findin oot the big answers. We develop aw they long-winded ideas which jist interpret the reality ay oor lives in different weys, withoot really extending oor body ay worthwhile knowledge, about the big things, the real things. Basically, we live a short, disappointing life; and then we die. We fill up oor lives wi shite, things like careers and relationships to delude oorsels that it isnae aw totally pointless. Smack's an honest drug, because it strips away these delusions. Wi smack, whin ye feel good, ye feel immortal. Whin ye feel bad, it intensifies the shite that's already thair. It's the only really honest drug. It doesna alter yir consciousness. It just gies ye a hit and a sense ay well-being. Eftir that, ye see the misery ay the world as it is, and ye cannae anaesthetise yirself against it. You can take this as Omar Khayyam's philosophy, stripped of its poetry - or Indian mysticism turned on its head. But it's the philosophy Mark and his cursed mates live with. This is a dark book, full of distress, but laced with a sunny optimism in some obscure way. You just can't help liking these sorry excuses for human beings and their mad capers. A spot of caution, though - if you are a finicky person who gets upset at the description of blood and filth, steer clear of it. But if you are the kind of reader who likes to stretch his/ her limits, I recommend this book wholeheartedly.
