this is my favorite book in the george miles cycle. sometimes i get on the verge of recommending this book because it's the most tame and accessible book in the series (period i think is actually the tamest book in the series but it is the least accessible by far) but then i remember the dwarf murder scene and mason and the fourteen year old and the blur rape scene and also just how fucking weird dennis the narrator is. (edit to add: and that one scene with chris towards the beginning, you know what scene i'm talking about). honestly, i think a lot of the reason why my two favorite books in the george miles cycle are frisk and guide because of dennis the narrator. to this date the hold dennis the narrator has over me is completely incomphrensible to me. normally, i'm decent at putting why a book does or does not work for me into words, but whenever i talk about the hold this book- or, quite frankly, any of the george miles cycle- has over me i cannot say anything of substance. maybe it's because even i don't want to confront why exactly this book- this series as a whole- makes the worms in my brain dance the way they do when i read them. but going back to dennis the narrator, i do think he's a big reason why the george miles cycle is so divisive as a whole, because for a lot of people his narrative voice will absolutely not work at all. it's very distinct and also original- to date i've never encountered another author whose voice is anything close to dennis'. i don't even know how to describe his narrative voice- maybe it's the bouncing between the serious analysis he does of the social situations he finds himself in or his own weird psyche and him saying or doing something completely out of pocket or the book's- and him as a narrator's- strong sense of self-awareness. he's also very funny, and i don't think people talk about the humor of this series as a whole enough but especially in the books narrated by himself. like frisk and guide have some parts that make me audibly laugh but in a very distinct way. in frisk, it's a lot of nervous laughter, because frisk is a book designed to set you on edge and make you uncomfortable from the minute you open the book, but in guide it's more genuine, i think at least. like when he's talking about his relationship with paul and the weird collection he formed in paul's honor and the entire time you're reading this you're like "what the fuck dennis" and he's recounting it like it's normal behavior and then at the end he hits you with the "i should really throw that away" and that comedic self-awareness is enough to tip me over the edge. a lot of that i think also has to do with tone, too. guide has a very flat tone, and despite how close dennis the narrator is to his subject matter he still feels distant enough that you never know quite how he feels about anything and about how you feel about him. he has this remarkable ability to remove himself from even things he's deeply entrenched in and the fact that i like distant, observer-type narrators is i think a big reason why i love this series so much but i also think that distance is one of the reasons why this series doesn't gel with some people (i mean, besides the obvious). describing the plot of guide is impossible, and that's because there is no plot. this book is the definition of "no plot just vibes" which also explains a lot about why i love it. i can, however, see that testing the patience of a lot of readers. like for instance, there's a part of the book where dennis makes himself a cup of coffee and takes a moment to tell us about his favorite coffee cup and i feel like there's two reactions to that part, there's the "that's a cool cup, dennis" reaction which was mine and then there's the "what the fuck does that have anything to do with anything" reaction and if you have the second reaction you're going to have a bad time with this series and also dennis cooper as a whole because his usual writing style is this wonderfully psychotic blend of too much and not enough information. he'll tell you about his favorite cup or whatever, but then leave certain major pieces of information just hanging without explanation or he'll analyze himself or someone else to a certain point and then stop short of that final stretch. there's never any pay-off, this is not an "a little life" esque trauma novel where dennis the narrator (or any of the characters, really) reveals that he was molested or whatever and that's why he's so obsessed with sex and death and whatever, which i think adds to the unsatisfication that some people might feel with these books. we don't know why dennis the narrator acts the way he does. he never goes to therapy and comes out with a diagnosis attached- or if he did, he doesn't feel compelled to share that with the reader-, he never unlocks hidden memories, he just is. he's careful to never let the reader too in, and i can see why that's a frustrating character to some but to me it's very relatable because that's how i am. anyway, great book, love it, 10/10, don't read it.
