It's been complicated to think of a way to review this Western, because it's quite the mixed bag. The good parts are very good, and the bad parts are very bad; and balancing both isn't easy. I'll start with the bad: the endless meandering, the overbloated plots ripe with unnecessary scenes (did we need to know the blue pigs like Bolivar's sweet shit?), the insertion of side stories and characters that come and are gone in a blink, the characterisation of the women (there's only one that's truly her own person and well-defined, the other is pretty much a prop to the men, and before you say that's not so, let's remember that last scene with the saloon owner), the insertion of basically every single Wild West cliché (I think this was only missing a gunfight on the main street to have ticked off 100% of the list of Western hallmarks), the use of sexual assault for comic relief (as happens to Sheriff July's deputy), and... forgive the repetition, but the blasted endless meandering. That alone was driving me bonkers for most of the book. And the good? Augustus McCrae. Gus is the soul of Lonesome Dove , there's no question about it for me. If he's gone, the story ends, and the remaining pages are just like the empty extension of pasture in Montana that can't retain you there anymore. He's that kind of unheroic hero that I like not just in Westerns. He's no Shane and no John Wayne, always on the right side and never does anything to sully his rep as using his six-shooter to blast outlaws off the face of the planet. He's flawed and he's aware of it, he has a weakness for whores rather than prim schoolmarms, he's an unassuming and non-ostentatious bon-vivant that loves life's little luxuries, and he's loyal even when he knows the person he gives his loyalty to is in sore need of a kick in the behind. In short, he's perfect in his imperfection. You know what they say about characters larger than life? This is one of them. And, for me, it was enough to compensate for the book's flaws. I don't know if McMurtry was aware that one can't kill the goose of the golden eggs and expect to write a tetralogy that'd be just as good as the first book, but I, for one, am not going to continue with the other books. If the soul is gone, the void that remains is felt deeply. But, oh, how much I enjoyed it when the soul was still around!
