This is a grim novel, much more concerned with how war ruins lives than with adventure or guts & glory. When you see that the author was involved in the Middle East peace process you nod as if you knew. He doesn’t use outright anachronism to draw an analogy between those times and these. But you can sense the present and you wonder how far we’ve come. I took to our mains straight away. I cared about them. Francisco won’t lie down for an injustice, but he never thinks he’s active enough, either. He has a cruel life, and has seen things to stagger faith in God and man. He’s the crusader of the title, who comes home a casualty of war: insane, or in the church’s terms, possessed. The talking cure wasn’t unknown in earlier centuries; at any rate, one exorcist has had success with it, and rescues Francisco from the church’s more hands-on methods. So we listen to his story. We get Francisco’s story from his own lips, and otherwise we have the record of the Cistercian who executes his cure. He’s a toad and you watch his hypocrisy at work as he convinces himself: this causes a few laughs at the irony. But he doesn’t always choose the dark side and that leaves you with suspense – since Francisco is in his hands. What Francisco witnessed on crusade has sent him into mental withdrawal: atrocity; feuds whereby his captain, Uncle Ramon to his troops (you might want to call him uncle too) is dispatched by his own side; a year in a dungeon where people behave like an exaggerated crazy-mirror of what they are in the free world above. Francisco wasn’t made to be a novice – he spends his late teens in a Cistercian abbey – and he wasn’t made to be a soldier: he goes to the crusades on behalf of his dead brother. Even though he’s from a high noble family his life is brutish, nasty and too short. He finds no consolation in God, who capsized his brave brother’s crusader ship within Francisco’s sight – he scarcely got off shore. Against this negativity, there are good people for him to love and live for; his cousin, less introspective than Francisco, more your soldier; his cousin’s sister who also lives with death and understands Francisco; Uncle Ramon. The writing: well above average, I thought. Then again I thought it misfired, even frequently. Make of that what you can.
