A mix of selections from Greek historians between the 5th and 2nd century BCE. This book is mostly devoted the the history of the Persian, Peloponnesian wars and Sicilian campaigns chronicled by Herodotus and Thucydides, with the last hundred pages or so devoted to smaller excerpts from Xenophon and Polybius. I felt the intrigue of the book wore off as I continued reading; the more interesting and lucid writings are in the first half of the book and then the number of new names and quick summaries of their contributions become too much and take place too rapidly to retain. Also, the imitation of the Homeric style by these historians where the narrative is interrupted by a long speech seems massively overdone by Thucydides, making him much more difficult to establish a rhythm with than Herodotus. This is probably about half of The Histories by Herodotus and a third of The History of the Peloponnesian War by Thucydides, and while my interest is now sparked to read the rest of Herodotus' work it may be a while (if ever) that I finish the rest of Thucydides work. He seems too devoted to telling "history" through overuse of long speeches that he strains the limit and believability of his genre. Herodotus, on the other hand, I found to be humorous, lucid, and an enjoyable storyteller. His work is really more of an inquiry into the sayings of locals on past events (mostly events their grandparents or great-grandparents witnessed or took part in), so should be understood as much a collection of the true memory of some events as the fantastic hearsay of embellishing villagers. Whatever mix it may be, it is interesting to read. I can't say either that I found the excerpts from Xenophon's Anabasis to be significantly interesting. Part of that is it feels like either the selection excludes important information or it is just insufficiently prefaced for a reader to jump in and feel they understand what is going on and what the context is for the events being described. But also, the lack of interest for me was partly the material didn't seem as interesting on its own merit as others of Xenophon's works, such as his Symposium , Apology and Memorable Thoughts of Socrates . The final author, Polybius, has his histories segmented into fifty pages or so but is an odd mix of overly summarized events, angry rants about the ineptitude of historians who preceded him (and his moral dilemma over how they whitewash certain immoral characters), and a comparative look at forms of government in the various countries and city-states of the past and the then-present Mediterranean world. The history he relayed wasn't told (I felt) in a manner that is easy to digest, having too many names introduced in too short a space and then concluding a commentary on the events while they still feel they could be developed further. The portion that was interesting was his comparative analysis of government in Rome to the preceding Greccian city-states. It was thoroughly descriptive concerning the various offices in the Roman world, why they worked better and why their empire is lasting longer and remaining stable over its Greccian counterparts. There is much more that can be added to the question of the Roman empire's unusually long span of existence, but nonetheless he presented his points well and I felt I learned something about the material. I enjoyed portions of what I read and though I can't speak with authority since I haven't read all the works being shortened herein, I wonder if they could have been better edited. Even if not, the short book introduction and the two page prefaces to each ancient historian certainly could use more detail and context.
