This book follows one woman's action in the pro-choice movement, which ended up having national consequences. Weddington never intended to be a star of the women's movement, and it's clear she doesn't consider herself one. She originally brought her case to state court to show solidarity with cases across the nation, and was lucky enough that hers was taken to Supreme Court. This book follows that case, plus the twenty years of aftermath. Although the book is twenty years old now, it is still a great read of the pro-choice movement. It also includes timeless support for the pro-choice side, including a section at the end of the book about how you can get involved. It is also a great book if you are interested in learning more about our political and legal processes. I learned a lot about how a case reaches the Supreme Court and the procedures of said court. I also learned about how the selection of judges on a nine-justice panel can deeply influence our country. I also learned about how, if impassioned enough, a grass roots movement can influence our politicians. I really enjoyed this section of the book. I only have two criticisms. First, I felt that the plot structure could have been handled differently. I first noticed a difference mid-book. In the beginning, Weddington includes a very brief review of her young life. Throughout the first half of the book she refers to her personal life, including her husband and friends. We also learn about the other career goals she ends up pursuing (she works in the White House under Jimmy Carter; this woman deserves to be admired for her accomplishments!) but after a certain point, this book turns into pure political text. Her husband dropped out of the book for a while, and I was curious about it. They ended up getting divorced, but she mentions this in a paragraph or two, a little too late. The stripping of personal information continues until the end of the book. I also thought the last chapter about action could have been removed and presented as the second part of the book, something that could stand alone from the first. Obviously I was not there during her marriage, but I felt that Weddington's conclusions about her husband were stereotypical. She blamed their divorce on the fact that he couldn't, in the end, handle her success. But it sounded like he put in lots of work on the Roe vs. Wade case, yet never got any credit like the other lawyers who worked on it did. I don't believe he worked on the case pursuing fame, but it would be hard to live with someone who got recognition you didn't. I think it sounded like that was the issue, and she blew it off as another man who couldn't handle a successful woman - when it sounded like he loved that about her. That's just my two cents, though. I found myself disagreeing with some other points throughout her book as well. Overall a great book, something everyone should read for information about abortion and our legal/political system.
