So this is the first I’ve read in this ghostwritten series, the only Fear Street novels Stine didn’t write himself. Mia Saxton is new to Miss Pemberthy’s Home for Girls. She takes an instant dislike to the school bully, Alicia, who also takes an intense dislike to her (and everyone else). Mia’s roommate, Clara, is slightly overweight and a constant target for Alicia’s bullying. Mia defends Clara to Alicia and they become fast friends. They have a secret where they sneak the cat Goliath up to their room at night and let him out in the morning. One night Mia is out and hears sounds coming from a barn. She is strangely drawn to it. She falls into the door and is greeted by the stunned faces of four girls. Mia realizes they are practicing the dark arts, and she swears not to tell. But Joanna, the leader, knows that something changed in the spell’s power as soon as Mia was in the room. They invite her in to complete their group. Soon they realize that five girls are needed to practice spells. So Mia finally has a group of friends and follows them outside every night to practice spells. She asks if Clara can join the group too, but Joanna insists that she can’t. Their spells grow more and more intense. Finally, after a particularly nasty fight with Alicia, the girls try a spell that sends spiders after Alicia. Only Alicia is deeply afraid of spiders and ends up dead. They crawl from her mouth as the five girls find her dead in the woods. Mia swears she won’t tell what really happened but refuses to use the power anymore. She doesn’t like what happens when she does. Joanna threatens her that she will be sorry. Shortly after this Mia begins to be the target of life-threatening spells. She gets attacked by the roses at Alicia’s coffin (yes, attacked by roses); she gets trapped in snow that keeps piling up on her; and, finally, she gets attacked by kitchen utensils in a scene cribbed straight from Carrie. At this point, Mia is trying to reason with Joanna’s latest recruit, Emily, but the girls aren’t having it. As the kitchen fight grows more dire, Mia harnesses her own power and traps three of the girls and rolls another one up in a rug. When Miss Pemberthy finds Joanna she has gone hysterical and cannot stop laughing. She and the other four (minus Mia) are sent out of the school. During this showdown Mia burned the book to ashes with the flames on her hands, so she assumes the terror is over. And yet the next night she still hears chanting and follows it up to the attic. There the floorboards come loose and head straight for her face (yep). She cannot fight back and falls downstairs, ready to give up hope. But suddenly Clara appears and lists herself as the true perpetrator of all Mia has recently experienced! Mia can’t believe it, but she soon sees that Clara means business when she sends shadows after her. Once again, Mia summons her last amount of energy to burn away the shadows and turn them on Clara, and they start to suffocate her. Clara disappears after this, and Mia decides to head back home, vowing never to use the power again... “unless I have to.”
