The Unexpected Mrs. Pollifax by Dorothy Gilman Synopsis / Mrs. Virgil (Emily) Pollifax of New Brunswick, New Jersey, was a widow with grown, married children. She was tired of attending her Garden Club meetings. She wanted to do something good for her country. So, naturally, she became a CIA agent. She takes on a “job” in Mexico City. The assignment doesn’t sound dangerous at first, but then, as often happens, something goes wrong. Now our dear Mrs. Pollifax finds herself embroiled in quite a hot Cold War—and her country’s enemies find themselves entangled with one unbelievably feisty lady. My Thoughts / 3.5 rounded up In your twilight years? No husband to take care of? Kids all grown up and moved away. Feeling like there's nothing to excite you each morning as you take off to your next volunteering opportunity? Well, good news! This may be one job opportunity you've never thought of taking….. “But isn’t there something you’ve always longed to do, something you’ve never had either the time or the freedom for until now?” Mrs. Pollifax looked at him. “When I was growing up—oh for years—I planned to become a spy,” she admitted. Widowed housewife, Mrs. Pollifax fills her days with her volunteer work wheeling the bookcart and working the gift shop at the hospital, rolling bandages, attending the garden club and art association meetings, and joining friends for afternoon teas. Society tells her that should be enough for someone her age. Her age!! She's only in her sixties – not dead. When she comes across a newspaper article profiling an actress who began her on-screen career later in life, Mrs. Pollifax decides to fulfill a childhood dream and apply for a job at the CIA. First published in 1966. Yes this book is little dated. Yes some of the plot points are a little far fetched. Yes the language may come across as a little twee. But let's just applaud how the author has written a senior female MC who doesn't let age become a barrier. A senior female MC who is not afraid to give the unknown a chance. A female MC who looks upon 'life's experiences' as a plus on a job application. A female MC who is unabashedly comfortable in her own skin. Sitting in a meeting room alone at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency, Mrs. P is mistakenly identified as another long-term undercover agent. Discussing potential jobs, Mrs P has no idea that the CIA think they are speaking with someone else. But Mrs P is overjoyed and happily agrees to the job. She's thrilled to be sent to Mexico on her first "secret mission". What's even better, is that she's to act as an American tourist and do nothing but touristy things - except on the 19th when she is to go into a bookstore and collect a book. After which she is to return to the US and deliver the book back to the Agency. Of course the mission does not go as planned; she’s kidnapped, taken to Albania, facing harsh questioning and possible torture by Chinese communists and kept prisoner against her will. There's plenty of solitaire (IYKYK). There's an escape and the ultimate rescue. Ah, all's well that ends well, because in the end, it turns out that everyone underestimates an elderly widow. Outwit. Outplay. Outlast.
