Ann Beattie writes like a machine. I read that she can write for an 18-hour stretch. She can write a 30-page short story in a day. A novel in a week. Here is my favorite tidbit from the wonder who is Ann Beattie: as a writer from the seventies she found it difficult, the transition from writing on the typewriter to writing on the computer . In fact, at first she was so comfortable with typewriter keyboard, that she felt the need to connect it electronically to her computer. But that was then. This is now. By the time she published her anthology Distortions, she learned that typing 60 words per minute on an IBM selectric wasn 19t fast enough to keep up with her thought process. The computer enables her to step up her writing to 80 words per minute. 1CSo, now I 19m keeping up with my thoughts, 1D she says. 1CBut they 19re the thoughts of a deranged, deeply unhappy person because of working on the computer for twenty years. 1D No kidding. She writes quick like her battery is about to go. Right from the beginning of each story her hurried style allows her characters and setting create their own world. Immediately, she provides you intimate quirks of a character 19s disposition. Her settings are detailed and inviting. But just when you sense where things are going, things begin to slide. I think her meaning just may come from her speed. She 19s in and out of her sentence before you know it. That may be it. Because there is no time for much background or description, her characters have only a fragile grasp of themselves and/or their relationships. As Beattie types along, they are bound to unravel. In 1CFour Stories about Lovers, 1D she probably writes with the most economy. Four 13 count them 13 lovers cheat on their spouses, and in doing so they break down into bits and pieces in the space of nine pages. There is no awful trysts in seedy hotel rooms. There is no emotional tirades. But there is plenty of awkward pauses and lonely images. Beattie is able to overlap layers of sad descriptions to deepen the despair for all. My favorite story just may be 1CDownhill 1D. The sentences are clear and crisp, but the segments are fragmented. One scene after another we know a woman is losing both her man and her mind. 1CPlease don 19t leave me 1D she says to her dog in the first paragraph, but we are not sure if her words are not actually directed at her husband. He seems like a smart and compassionate man 13 he 19s a lawyer that can cook - but in Beattie 19s twisted world that is enough to suspect the worse. Here I like this one because the woman is drawn to her dog for true companionship. The dog is a lover of small, cramped spaces, and likes to curl up in the space underneath a desk or under a bed. Beattie doesn 19t spend a lot of time delving in psychological analysis of this woman, but one day when the lights go off in the house, she crawls underneath the bed to be with her dog instead of to sit with her husband in the candlelight. When the lights come on, everyone knows it 19s over. We didn 19t need to hear her scream. What can be better than that? In this case, Ann didn 19t need to get loud and crazy to show the breakdown of a young woman. She did it in six. And the silence is deafening.
