A note on the series: I read this book significantly after reading the first one, and that felt like a mistake. The book starts off assuming you know about the tension between Patrick and Sophie; they've already been caught kissing at a party, he's already proposed, and she's rejected him and hastily gotten engaged to another man. That amount of plot usually takes up at least a third of a typical romance novel. From there, the book quickly establishes that Sophie is gorgeous, flirtatious, often provocatively dressed, and that she rejected Patrick (which, again, I didn't remember from the first book) due to her emotional baggage: her father's chronic infidelity and her mother's resultant bitterness. She's been sobbing for a month since, remembering "the twisting excitement" when she realized Patrick was "stalking" her (?), and their intense attraction. But now she's getting engaged to this guy Braddon, figuring he's too dull to be unfaithful, not knowing that he's in love with his French mistress. What remains in this book can be a crazy mess. It's so impossibly busy and filled with needless coincidences and silly drama that it becomes overwhelming by the end. Here is a non-exhaustive list of the plotlines in this book: Sophie makes then breaks her engagement to Braddon; Sophie gets trapped in (another) compromising position with Patrick, forcing their marriage; Patrick thinks Sophie loves Braddon, not him; Sophie distrusts Patrick because of his sexual-tiger reputation, which reminds her of her dad, and thinks he's cheating on her (turns out there's a mistaken identity issue with his twin brother Alex); Patrick acts as an ambassador to Turkey but some evil dudes try to put a bomb in the diplomatic gifts (Sophie foils this by knowing many languages, which skill is absolutely never mentioned until 1/3 into the book); Sophie sneaks out to train Braddon's mistress to be a lady so he can pass her off as French royalty and marry her (she turns out to actually be French royalty, in a goofy "Anastasia" twist); Patrick doesn't want to have children because his mom died in childbirth; Sophie gets pregnant and she and Patrick fight over it; Sophie has a stillborn baby and grieves horribly; Sophie's dad stops cheating on her mom and they fall back in love and get pregnant themselves. That's quite a lot for one little book. There are several very easily-resolved misunderstandings, but the dumbest has to be about Sophie's facility with languages. Patrick finds her reading a language book, praises her, and then doesn't hang out with her for like ten minutes. In "despair," Sophie throws her Turkish grammar book into the ocean (literally) because "her mother was correct about male dislike of bluestockings." Patrick goes out of his way to make it clear that he's impressed by her smarts ("'It's splendid to have such a knowledgeable wife,' he said dreamily."), but she lies and hides things for no apparent reason. Meanwhile he thinks her bizarre behavior is because she's "at that point of the month." Each refuses to say "I love you," thereby causing the other person deep distress. For most of the book, James smoothes over these problems this way: "The craving that had tormented Patrick was assuaged only by hours of wanton play and languorous touches. The despair that had plagued Sophie was soothed by a husband who gorged himself again and again on her body." (My marginalia: "So they just bang all day and everything's fine? What dopes") At the very end of the book, Patrick says: "We're a pair of idiots, Sophie. Why didn't we talk?" Which is basically what I was wondering the whole time. For the most part, the book is high-energy frivolous fun. But the subplot about Sophie's pregnancy is emphatically not. Its high angst doesn't really fit with the tone of the rest of the book, in part because all the other mysteries and conflicts are so superficial or resolved so happily. Still, it's written so convincingly that I was definitely up at 4am crying over it (though in the spirit of full disclosure, I'm pregnant myself, so calibrate accordingly). First, Sophie reasonably feels upset about her pregnancy because Patrick doesn't appear to want anything to do with it. (He's so stressed out by the possibility of her death in childbirth that he can barely speak to her, but of course this is poorly communicated.) In one scene, she looks at herself in the mirror and feels fat, ugly, and unwanted. Cried during that part. Then Sophie unexpectedly loses the baby at 7 months, which is excruciating to read. She questions what she "did wrong" to "make her baby die"; "She couldn't look at her body now without hating it for its failures, for its inability to provide a good home for her daughter." And Patrick, upon seeing the tiny form of his baby daughter (who Sophie still had to give birth to after she was already dead), tells the baby he loves her and decides they should have more children after all. I'll probably be dehydrated for the rest of my life from all the crying I did over that part of the book. Some of the language is odd; for example, the word "rackety" is overused (though once might've been too much for me), and she switches between "Damn" and "Damme" rather than just being consistent. This book is a very early effort for James and she doesn't seem to have hit her stride yet. She's still one of my favorites, though, and I'll definitely read the last book in this series.
