I say it every time but I love short stories for the way they engage and portray a broad spectrum of humanity. Yes, ‘Lost in the City’ is a microcosm of the African-American experience in Washington DC in the late twentieth century and Edward P. Jones gets to the heart of this with art and skill, yet we can all relate to loss, and fear and the hope that run through these pages. Everyone in these stories is striving for something better, something more than what they have, whether its education for their kids, a better relationship, more money, more something. All have hope but so often in these stories, that hope is dashed and the future cut short. All too often women are hurt and killed by men, three women killed in total in 14 stories, many more hurt. In several stories the opening line is to do with such brutality, there is no shying away from the reality, there is no justification or really even explanation, just statements like this; ‘When Madeline Williams was four years old and her brother Sam was ten, their father killed their mother one night in early April.’ All too often the male characters are portrayed as brutal and selfish running away from unplanned pregnancies and using their strength against the ones who love them. Yet in ‘His Mother’s House’ we see another side to this in a mother for whom her son will always be a child, innocent until proven otherwise. By linking three or four of the stories, with minor characters in one story becoming central in another, Edward P. Jones creates a sense of this small world in a much larger one. He shows us how we are all interconnected, that the idea of family isn’t just about blood and that without someone looking out for us the world can be a hard and lonely place. Relationships, especially between parents and children, grown up or otherwise are the crux to the majority of the stories and provide a large part of their pathos. Neglect and separation, loyalty and fighting, illness and death are all featured and break the heart time and again. Edward P. Jones has a talent for getting inside his characters heads and hearts and splaying them open for us to gaze at and wonder what happened next. However, what so often sets short stories aside from novels is their endings, the lack of neatness or the resolving of something. So many times the endings for these stories simply tapered off and left the story hanging yet in this way they became more poignant and evocative. One of my favorite endings was that of the story ‘Gospel’ where Jones writes; ‘In the end, it grew cold in the car, and colder still, and at first she did not notice, and then when she did, she thought it was the general condition of the whole world, owing to the snow, and that there was not very much she could do about it.’(p.201) These stories are timeless and relevant –in light of what’s going in in America at the moment, the episode with the cop in ‘Young Lions’ was particularly pertinent. But ultimately, although the details of the stories may be unique to this particular community, the yearning and the hope, the drama and the tragedy are colorless, they are universal themes that run across humanity and are why this book is such a great read.
