Having only previously read Tiptree’s shorter work, I wish I hadn’t read this, as it utterly destroys any respect I had for her. Yes, “her”: James Tiptree Jr. was a male pen name for Alice Sheldon. I’ve read a number of her stories over the years, including the famous “Houston, Houston, Do You Read?” and liked them well enough. But this novel, one of the last things she wrote, I don’t know how on Earth this made it to publication. First off, the dialogue is ludicrous. It’s in an ersatz 1930s screwball comedy vein, and I find it impossible that anyone would talk this way. For instance, everyone exclaims “Goodo!” all the time. You can practically see a bad regional actor trying to imitate Jimmy Stewart, punctuating every sentence by slapping his hands together and shouting, “Hoo boy!” Second, the story only holds together by the barest of threads, and the “time bubbles” or whatever they’re called are incredibly inconsistent. Their duration and magnitude and what people can do when caught in them depend entirely on the demands of the story. They work as pure deus ex machina problem solvers. Very unsatisfactory. It’s also incredibly grimdark, with two things punching you in the face: extreme torture and kiddie porn. And the primary victim of the torture is a child. The torture is characterized as oh my goodness this is very bad but the kiddie porn is absolutely celebrated. The pornographer is a hero of the story and everyone accepts that this is perfectly reasonable. There are no parallels drawn between the exploitation of children and the exploitation of the aliens. It seems that Sheldon is saying that it’s perfectly fine to rape kids as long as they aren’t being cut up to make drugs. What the actual fuck? How was this defended to the editor? How did the editor defend this to the publisher? How did no one push back on this once the book was released? Mind-boggling. I did a deep dive into Sheldon’s life story and I came away with the belief that she was fundamentally screwed up. Beyond her being bisexual in an era when society didn’t approve of that, but something deep down, eventually leading her to the murder of her bedridden husband and then killing herself. I get the impulse for euthanasia for someone suffering, but murder-suicide is dysfunction, pure and simple. That’s why I think the kiddie porn was something that she was into. Unlike the torture, there is literally zero pushback from anyone in the story about this. We meet several people from different cultures, including an alien species, and no one has a care that they are using children in a manner which might traumatize them. Given that Sheldon’s first public notice was winning an award for a nude self-portrait she painted when she 17, I suspect that she was sexually abused as a child and internalized that. One of the things I volunteer for is to record survivor stories at an abuse shelter, and Sheldon’s behavior definitely fits the pattern. It’s baffling to me that something this poorly written and, frankly, repulsive, ever saw the light of day.
