THUNDER ON THE PLAINS by Rosanne Bittner is a journey of love in the Wild West that is not for the faint of heart. Gloriously well written, this powerful tale will haunt you long after you have finished it. Colt Travis knows a good opportunity when he sees it. When Bo Landers offers a generous sum of money to guide their group from the Wild West back to Chicago, Colt agrees even though he knows great danger lies ahead. On their journey, he becomes acquainted with Bo's beautiful and brave daughter Sunny despite the fact that he knows they can be nothing more than friends. They come from two different worlds and if that wasn't enough of a barrier, Colt is half-Cherokee. Any kind of relationship could never work. Sunny Landers became fascinated with Colt the first time she met him on the trail and knew she would never forget him. A binding duty to her father's dreams of a transcontinental railroad keeps her focused and preoccupied for most of the time, but that could never keep the memories of Colt Travis far away. As the country changes, Sunny and Colt meet various times and each parting becomes more difficult. Despite all the odds against them, they must decide if true love is enough to conquer all or if they were never meant to be. THUNDER ON THE PLAINS by Rosanne Bittner is the kind of novel that touches your heart and captures your attention so drastically you can't stop reading it until you have finished it. The kind of story filled with characters that become a part of you and takes you on an emotional, yet thrilling journey into another place and time. It's not an easy journey, but it's more realistic, grittier, and not the light and fancy-free novel that most romance fans expect. This is a romance that is all the more rewarding because of the complicated path you have to take in order to reach the ending. One thing I loved about the story was how it paralleled the construction of the transcontinental railroad. This story follows the development from beginning to end and the large part Sunny and Colt play in the railroad's success. Of course that's not the only major historical event featured in this novel. Since THUNDER ON THE PLAINS takes place over such a long span of time, you experience many important events in America's history through the eyes of these characters. Ms Bittner does an amazing job of bringing history to life. It's not just a passing moment that is barely commented on, but actually a part of the story because it involved the characters and affects their lives. Also, since our hero is one half Cherokee, Ms Bittner goes to great lengths to include the trials and struggles Native Americans faced in this tumultuous time. The historical additions and details are brilliantly done and strengthen the overall foundation of the novel. Here is my objection, and is based completely on my own personal opinion...this is an intense read. While some readers may revel in the fact these characters go through a drastic and chaotic journey to find their happily ever after, it isn't necessarily my favorite thing. I literally became overwhelmed with the drama. Twelve plus years is such a long journey for these characters and near the final part of the novel, I was in tears at the end of each chapter. Being so emotionally connected to Sunny and Colt does demonstrate the fabulous writing talent of Ms. Bittner and shows on some level how much I enjoyed the novel, but it was not an easy journey. I don't mean to imply in any way shape or form that this isn't a fabulous novel, because it is. I just feel it's important to express what an emotional and captivating journey readers are in for. The bottom line is, I will never be able to forget Sunny and Colt. THUNDER ON THE PLAINS contained characters that I was quickly introduced to and within a few chapters, I realized they were not going to be forgotten anytime soon. I laughed with them, I cried with them, and I rejoiced with them throughout their journey until the very end. I can't say that this is a novel I would pick up again and again but that does not mean THUNDER ON THE PLAINS lacked for anything. This is an absolutely strong novel with a fantastic grasp on the reality of the time period. If you love your historical romance with a heavy dose of authentic historical details, then this is certainly the novel for you. If you love your historical romance overflowing with angst, than this is certainly the novel for you. If you want a novel that will convince you love can conquer anything, you should run at the chance to read such a classic and captivating tale. Lisa Jo @ The Romance Reviews
