Ruth Rendell wrote over 50 crime novels and seven collections of short stories before dying of a stroke at the age of 84. Piranha to Scurfy is one of her short story collections. Each story in this collection is quite different. Often there is an element of the fantastic or the occult, such as 'the Astronomical Scarf' and 'High Mysterious Union'. The two most subtle stories are 'Walter's Leg' about an aging man who confronts a childhood foe, and 'The Professional', about a reluctant witness to a murder. I found these two particularly disturbing, because of the way evil and violence occurred in ordinary settings. My favorite character in this collection is Ambrose Ribbon, the demented protagonist of Piranha to Scurfy. Ribbon is a Norman Bates type who lives on royalties from his daddy's textbooks and reveres his recently departed mummy. He preserves her bedroom as a shrine, laundering her satiny nightdresses on a bi-weekly schedule and hanging them up as if she was still wearing them. Ribbon fancies himself as a copy-editor, despite the fact he has never been employed by any publishing house, or indeed, employed at all. The rooms of his mother's house are fixed with shelves, from floor to ceiling, and over time Ribbon has filled the shelves with books he has reviewed to the point where Ribbon is now bricked in by encyclopedias and novels. Whenever a publisher releases a new bestseller from one of 'his' authors, Ambrose hastens to one of his favoured bookstores to purchase it. He then proceeds to scour it for errors of fact or grammar, upon which he writes to the author and publisher to report these "howlers" and demand correction prior to its release in paperback. Eventually, Ribbon becomes obsessed and haunted by one the novels he skewers -- a sensationalist occult tome titled 'Demogorgon'. As he spirals into insanity, he feels the scaly claws of the demogorgan under his bed when he reaches for his slippers, and imagines the shrubberies in his garden are advancing towards him. He buries the book in the flowerbeds, but it is too late. One of the things I like best about Rendell is how she inhabits a character so completely, inventing unique mannerisms, vocabulary and temperament for them. In PIRANHA to SCURFY, I had to continually google words to decode the main character's indignant outbursts, such as "farrago of nonsense". Rendell is a great read for people who like quirky characters, twist endings and fantastic use of language, like this paragraph from the Astronomical Scarf: Elaine's sister wore the scarf to a lecture at the Royal Society of Lepidopterists, of which she was a fellow. Cloakroom arrangements in the premises of learned societies are often somewhat slapdash, and here, in a Georgian house in Bloomsbury Square, fellows, members, and their guests were expected to hang up their coats themselves on a row of hooks in a dark corner of the hall. When all the hooks were in use, coats had to be either placed over those already there, or hung up on the floor. Elaine's sister, arriving rather late, took off her coat, threaded the astronomical scarf through one sleeve, in at the shoulder and out at the cuff, and draped the coat over someone's very old ocelot. I've re-read this paragraph a few times, and savoured "Lepidopterists" and "old ocelot". Priceless. Will definitely be reading more Rendells!
