Waverley is my first Walter Scott experience. I've been meaning to read him for a long time now and am glad to have put a step forward in that direction. My choice of Waverley as the first read of Walter Scott is due to the historic time period it was set in. The history and the Scottish setting in this novel are charming, and as his first read, it didn't disappoint me. I must first give credit to the story, for it was interesting. It tells the story of a young man named Edward Waverley who finds himself embroiled in a political intrigue in the middle of the Jacobite rising. The story is mainly of things that happen to him, the difficulties he faces, and his mind's debate on his loyalty. But the background of the history and the beautiful Scottish setting play an important role adding a lot of colour and weight to the story so as to make the story not only about the adventures of Edward Waverley. However, the flow of the story was painfully slow for me. The first half of the story was more of descriptions and introductions than any active action. I wouldn't say they were completely boring; there were parts that were quite interesting. But, as a whole, there were too many details making inroads into the plot and as such, its flow suffered. The second half picked on the action, yet in parts, the progress was slackened by Scott's obvious love for description. However, other than the speed of its progress, I had no issue with the plot, for I found it quite interesting. As to Scott's writing, I didn't find it too difficult or too heavy to read. Of course, Scott has made use of a fair amount of Gaelic, but since I listened to those parts rather than me reading it, I didn't find those parts particularly difficult. That is the advantage of using audio along with the text. You can listen to the difficult parts while following the text without labouring to read them. The characters were interesting and I enjoyed their different character traits. Yet, for some reason, I couldn't fully connect with them. I liked them but from a distance. Edward Waverley, though called the "hero" by the author, was only the center character, and though his character is developed from an idle, ignorant youth to an understanding, responsible man, I found myself enjoying some of the other characters, especially the Scottish Highland chief more than the "hero". The unlooked heroin (if I may say so) took me by surprise but was glad and thankful to Scott for including such a character. It was a fitting tribute to the women of the time to show that even though generally timid and gentle, they could rise to the occasion and show such a strength of character when in need. Most of the charm of the story was provided by the history of the Jacobite uprise and the beautiful Scottish setting. They complimented the story and increased its enjoyment. Sir Walter Scott seems unsympathetic to the cause, but he has done justice in describing the events without prejudice. I enjoyed the historical background as detailed by him. And as to the beautiful Scottish setting, it made me longing for a visit to the Scottish Highlands. :) I'm glad to have finally crossed the barrier and stepped into the literary world of Sir Walter Scott. Taking the first step is always an effort. :) Now that I have, I'd like to check out some others in the Waverley series.
