This is a classic for a reason. It's a brilliant book, in which Becker discusses Otto Rank's writings in a highly accessible way, that is absolutely relevant to 21st century society. The knowledge that we will die defines our lives, and the ways humans choose to deal with this knowledge (consciously or subconsciously) are what creates culture - all culture; from BDSM to Quakerism. The downside is that the book was first published in 1973, and therefore contains some highly offensive writing. It's a big ask, but please overlook the bit about Greenacre and Boss's (1968) explanation of why women don't have kinks; because they are 100% passive, and naturally submissive. The male has to "perform the sexual act" so it is natural for him to develop fetishes. However women don't have to get aroused, or channel their desires (just lie there, I guess), so they don't have kinks. Ever (p. 243). Ugh. Also, please ignore everything Becker says on homosexuality (i.e. the whole chapter on mental illness - as it was labelled in the DSM until 1973): namely that homosexuality is the "perversion" of weak men because of their sense of powerlessness, a lack of a father-figure, and a terror of the difference of women.** Also, the awful parts on "transvitites", who "believe they can transform animal reality by dressing it in cultural clothing" (p. 238). And also can you please overlook all the gendered language, and the way women don't count as actual people to Becker? Aside from all that this is a wonderful book, and everyone should read it. And luckily for me Greg already explained why, in detail, so go read his review. **This is Becker's opinion, not Rank's. Rank actually linked homosexuality to creativity and freedom from society, which pisses Becker off: "Rank was so intent on accenting the positive, the ideal side of perversion, that he almost obscured the overall picture . . . [homosexual acts are] protests of weakness rather than strength . . . the bankruptcy of talent." Double ugh. P.S. Weirdly, Becker repeats as fact (p. 249) that Hitler engaged in coprophilia, by getting a young girl (allegedly his neice) to crap on his head. There's no actual evidence for this. It's part of the attempt to frame Hitler as a monstrous being, rather than as a man who carried out monstrous acts. Over the years people have also attempted to frame Hitler as gay for the same reason.
