In the midst of planning a winter carnival and skating competition to aid a school in Mexico that has been hit by an earthquake, 13-year-old sleuth Trixie Belden half-overhears conversations and half-reads papers she’s told in no uncertain terms are none of her business. She agrees, but can’t help speculating with her best friend, Honey Wheeler, whether there isn’t something bothering the Wheeler family groom, Bill Regan. Through her 6-year-old brother she gets wind of a "sperimen"("experiment". Bobby’s baby talk has got to be one of the most annoying things about these books). Trixie, Honey, Trixie’s brother Mart and Brian, along with Diana Lynch, and Honey’s adopted brother, Jim, form the club known as the Bob-Whites of the Glen, who solve mysteries, irritate the police and foil the plans of many a crook. They live in the Hudson River Valley of New York state, not far from White Plains. The series ran from 1948 to 1986 with various authors. The present book, The Black Jacket Mystery is the eighth of 39 books. Originally released in 1961, it was re-released in 2004. The volume that I have is one of the new versions. The book is attributed to “Kathryn Kenny,” a pen name used presumably by several people. I couldn't find the name of the author of this book. Riding the bus to school one morning, the girls watch as a boy in a black leather jacket and matching cap gets on. Trixie kicks Honey’s shin. "Wonder where he left his motorcycle," she whispers to Honey. It’s the start of a beautiful relationship. When a "catamount" scares their horses and causes them to run away, Honey loses a watch—her dress-up watch. They go back the next day to see if they can find it, but no luck. They do find the prints of cowboy boots like the ones the new kid, Dan Mangan wears. When the watch later turns of up pawned, the girls conclude that Dan must have stolen it. The rest of the book is about trying to decide whether Dan is a hood or not. He’s been given a job working for Mr. Maypenny, the Wheelers’ gamekeeper, so it’s assumed he'a a relative of his. Dan himself is not particularly friendly to anyone, but likes to wow them in the cafeteria with tales of his exploits in the big city. When the Bob-White’s clubhouse is broken into, trashed and burgled to the sum of $3.40, the girls again find the prints of cowboy boots. They’re much too big for Dan and they’re polished brown, while Dan’s are black. Could the girls be mistaken? The moral of the story is not to judge a book by its cover, even if there is some reason to believe that the person is not exactly without fault. There is also one huge plot hole in an incident designed to bring out the hero in Dan. The redemption at the end so contrived it makes Darth Vader’s look natural. But I digress. While the writing is simplistic and the minor are characters super nice, Trixie herself shows the emotional swings of an adolescent. She can be mistaken, she can argue (briefly) with her parents or forget to do chores, but she is a good girl and regrets deeply when she’s wronged someone. While she’s a little over the top, she is not one dimensional either. One of the odd terms (at least to my ears) in the book is "catamount" to refer to a cougar or lynx. Granted I lived in New York state quite a few years after the Bob-Whites did, but I’d never heard that word before, so I doubt that it’s regional. Of course, of the six years I spent there, I don’t recall any sighting of a such a critter anywhere near where lived, that is, the Mohawk River Valley, north and west of Bob-White territory. While they may still exist in remote areas in the Adirondacks or Catskills (I’m guessing), I’d be willing to bet it’s been quite a while since they ventured too close to humans. Too many of them ended up the way the catamount in the book did. This one is hard for me to recommend because of its saccharine sweetness and unrealistic redemption story, but, for a 10-year-old who has read and enjoyed other Trixie Belden stories, this might be quite enjoyable. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
