I've marked this book as "read" but actually I didn't finish the book because I knew how it ended - I remembered how it ended, and didn't want to relive it. Going in, I knew the book was based on the real murder case but assumed it would be altered, characters physical characteristics changed, in other words, that it would be a work of fiction. Instead I was reading an account, overlaid with the author's presumptions of knowing the people involved and their thoughts, of the tragic death of someone I had met. When I was young, I knew Imelda Riney's brother; not well but we hung out in the same figure of eight in Dublin; he was a sweet fellow and I enjoyed running into him. One night he brought Imelda with him to our regular haunt, the Bailey Pub, and introduced us. She was just 18 at the time, a gorgeous and luminous girl and without any trace of conceit - in fact just as described in the "novel" down to her waist-length wild curly red hair. Some years later, watching a news segment on the search for Imelda and her son, Liam, on TV, I saw her brother among the family members and was appalled to realize that the missing woman was the girl I had met that night in the Bailey. And then, a few days later, when they were found I, along with the rest of the country, was horrified and devastated at the outcome. So, it was with a creeping sense of horror and, yes, outrage, that I read the book, "In the Forest," to discover how closely O'Brien had kept to the real-life events, how she hadn't bothered to even alter the physical characteristics of Imelda. I reached a point where I had to put it down as, in reading it, I felt as if I was colluding in the exploitation of that tragedy. There have been many apologists for this book and even some reviewers who have claimed the negative press in Ireland was Irish begrudgery and petty jealousy at O'Brien's international success, eg: Ronan Bennett in the Guardian. This, in my opinion, is a cheap shot at the reception of the book in Ireland, and untrue. For starters, O'Brien has never, to my knowledge, been resented in Ireland, the opposite in fact. Ireland was proud of her and she is widely read there; as a writer, she was the hero of my youth and that of my friends'. While the book certainly illustrates failings on the part of social services in Ireland, I feel O'Brien could have exposed those failings without exploiting, for profit, a real life tragedy and one so recent at the time the book was published that the families and friends of the victims were still raw and grieving. That said, I read it at least 10 or more years after it was published and, despite being only an acquaintance of Imelda's brother and since having lost contact with him, I still found it sickening.
