Should I like a Vince Flynn novel? Well, before he died of prostate cancer in 2013 Flynn was a right winger to say the least. He was a frequent guest on Glenn Beck's programs and Fox News Channel. It should be noted that virtually all independent ratings for veracity show Fox News to be the least honest and the purveyor of fake news more than anyone other than Donald Trump. Hey, don't get mad at me, I didn't conduct those ratings studies! But I digress, as the cliche goes. I like Flynn's novels and his protagonist, Mitch Rapp. There is, at times, a small current of right wingish attitude in some character's comments in the Rapp series but overall Flynn was very even handed when it came to criticism of those in power. Whatever I might think of his politics, that I cannot fault him for. But what does that have to do with a review of The Third Option you say? Everything! In this book the Republicans and the Democrats alike come in for scathing review in this novel. Rapp is set up to die. Well, that's not all that unusual for those that have followed this series so far, but this time it almost happens. But of course he survives - you don't kill off your main character in a series. Not unless you want to end the series and even then. . . well, just ask Conan Doyle who tried to do away with Sherlock only to be forced to resurrect him in subsequent novels. But Flynn had no such plans for Mr. Rapp. He wanted him to continue and in so doing he offered readers of action/covert/thrillers a continuing thumping good read. The action in this novel takes us away from the Middle East and starts in Germany and then winds up in the D.C. area, as dangerous for Rapp as is Beirut. This book brings us to the end of Thomas Stanfield's brilliant career and introduces us to a deft practitioner of Machiavellian arts. We see relationships grow and others come to an end, and in the midst of all of this Rapp practices his particular style of lethal diplomacy. This book is interesting and the action is non stop. If you are a liberal or a conservative you won't be put off by this (or any of the first three that I've read) Mitch Rapp book. There is enough blame for finger pointing all around.
