✩ 5 stars ✩ What to Expect: ➼ Riches-to-Rags-to-Riches ➼ Unexpectedly Orphaned ➼ Emotional Read ➼ Rich in Spirit/A Princess at Heart ➼ Children’s Classic ➼ Third Person POV As a long time fan of the film, my expectations were high, but I’m happy to report that the book was equally as charming and magical. Classics don’t always feel as accessible from a modern perspective, but this still felt very relevant and had high readability. This is a riches-to-rags story in which Sara Crewe goes from a very wealthy child to a penniless orphan overnight. Whether she was rich or poor, she remained uncommonly kind and generous to everyone around her with no regard to class or societal norms that may have dictated otherwise. I’ve had a hard time writing this review, because there were some things I found problematic that I would like to address, but it’s hard to do so without spoilers or detailing the entire plot for those who haven’t read the book or seen the film. Her father’s circumstances were significantly altered and those circumstances are at the root of most of the issues I had with the book. If you don’t want to know the alternate ending, please don’t read any further. In the movie, her father leaves her at the boarding school when he is called to war (World War I). It is later reported that he has died and that he also lost his fortune, resulting in all of her status being stripped from her. These details aligned with the book, but this is where the plot diverges. In the movie, he did not actually die but suffered a head injury that caused temporary amnesia and his identity was confused with other soldier who had died. He miraculously ends up living next door to the boarding school with no memory of his life or his daughter. In a very cinematic turn of events, he comes into contact with his daughter and his memory returns and they of course live happily ever after. Admittedly, this does sound a little too good to be true, but it’s fiction, so why not? In the book, her father does actually die, however, and it is his business partner in the diamond mine that comes looking for her. It was reported that his investment in the mine was not profitable which caused him to lose his fortune, but those reports turn out to be false. His business partner then spent years searching for Sara to give her her inheritance. He did not know which school she had been placed at and had been searching all over Europe only to eventually learn that she had been living next door to him for all that time. To me, this is even less likely than the circumstances detailed in the film. Even if he didn’t simply take the money and run, he wouldn’t have spent anywhere near that long searching for her. This is where things become a bit problematic. I think it was accurate for the time period, but considering how magnanimous Sara’s character is, it’s interesting that the author herself does not seem more evolved. In both versions, there is also an Indian man living next door who owns a monkey that sneaks into the attic room that Sara is living in. After she helps to return the monkey, the man secretly sneaks over (kind of creepy) to decorate her whole room and bring food and gifts. He does not take credit for it, so to Sara it feels like magic. This is very beautiful and wonderful and makes her feel like a princess again after being downgraded to a servant, but she is not the only girl living in an attic room. There was another girl who had always been a servant living in a room next to her that gets no such treatment. Of course Sara shares, but while Sara gets an entire new soft bed, Becky gets maybe a spare blanket and some food. At the end when the man decides to adopt Sara, Becky gets to come along with her and work as her servant. A step up for her for sure, but still a very mixed message in a book and a storyline that felt designed to teach us to look past class and societal norms. The underlying subtext that Sara gets to stay a “princess,” but Becky will always be a servant was just very confusing to me. In the movie, Sara’s father adopts Becky which was a much happier ending and again less problematic even if it was likely an unrealistic outcome. In the book, Sara is also described as having dark hair and green eyes. Her description sounds very beautiful but it’s clear that she did not meet the western standard for beauty at the time. It also raises some questions as to her parentage and leads me to assume her mother was likely Indian. Not knowing the circumstances, it’s hard to say if this is problematic or not, but knowing what I know about white male colonizers, I’d say it’s likely. With classics, there will always be aspects that aren’t completely right or acceptable in society today, but I did mostly love this book. It’s a beautiful and inspirational story that to me represents the potential we have as human beings to be kind to one another. I cried like a baby when she gave a hungry little girl 5 out of 6 of her fresh buns even though she was poor and hungry herself. Sara is just such a beautiful soul that we should all strive to be more like. This is definitely a book that I think everyone should read at least once. 💖 ✼ ҉ ✼ ҉ ✼ ҉ ✼ ҉ ✼ ҉ ✼ ҉ ✼ Pre-read: Excited for this one! The movie has always had a special place in my heart. ♥️ Classic pick for June 👸🏻 ≪ ◦ ❖ ◦ ≫ Connect with me on Instagram
