Going to school when I did, it’s hard to conceive of how important the psychoanalytic project was for so much of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The influence of Freud and the subsequent schools of psychology developed by his students spread into virtually every discipline, from literary analysis to economics, but by the time I got there it was all pretty much gone. I’m sure that somewhere there’s an Onoda-type holdout department that won’t let the old stuff go, or one or two octogenarian professors whose names are recognizable enough that they haven’t been forced into retirement, but for me psychoanalysis was primarily discussed in the past tense. This book is from 1973, and clearly had quite an impact on American thought at the time (if Woody Allen movies are any representation, at least), but seems impossibly dated forty years later. In fact, aside from a handful of obscure movie references, I wouldn’t be too terribly surprised to find that this came from the 30’s or 40’s. Becker’s project here, rather than an actual mediation on death, is a reorientation of psychoanalysis, putting death at the top (or bottom?) of the pyramid in place of the sexual impulses that Freud spent so much time thinking about. This new direction for study is a kind of synthesis of Freud, Kierkegaard, and notably Otto Rank, one of Freud’s disciples who Becker believes hasn’t received the credit he is due. In that way, there’s not a whole lot of original thought in this book, which is probably its most contemporary quality. Rather than present new ideas, he shuffles and reorganizes old ones from disparate sources that, due to various disciplinary and dispositional prejudices, have been kept at arm’s length from one another. It’s really an extended commentary on the work of prior psychoanalysts, and its (syn)thesis was apparently fairly revolutionary at the time (though, again, its late publication date makes me suspicious of that), but today it seems somewhat obvious. And it all reads like a bunch of garbage. It’s clear that psychoanalytic thinking must have been a great deal of fun, finding all kinds of willy-nilly metaphors for everyday behaviors that can be pulled out of mythology or Shakespeare or one’s ass. When one isn’t beholden to any sort of evidence other than anecdotes from like-minded psychologists, one can say pretty much anything one wants and, if the voice is properly authoritative, say it to a whole lot of people. It’s like philosophy without all that pesky logic and rigorous thinking. It seems unfair to apply 2012 knowledge to a book that didn’t have access to it, but this is from 1973. Were we really still looking for cures-through-metaphor to things like schizophrenia and – appallingly – homosexuality at such a late date? (Psychiatric drugs for schizophrenics were available at least since the 50s, but you’ll have a hard time finding a suggestion of any potential biological/chemical causes to mental diseases here.) Oh, and if you’re a woman, bad news: there’s either no hope for you, or Becker isn’t interested in looking for it. It’s your genitals, after all, that are causing all the problems in the world. Even if we chock all this offensive nonsense up to being a sign o’ the times (which I can’t help but reiterate is 1973, much too late to excuse it), the book still buys into the “heroic soul” project that is to this reader extremely annoying. The idea that some people are just too sensitive for this world, and that the beautiful souls of our great men need special care is an adolescent concept that I’m always surprised can be found in so much literature written by people who should have been old enough to know better. “You just don’t get me, man.” Half of this book’s sentiments can be found on t-shirts at your local Hot Topic. The concept that humanity lives in a state of denial of our own imminent demise is interesting, but doesn’t feel particularly new, considering mortality has been a theme in literature since… literature. That we need to shed our reliance on the common denials – materialism, status, class – and transfer them to the unhappy cure of Becker’s Rank-ian brand of psychoanalysis is not convincing in the least, and so this book feels like yet another (albeit depressive) common denial to add to the list. It may have been a big influence on everyone in the 1970’s, but thankfully we’ve put a lot of this stuff behind us.
