ETA: Upping my rating to a solid 4 stars on reread. The things that bothered me most the first time I read this bothered me less this time around. I was able to be more amused by Tiffany the spoiled brat, not just annoyed. It’s pretty funny to see how Sir Waldo and Miss Trent manage her. I don't always love Georgette Heyer's heroes and heroines, but The Nonesuch has a very likable pair (even if their names make me wince): the witty, intelligent and kind Sir Waldo, who is also young and handsome (though you wouldn't guess it from his name) and the honorable, even-tempered and also intelligent Ancilla Trent, a lady in Reduced Circumstances who is now working as a governess. Ancilla is a capable, sensible person - my kind of heroine! - who knows how to manage a situation even when others around her are losing their heads. With such a highly rational pair, the craziness has to break out in this book somewhere, and it does so in the form of Tiffany Wield, Miss Trent's charge, whose beauty drives the local young men to distraction and who is the most amazingly spoiled brat you'll ever have the dubious pleasure of meeting in literature. Tiffany's behavior is way over the top; she acts more like a particularly bratty 6 year old than a 17 year old. I got thoroughly tired of reading about her antics. Luckily she doesn't fool either Waldo or Miss Trent. Still: minus one star for Too. Much. Tiffany. The other reason this isn't one of my favorite GH books: about 3/4 of the way through we get hit with that old Regency romance trope, the Big Misunderstanding. Happily, Sir Waldo never loses hope and remains determined to get to the bottom of it, and most of the time between the start of the misunderstanding and when it gets resolved is spent on other topics (Tiffany, of course), so the reader isn't put through the usual amount of agony. I give Heyer props for that. Still, it's a pretty far-fetched and, of course, unnecessary misunderstanding. The use of this trope - by far my least favorite plot device in the romance genre - made me knock part of another star off its rating. If you can find Tiffany amusing or at least give her shenanigans a pass, I think this is one of Heyer’s better novels. Favorite quote: "Mr Culver's carefully arranged locks were too lavishly pomaded to rise on end, but his eyes showed a tendency to start from their sockets."
