I tried very hard to not take a screenshot of every page. Here are my favorites: "Throughout the whole Old Testament in particular we find people (like Abraham) arguing with God and being implicitly praised for it. Becoming involved in the Bible does not mean simply taking everything it says without the slightest murmur of difficulty. It means at once being willing to argue and fight back, provided that if we are clearly wrong we will finally admit to it. The Bible prefers honest disagreement to a dishonest submission." "One of the basic truths put forward in the Bible as a whole is not merely that God is always right and man is always wrong, but that God and man can face each other in authentic dialogue: one which implies a true reciprocity between persons, each of whom fully respects the other's rights and freedom. The covenant idea brings this out clearly... The whole idea of covenant, dialog, reciprocity, mutual respect—and above all the idea that God respects man's liberty, dignity, and rights—is brought out by giving the exchange a frankly human character. 'Then God said... Then Moses replied.'" "...The prohibition of idolatry is in fact one of the deepest roots of this Biblical doctrine of liberty, idolatry being inseparable from servitude to human systems that exploit man's natural needs and appetites for their own ends, or seek to dominate him by brute force. Idolatry is a basic form of spiritual violence. This was clearly understood in the non-violent resistance of Christian martyrs against the idolatrous claims of the Roman State." "All through the Bible we find what we might call the groundwork of a theology of liberation and resistance. 'The People of God' to whom the message of liberty is directed is, in fact, a small nation or a minority in exile, constantly called upon to resist the massive powers of invaders and oppressors, but to do so in a special way: trusting not in alliances with the big political powers but in the hidden, seemingly hazardous, but really firm promises of God. It is precisely in the soil of oppression and in the call for spiritual resistance that God sows the seed of that [radical] Biblical humanism. The prophetic vision of a 'united, peaceful mankind, of justice for the poor and helpless' blazed out in what is essentially a dark and tragic situation."
