Jonathan Aitken was, at the time of this book's writing, a member of the British Parliament. He came to know Richard Nixon through this avenue, and has produced a highly complimentary, ever so gently critical biography of the disgraced former President. Aitken himself later fell from grace with a perjury conviction on his record. The book was written in 1993, only a year before Nixon's death. Since Aitken is British, he uses British spelling, such as “cheque” instead of “check”, that is a slight adjustment for an American reader. From the beginning of the book, on page 7, he writes that Nixon's father, Frank, was caricatured as being “cruel” by other biographers, but that this was not so. Yet, Aitken goes onto make an excellent case for Frank being cruel: forcing his family to drink unpasteurized milk, which at a minimum led to frequent bouts of ill health and at its worse may have been the biggest factor in the early deaths of two of Nixon's brothers, Arthur and Harold; frequently screaming at his children and wife, being unable to control his emotions; refusing to accept free treatment from the local hospital for Harold in his battle with tuberculosis, which caused him to drain his financial resources on expensive treatments in Arizona. This last fact resulted in Nixon being unable to accept partial scholarships that were offered to him by both Harvard and Yale. Aitken, however, writes on page 30, “In good times Frank would have gladly scraped together the necessary parental subsidy...”. But Frank's actions, at least in part, caused him to be unable to help fund an Ivy League education for Richard. This is an example of Aitken's attempt to put the best possible gloss on things that Nixon or his family did. Aitken frequently seems to make numerical errors when writing about something early in Nixon's life and then mentioning Nixon's commentary on it X number of years later. An example of this is on page 228, as writes about Nixon's 1953 trip to Asia: Nixon... claiming in his memoirs thirty-six years later...”. Nixon published him memoirs in 1978, twenty-five years after the Asia trip under discussion. Another example comes on page 248, when he writes that Dwight Eisenhower had a heart attack in 1954. This is not so; the heart attack occurred in 1955. Considering that earlier in the book he did get the year correct, and that this was a big moment in Nixon's vice-presidency, this is a sloppy error to make. Aitken is so busy trying to remake Nixon's image into that of a kind and caring man that he fails to cover other much more important things. Case in point: Aitken spends an entire page detailing Nixon's efforts to help a Hollywood producer stay on a film project (see page 312). Yet, he devotes a total of one sentence to Nixon's nomination of Warren Burger as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. He also fails to mention at all Nixon's policies and actions in conjunction with the 1971 India-Pakistan war or Chile's 1970 election of Salvador Allende. Those topics are not even in the book, but we can be rest assured that Nixon helped that Hollywood movie producer. John Dean's doorstep is where Aitken lays the blame for Watergate. His view of Dean comes on page 417: “Dean was a transparently flashy chances whose track record was as full of ill-smelling holes as a slice of Emmenthal cheese.” He proceeds to finger Dean as the architect of the Watergate break-in and subsequent cover-up. Dean's hands are nowhere near clean, nor was his behavior laudatory. Still, Watergate was the summation of many different things, all beginning with Nixon creating a culture in his administration of trusting no one and doing whatever is needed to strike at people opposed to him. While Aitken does not absolve Nixon of any responsibility for Watergate, he loosens the leash as much as possible to the point where, at worst, Nixon is viewed as naive and exercising unwise judgment. This is nowhere near the best Nixon biography out there. Aitken too quickly looks for ways to spin Nixon's misdeeds into innocent or naive decisions. While his concern that many biographers have focused on Nixon's shortcomings, especially concerning Watergate, is understandable, he over-corrects in his effort to show Nixon in a more human light. Several times, he refers to Nixon as a “prophet” and on the final page admits that he has “affection and admiration for him.” While this is not a fault for a biographer to have, and certainly there are things to admire about Nixon, the admiration in this case has resulted in a biased portrait. Thanks to his exclusive access to Nixon's private papers, and his extensive multiple interviews with Nixon, there is some merit to reading this book if one wishes to gain a different perspective on Nixon. However, if one were looking for one good book to read about Nixon, this one is most definitely not it.
