Confounding and enchanting in equal measures, FREDDY'S BOOK defies easy categorization. Yet its compelling story...or should that be stories?...and their elusive meanings intrigue me to this day. A professor visiting a university spends the night at the home of one of the local academics. The academic reveals his son is a..."monster". Of a sort. The professor meets the son, a young man named Freddy, who is a shy, sensitive person, but of tremendous height. A giant, in effect. Before the professor leaves, Freddy slips him a secret manuscript...a tale of a knight in the middle ages, locked in a titanic struggle with the devil himself, and all the terrible powers of darkness... I'm not the first reviewer to say he prefers the opening sequence in 'reality' compared to the subsequent fantasy setting. Nor am I the first that laments the fact that we never return to the realistic setting, and see how Freddy's story ends. Yet, on reflection, I think that misses the point. We know how Freddy's story ends. He's rejected by society, held in contempt by his own father. There's nowhere for him to go. Likely he will spend the rest of his days a recluse in his house. His only means of escape is into fantasy, to create a world where he...or an ideal version of himself...may be free. His only escape is his book. If this novel is about anything, then it is about the very act of imagination itself, and what desperate circumstances may inspire it. I think it has a few things to say about the kinds of authors that tend to come up with truly strange fantastical tales, and how a struggle for acceptance may be futile in life, but not so futile in fiction. It's a strange, bittersweet novel, with lovely prose and some sensitively drawn characters. The fantastical setting, while perhaps not as resonant as the realistic one, is also evocatively described, and the knight's noble struggle with the devil is highly memorable. Yet it's perhaps natural that it's Freddy...poor, doomed, ugly, beautiful Freddy who makes the deepest and most powerful impression. I think this may be my favorite Gardner book.
