Synopsis : Naive country lad Kit Charing's obstreperous and stingy guardian has made it clear that the boy will inherit nothing unless Kit marries one of her nieces: either the amiable but rather dim fashion plate Frederica Standen, the simple-minded Lady Dolphinton, mean-spirited Claudette, uptight bible-thumper Huette... or the intended target, the beautiful and very popular Jacqueline Westruther. Unfortunately, despite being rather in need of funds, the prideful minx Jacqueline resists, refusing to engage with this marriage plot. And so Kit enacts his own scheme: he and kindly Frederica will fake an engagement, in the hopes of igniting jealousy in the heart of flirtatious Jacqueline. All's well that end's well when both Kit and the reader come to understand the callow heartlessness beneath Jacqueline's beauty, and the strength and loyalty that lie under Frederica's shallow obsession with fashion and manners. Girls will be girls! As boys will be boys. I loved this sweet and comedic confection. Heyer must have been in a playful mood when writing Cotillion, as she does surprising things in this novel: mercilessly sending up the superficial nature of high society including its discreet but constant focus on money; putting romance to the side while instead providing a generous number of comic scenes based around shopping, couture and the appropriate colors that should be worn by certain complexions, describing an unpleasant dinner party followed by a trashy masquerade, and the visiting of many so-called attractions of London; spoofing the very idea of how a proper marriage proposal should be conducted; making unseemly jokes about red light districts and honey traps; and best of all, confounding reader expectations around gender roles and what sorts of traits romantic leads should embody. I grinned happily and laughed out loud many times. The title is clever as well, delineating the romantic entanglements that four couples dance through in the novel - with one couple being a surprise, last-minute addition. All in all, Cotillion is an amiable and cheerful delight. Actual Synopsis : switch the genders in the Synopsis.
