I know I promised myself I'd pace myself on Anne Stuart, but then I saw the blurb for this one and it was repeatedly compared to one of my favorite Paul Newman movies, Long, Hot Summer . It has been years since I've watched that one (I purposely didn't watch it once I started reading this just in case it made the book suffer from the comparison), but I just couldn't resist. And yeah... Meh. Jassy was actually a really great character. I enjoyed her. I know she was a bit of a goody-two-shoes, but she had a spine and a sense of self-worth (similar to the way Joanne Woodward was in LHS). And while I didn't hate Caleb, he had reasons for behaving the way he did, and he certainly had reasons to hate her brother, who... yikes ... the revenge-is-all-I-do schtick did get a little old (I'm going to add the caveat here that I cannot for the life of me remember Paul Newman's motivations in LHS, so maybe it was another homage). And in the end, either his varied levels of revenge happened off-page, or Jassy handled them due to coincidences that really had nothing to do with any strings he'd pulled. I didn't understand everyone's cluelessness about Jassy's brother, Harrison. And honestly, because we only got to see him as his life fell apart, the fact that no one saw his absolute fuckheadedness until now was really unbelievable. I would have liked to see Jassy stand up to him more rather than letting him think he'd gotten his way and doing her own thing anyway. I would have liked to see some sort of trace of normalcy from him that made it a little more clear that he wasn't always a jackass because that is all he ever is in this book, and you find yourself wondering why the hell that wasn't more obvious to Jassy and why she didn't take more steps to get out from under his thumb. Even the revelation that he beats his wife... I mean Jassy, helping victims of spousal abuse is your entire job and you live with these people, how did something over the years not set off a red flag?! A lot of it felt like it wasn't plotted out in advance, or even revised during later drafts, so much as while-Anne-Stuart-was-writing-it-and-according-to-what-felt-right-just-then. While the book was a lot of fun for the first half or so, once Jassy sets her sights on Caleb, it went flat. And it isn't really even because of the romance -- it's because the entire plot, romance and all, kind of let itself go after that. I would have liked more of some of the background characters to make the story feel more real. Additionally, even though the way this ended gave me a similar feeling to the sudden way a lot of movies end, this one really could have used an Epilogue. Jassy's finally breaking free of her clinging family and her own do-gooder instincts would have meant a lot more to me if she would have left sooner in the book and I could have seen it in action. As it was, it just kind of felt like a "meh" gesture -- which is how a lot of this book felt to me. So even though this hit my newly discovered love of Romances Involving Old Money Family Dramas, it wasn't deep enough for me to rate this any higher than three stars.
