I don't often rate books 5 stars, and I wasn't sure this deserved the rating, but when you love a book so much that the feeling of “well, that's over” at the end makes you cry a little, I guess that's a 5-star read. Anyway, 4 stars doesn't seem to do it justice. Chances are, you happened across this book because you saw the 1973 movie version starring Ryan and Tatum O'Neal. You know the truism that the movie version of a book always leaves a lot out, because you can't fit a full-length novel into a 2-hour movie? Well it's truer than ever in this case. The film version comprises literally only about the first third of the book (although it's fairly true to that third), and there's enough material in the other two-thirds for at least one sequel, and maybe two. So if you got a wistful feeling when Long Boy and Addie drove off together in that old truck at the end of the movie, the good news is, there are plenty more adventures still in store. The bad news is, you still won't want the adventure to end when you hit the last page. If you're a fan of the movie, there's one significant difference you should know going in. The film version of Addie is pretty much just like the book version... except that film Addie has a moral compass and an unwavering sense of justice that is almost utterly lacking in book Addie. Film Addie only went with Long Boy (a) because he was supposed to be driving her to her relatives to stay, and (b) because he owed her $200 after swindling that money out of the brother of the man who killed Addie's mother. All the shenanigans that ensued were almost incidental, until the very end of the movie. However, book Addie is a born grifter, pure and simple. Once she sees how Long Boy operates, she takes to the lifestyle with a will, and any fiction that she's going to stay with her kin is quickly dispensed with. It's so obvious they're a great team that Long Boy never even bothers to try to take her there, and Addie never shows any desire to go. And if you're hoping to see more of the Robin-Hood-esque Addie from the movie who steals from the rich and gives to the poor and acts as Long Boy's external conscience, you can forget it. This duo will con anyone they can get money out of, although obviously folks with more money to spare are better pickings. And although Addie takes great delight in pretending Long Boy is her daddy, the question of whether he's really her father is never really examined the way it is in the movie. It's interesting to observe that Long Boy's “dropped wallet” scheme and the inheritance scheme they used to swindle Uncle Beau in the final third are just broad variants of what most people know today as “the Nigerian scheme.” Some form of it has probably been done nearly as long as there's been money. In the dropped wallet scheme, you actually show the mark the large amount of money they stand to gain, and then convince them they just need to cover certain interim expenses in order to get it. By the time the mark realizes he's never getting that money, the grifter is long gone with all the "expenses." That's not to say it's all pure greed and self-interest. There is one part of their adventure where Long Boy regularly has to buy groceries as an excuse to cash a check (from one of their marks), and Addie relates that it became their habit to drop the groceries off on the porch of the sorriest-looking shack they saw on their way out of town. Where the movie ends, the book is just getting started, as Long Boy and Addie move on to bigger and better schemes making them more money, broadening their territory, and improving their lifestyle. By the end, you'll scoff at how they used to sell bibles to widows for $8, $10, or even $20. It culminates in a grand scheme to defraud a dying heiress of her multi-million-dollar fortune – a scheme in which Addie herself plays the starring role. And don't worry... it turns out our mercenary little Addie has a humanitarian streak after all. One thing that made me really sad, though, was the way Addie abandoned Mayflower at the end, a woman she seemed to genuinely adore, by walking out and disappearing after expressly promising not to leave. I guess just like movie Addie, when actually offered an alternative life, she realized she loved being on the road with Long Boy and doing "business" more than the idea of having a happy and comfortable home. You could say Addie is the free-spirited rebel girl in all of us, that part of us that wishes we dared to reject the ordinary kinds of lives our society offers women and run off to live a thoroughly unconventional life. Audio Notes: The audio version, narrated by Laurel Lefkow, is rather hard to obtain, but it's a delight. Lefkow does Addie's flat Southern twang for most of Addie's narration, but also brings out plenty of other voices for the dialog, including Miss Trixie Delight's vapid giggling, which almost had me howling, she was so spot-on to Madeline Kahn's memorable performance in the movie.
