This book earned Iris Murdoch the fifth of her six Booker shortlistings, and in my view this was well merited. Most of the editions of her novels that I have are fairly recent reprints (mostly published by Vintage), which have introductions that talk about the plots, and give away events that happen late in the story. By contrast, this one is an early Penguin paperback edition, and it was good to read a book with no more idea of what would happen next beyond the few hints offered by the blurb. As so often with Murdoch, this is an ensemble piece largely populated with middle class Londoners, and it has many of her characteristic traits - the dark humour, shifting allegiances and relationships and characters who make sudden impetuous decisions. Unlike most of her novels, this one starts with a short chapter which establishes the situation its main protagonist, the 20 year old Edward Baltram, finds himself in. In a student prank, he has laced his friend Mark's sandwich with a drug. Mark then falls asleep, so when Edward receives a phone call from a near neighbour Sarah, he locks Mark into his room and goes to see her and ends up in her bed. On returning around half an hour later, he finds his room deserted and the window open, then sees Mark's dead body lying below. All this happens in less than ten pages, but the rest of the book explores the consequences for Edward and his complicated extended family at much greater length. Edward has been brought up by his stepfather Henry and Henry's elder son from an earlier marriage Stuart. Edward's biological father is Jesse, a famous painter who lives in a fenland coastal setting with his wife and two daughters. His mother Chloe married Henry while pregnant with Edward, and is now long dead. Chloe's sister Midge is married to Thomas, a psychiatrist who acts as a sort of mentor to Edward and Stuart, another subplot is Henry's affair with Midge. Edward is obsessed with feelings of guilt, but agrees to go to see Jesse and his family, and this part of the story is a little reminiscent of The Unicorn . The three women claim that Jesse is away, and introduce Edward to their rather monastic but slightly sinister self-sufficient lifestyle. To say much more would spoil the book for anyone who has not read it. For all of the deaths and mishaps involved, I found this an entertaining and stimulating read, showing that in the mid 80s, Murdoch's imaginative powers were still intact.
