I received this book in a box of old books listed on Freecycle. I entered them all onto my bookshelf on paperbackswap.com and this is one of the books that at least one member had on their wish list. This means I could send it out to the requester for a book credit as soon as I was ready to let it go. I decided to read it and half a dozen others right away. My disclaimer is that the cover of the book made it appear as a romance and I'm not much into a steamy "romance" that has a flimsy plot. This book is a historical romance but it is also a period piece with murder or two and townsfolk rebellion to add to the intrigue. The book predicates on Belle's grandmother telling her father, Patrick, that he has a claim to a birthright which includes a castle. Over the years, she tells him very little about the wealthy father who died when he was an infant. Unfortunately, the grandmother dies before she is persuaded to impart the genealogy. Patrick, Belle's father makes claim against some English families over the years but none pan out. He is a ne’er-do-well and such a fortune hunter that he and his daughter reside with a non-blood relative for lack of solvency. Belle and her relatives hope that his search will fizzle-out soon so that he can focus on improving his lot on his own. Happening across an obituary in a newspaper Patrick believes he has finally located his roots in Ireland at Castle Malindine. He sells a gold-topped cane said to come from his father in order to fund some fancy clothes and a one-way ticket for them both. Belle and Patrick immediately set out across the Irish countryside to lay claim to the estate which he claims should have been his to inherit one generation back. As I read I wondered if the cane (or Belle’s locket) would be the only way to prove his identity. I also pondered if Patrick was the product of an affair rather than a marriage and that was why the grandmother never told him the whole story. There isn't a lot of historical imagery or descriptions of the older castle, homes, or long car/carriages in this book but the plot does move along at a decent pace. Patrick and Belle are befriended by the local church leader and his wife and some other townsfolk. They are told that the Malindine family is filled with generations of horrible inheritors and that they should prepare for a horrible fight. Belle meets two men whom strike her fancy in differing ways and both seem to want her as his wife. If you’ve read a book description which contains a spoiler as I did, you’ll learn that Patrick and Belle are met with a life-altering tragedy (I won’t tell you what it is because it didn’t actually happen until page 133 of a 252 page book so I don’t think it should be revealed) and the book takes a sharp turn in plot. This isn’t a thriller, a steamy romance, or vividly researched historical fiction but it is written by what appears to be a decently skilled author. It is a nice distraction book but not one that anyone need to scour the Earth to locate and read. Show more
