Trixie and her best friend Honey set off in an RV (chauffeured by Honey's governess, Miss Trask) in search of their runaway friend, Jim. Along the way, they find even more mysteries to solve: a sad, mysterious family; missing trailers; a runaway child; and a stolen locket. It's interesting how differently one views a book from childhood one re-reads as an adult. Although I do recall this one issue (detailed below) bothering me as a child, it almost enraged me as an adult. I'll be honest, I don't like this book very much for one primary reason: the repeated irresponsible care (or should I say "lack thereof?") toward the girls' dogs, Reddy and Bud. First off, they should have left them behind rather than take them on the trip. Secondly, the dogs need to be put on leashes rather than let free to run loose all over the countryside. I mean, my word, poor Bud is but a mere puppy, and both dogs are in very unfamiliar territory. And, thirdly, if your dog is lost, you move Heaven and Earth to find it. It's not just an animal or a possession; it's family! Had it not been for that aspect of the book, I likely would have given it four stars. (In my rating system, two stars means "disliked" rather than "it was okay.") In general, I thought the mysteries were interesting, but I had a hard time understanding how two 13-year-olds are permitted to run around on their own in unfamiliar woods. And, did I miss why Miss Trask didn't just drive the girls around to the three boys’ camps? That would have been more efficient and likely increased the probability of their finding Jim in a timely manner. I also found it rather odd (although nice) that Trixie's attitude had greatly improved in one short week. And, could they have harped anymore on Mrs. Smith's weight? I mean, really! Besides the plot and subplots, there were some very likable characters. I'd love to have a Mr. and Mrs. Smith in my life! They seem like good people. And, I do sincerely love the ending of this book (except as it pertains to Bud). Although there are some things I don’t understand about this story and one thing I clearly don’t like, I don’t hate the book (which would be a rating of one star, per my system) – just that one aspect. Of note, this is not the version of books I was exposed to as a child. I found the drawings often did not match the photos in my head, which greatly bothered me. It also finally dawned on me that, in my head, much of the setting is in Petit Jean State Park in my beloved home state of Arkansas.
