i can now say with pride that i have read everything markus zusak has written and put out in the world. i can also say, in a more disappointed tone, that this series was pretty terrible. it just has debut written all over it. the underdog trilogy, if i'm being honest, is like a poundland bridge of clay, with much poorer writing and even less action. yes, i did find an unexpected mild enjoyment for the second novel in this series. the other thing that i personally enjoyed was the setting of these books. all of these books take place about a bus or train ride away from where i live, and it was oddly homely and comforting in that sense. i could believe that all these events were really taking place in a working class area about forty minutes away from me. but that's really all the nice stuff i've got for the underdog trilogy. the main character, cameron, was unbelievably pitiable through every single book. his character never really went through much development through the series, and the only thing that really changed was that instead of daydreaming about girls and models in magazines, he somehow had a real girlfriend at the end of when dogs cry. pretty amazing, really, considering that he says nothing to her and just stands outside another girl's house all the time (which is, by the way, creepy). he's pathetically sad and the only thing i really cared about was his relationship with rube, which was, i suppose, another good thing this series had to offer. i particularly hated the way women were written throughout the entire series. i really didn't need to read about cameron's fifteen year old testosterone fuelled fantasies, nor did i need to read about him slut shaming either. octavia was so underdeveloped (and most of the characters too for that matter) and the fact that she saw anything in cameron is a mystery to me. also instalove. yikes. with the exception of the second book, this series basically had no plot? when dogs cry basically consisted of cameron and octavia wandering around sydney doing nothing. and i can barely remember the events of the first book. you could argue character development, but let me tell you, rube was the only one who really went through anything worth pointing out. there's more i could say, but i think that's enough. on a more positive note, i've loved everything markus zusak's put out since this. i am the messenger, the book thief and bridge of clay are all brilliant novels. put the underdog series aside and pick up one of those books instead.
