Boone Caudill, Jim Deakins and Dick Summers come to life in the pages of A. B. Guthrie’s The Big Sky living the lives of mountain men in the American West of 1830. This is an adventure story as well as a love story. We are taken up the Missouri River on a keelboat and through the mountains and valleys hunting buffalo, trapping beaver and fighting Indians with these men. We witness their bonding and their mischief as well as their savagery and their violence. Guthrie’s love for his own Montana is vividly imagined throughout. It is quite evident that he was witness to the beauty of the mountains and valleys he writes about so well. I truly benefit from his descriptive prose as I’ve never seen any of these parts of the US before. This is a novel that takes place out of doors and you definitely feel that openness and wide expanse of the plains as well as the breathtaking beauty of the mountains and valleys. From the top, Boone could see forever and ever, nearly any way he looked. It was open country, bald and open, without an end. It spread away, flat now and then rolling, going on clear to the sky. A man wouldn’t think the whole world was so much. It made the heart come up. It made a man little and still big, like a king looking out. It occurred to Boone that this was the way a bird must feel, free and loose, with the world to choose from. Boone Caudill is a restless and angry young man who leaves his Kentucky home fueled by an abusive situation with his father. He has a need for adventure and freedom that can’t be found with his family. He’s a man who can’t be contained within walls. The only thing that makes him happy is being out in the open in the wilderness. There was the sky above, blue as paint, and the brown earth rolling underneath, and himself between them with a free, wild feeling in his chest, as if they were the ceiling and floor of a home that was all his own. Boone’s impulsive nature and quick temper often lead to violence. Whiskey and squaws become a way of life as well as killing buffalo and trapping beaver while at the same time taking scalps and trying to keep his own. He is a man more comfortable in the world of the Blackfeet than the white man. As expansion to the West threatens his lifestyle, Boone’s animalistic essence is a part of him that will not fit into this new civilization, living only for survival, an unsustainable lifestyle. He makes an ultimate decision that alters him forever and questions whether or not Boone, the mountain man, has a future. Jim Deakins is Boone’s loyal friend and companion. They travel together learning the mountain man ways and becoming well versed in the lessons they receive from their mentor, Dick Summers. Jim is the social one, who needs to have interaction with others and to have fun. He looks forward to the Rendezvous where he can experience a civilized way for a time before returning to the wilderness. Dick is older and has been able to keep one foot in the wilderness and one in a future settling down and planting roots. He is everything that Boone wants to be but ironically he has his sights set on a different future - the one that Boone can’t abide. These men see their livelihood changing with the depletion of the buffalo and the beaver as well as the sickness that wipes out many Indian tribes altogether. While Dick realizes the need for change himself, it is Boone who holds on to the extinct way of life that he loves. But new times are a-coming now, and new people, a heap of them, and wheels rolling over the passes, carrying greenhorns and women and maybe children, too, and plows.
