5*......For trying, and succeeding in a new concept. Individual stories interconnected by a string.... I loved this book! This is, by far, one of Kings deepest books--delving into the time period, one of tension and fear... and the humanity of the characters...their coming of age, their trials, their sanity, and even deaths. It is far more than a collection of short stories, as there is a continuation of characters throughout the book in some way in each story. I'm not saying that this is like a novel, it's a book with a string holding the stories together in a unique way. We are able to see how a lot of the characters introduced in the novella that starts the book developed--including one who seemed to get what was coming to him after attacking Carol Gerber brutally in the first story. Nice touch--I don't remember ever reading a set of short stories that were all linked together this way. This book stands out from all of Kings other works. Not a novel. Not a group of great, but unrelated stories...I will say some of the stars are for even trying this new method....but that's not all, by far. One Note: King writes masterfully, interconnecting the stories beautifully, trying something different and succeeding in my opinion--but the people who are looking for horror and gore aren't going to find very much of it here.... You are more likely to find a few tears and some anger. Mr. King, you are brilliant...able to write anything....your creativity never ceases to amaze me... The Vietnam war also plays a big role in this book as the characters age (King was busy righting Carrie as it finally ended, so it is a time period he knows well, much better than me, as I did not live through it and love getting the fictionalized tales from that period of history I missed...I find it interesting that he grew up during the time period the characters in these stories did, from childhood through adult--this book not only follows King's time frame, but other similarities are here...he was raised mostly in New England, by a single mother, the threat of the draft was undoubtably a heavy topic with his college friends. I love how much of his own life is mirrored in this and other stories, such as fighting alcoholism, etc. ). It certainly comes across as ANT-Vietnam war....so if you don't feel the same (and you certainly did not have to live during the time-period in question to have feelings on this one, since it's a huge part of recent history) well, it just may make you mad....just think of all the relatively small "wars" we've been involved in, and you can imagine how angering to see people you were in school with (or could have been) coming home in countless numbers in boxes. It was a horrible time to be young in I imagine...a fearsome time, in which being in college, or having young children protected you a bit...And of course the ties to the dark tower are here....this book was written right after the fourth Dark Tower book and would be the perfect read then, as these events and even the character Ted Brautigan from the opening novella and closing story is in the DT books, being hunted, and escaping,and getting caught--as we get a glimpse of here.... (which makes me furious at Liz, Bobby's selfish, albeit troubled with many things, mother in Low Men) The opening novella, Low Men in Yellow Coats, was by far my favorite and is the story--along with the final one in this book, Heavenly Shades of Night are Falling--which the movie Hearts in Atlantis was really based on....But the story Hearts in Atlantis had nothing to do with it.....strange. I guess it just sounded better, though it made no sense--at all. I still loved the movie....though I wondered where Atlantis came in. The Novella Low Men in Yellow Coats begins our interlocking string that winds through the rest of the book; including all the characters that will appear in the rest of the stories with a tale of children coming of age--Bobby Garfield, with friends Carol Gerber and John "sully" Sullivan playing the biggest roles, dealing with bullies, then a touch of the supernatural when an interesting older man rents the room upstairs in Bobby's house; Ted Brautigan. A wonderful man, who loves books, and gives Bobby a copy of The Lord of the Flies. Liz Garfield claims they are poor, and cannot buy Bobby a bicycle, though she constantly brings home beautiful new dresses for herself...Bobby's birthday gift: a library card. (Granted Liz is an extremely well-written and complex character,with A LOT on her plate). Knowing of his need for money, Ted hires Bobby to read him newspapers, as he claims his eyes are weak. Bobby is given another job--to watch out for "low men" who are stalking him by putting up fliers for a missing pet and leaving chalk drawings on the ground. Bobby does know of Ted's psychic power, because he passed some on to Bobby once by touching him. Only we, as King readers know how dangerous these Low Men (the evil can-toi) really are. Bobby knows Ted will leave if the men chasing him find him, and he's so attached that he doesn't take this request seriously until it's just about too late. In the meantime Carol (the thread winding throughout the book) Is attacked, held down by Richie O'meara and Willie Shearman (remember this name...) while Harry Doolan beats her with a bat. Bobby finds her and carries her to his house, where they think her arm is broken, and with his mother Liz gone, he summons Ted to help. Ted has to cut off her shirt to get at the arm, and after examining it realizes it is only dislocated and uses his magical hands to put it back in place. More to come soon......
