”Many men go fishing all of their lives without knowing it is not fish they are after.” --- Henry David Thoreau Part spiritual ishy -quest, part fishing tales, part family drama, add in a quirky, fanciful introduction to romance, a coming-of-age tale, some interestingly eccentric characters with their own strange stories to share, and a reverent approach to Nature – all set in / on / near the mythical Tamawanis River in Oregon. I added this book to my to-read list three years ago, right after I finished reading David James Duncan’s ‘The Brothers K,” which, initially, I thought I might end up loving perhaps a bit more than this one as a story, but this story has its own charms, and it will be a long time before I forget this one with its memorable characters and the setting. There were the letters, there was the word: plain as water, in a flowing, utterly uncrabbed hand, current, erosion, gravity, and chance had written why upon the valley floor! Billions of ever-changing, ever-the-same gallons of gurgling sun-and-moon-washed ink, spelling forever, in plain English, why . It was incredible. It had to be kidding. Rivers can’t write, let alone ask questions. why it said. It had a point. What did I know about what rivers could or couldn’t do? But granting it literacy, what did it mean by why ? And was it asking me? I didn’t know. I looked upstream and down for a clue, but all I saw were the random scribbled curves of runs and rapids. Yet right below, in quarter-mile letters it had taken centuries to form, water—my favorite element—asked in the only language I could read, why. While there is a “spiritual” / religious aspect to this story, don’t let that dissuade you since it is more of a loosely woven philosophy involving Nature interwoven with a sense of religious reverence for the world around us, many of which are relayed through allegorical fishing tales, some through introductions of other characters. Family is another strong theme in this story, from Gus’ parents, his father a gentleman’s fly fisherman, his mother strictly a “raucous cowgirl” who uses bait, to his younger brother Bill Bob who seems to float through his life as a connecting, if quiet, force that binds them together through a love of nature, and an acknowledgement of the grace of living, despite their differences. "And so I learned what solitude really was. It was raw material – awesome, malleable, older than men or worlds or water. And it was merciless – for it let a man become precisely what he alone made of himself."
