END AS A MAN by Calder Willingham (December 23, 1922 – February 19, 1995). Calder was an American novelist and screenwriter. END AS A MAN was written in 1947 and I heard about it from author/friend, Christopher Bram, while reading one of his books: EMINENT OUTLAWS: The Gay Writers Who Changed America. END AS A MAN is the ideal book for every man in the military. Those who have the ability to acquire a diploma from The Academy have achieved a gift in that it is only presented to ‘a man’. The story revolved around a military Academy for boys and the struggles, fights and competition between the lowerclassmen, upperclassmen and officers/teachers. As it was written so long ago (1947) there were moments of hardship. So much of it can be applied today. In getting through this book I found it sometimes difficult but the last few chapters were quite dramatic and exciting. Here are the lines that captured me for some reason or another: “…The idea is, if you have a weakness, fight against it.” “…the good man’s the true man. My point—the true man is true because he is operating at the summit of his potential; the good man good for the same reason.” “It must be recognized that human memory is the most perfect and powerful thing in the world.” “Incredible how the human imagination runs away with itself…” “What really counts is…personality, the sense of humor, and getting the best of them.” “Well, one does have to lose one’s innocence some time or other.” “Everyone is always curious about unpleasant things, have you ever noticed that? Get something grisly and they will just hover around—like buzzards!” “I’m just another human being you know, with frailties and faults.” “It’s better to study chemistry and learn something than to spend your life talking like a fool!” “Do you know that in South America there’s a tribe of natives that have a think known as a blood brotherhood? Do you know what they do? When one of them saves another one’s life, then they become blood brothers. They each pierce a little blood from their wrist and then they rub their hands together good and hard so the blood of one goes in the cut of the other. Then they’re blood brothers! That’s what they do in South America, and it sounds like a doggone good way of showing your relationship for a true friend.” “You know, I understand that the modern authorities believe the real index of intelligence is mathematical ability. They say that’s much more important than any sheer sensitivity, as far as pure intelligence goes.” “Where did the word MOON come from?” “That was derived from the entirely different word, June. I suppose the word derived from the fact that the MOON is especially visible during the sixth month of the year. That’s all.” I have been wondering about this business of love at first sight. Of course it sounds foolish. But isn’t it true that the shape of a face or the look of an eye can do more to determine love than the deepest spiritual compatibility? Isn’t it true that the man who loves is NOT rational? Well, it seems very possible to me that one can make the error of falling into love at first sight. I believe THE CORRECT PERSON can make a mark that is unremovable. I stopped, under a magnolia tree, and repeated to myself: LOVE IS A MYTH. “Energy is a vital thing in life—you have only so much of it because the amount nature gave you is fixed. Throw it away and you get to the point where you haven’t got any more.” “What is all this stuff about liking and not liking?” “The fact is, what I like usually likes me; what I don’t like usually doesn’t like me. I’m not being conceited. It turns out that way all the time. Why is this? Because since I was twelve years old when I got my stepmother I’ve seen to it nobody decides whether they like me. I decide whether I like them!” “There’s always something to do. A man with brains is never trapped.”
