Both species, the human and the monkey, were in the presence of another life form, which was older and more powerful than either of them, and was a dweller in blood. I read this book on the same days I was watching the Netflix adaptation of The Haunting of Hill House , which had a curious effect on me. Because, well, the TV show might be very creepy, but I have to say it is nothing compared to the horror of this book. That's what The Hot Zone is: A true horror story. Preston uses interviews and first-hand accounts to tell the story of the Ebola virus and its various strains. I'd heard of Ebola, of course. I knew it was a disease and that it killed people. I knew I didn't want it. But I didn't really know . I didn't know that it liquidates your organs and turns your body into a walking corpse days before you "bleed out". I didn't know that it is one of the most infectious diseases that have likely ever existed on this planet. It acts like a predator, lying quietly in wait for a host so it can multiply and multiply to destructive effect. Reality can be so much more scary than fiction. Truly, this is a terrifying book. Preston definitely dramatizes the whole thing, but he's working with some pretty powerful material. Imagine a virus with the infectiousness of influenza and the mortality rate of the black plague in the Middle Ages-- that's what we're talking about. This is the third book about diseases and medicine that I've really enjoyed (though, yes, enjoyed seems like a poor choice of word) - the other two being And the Band Played On and The Emperor of All Maladies . I'll happily take recommendations for any others. In the hands of a skilled writer, these books are fascinating, educating and deeply unsettling. Also, despite the age of this book, it doesn't feel too dated. Maybe that is because Ebola remains a threat. Ebola outbreaks are ongoing in Africa, right now. One mistake, one oversight, one infected person taking a plane flight and we might not be able to stop it. Blog | Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | Youtube
