As a psychologist, the author is respectable. As a theologian, though, he seems a little lacking. The four "shifts" he discusses in this book are truly very useful in helping people live socially healthier lives. But I feel like what he had to say could have been said with 2/3 less text. Ultimately our issues in properly relating to other human beings is a sin problem. We can band-aid the issue by changing our behavior, but without a heart change from God that's moralism, which ultimately ends in frustration and failure. I know that Cloud uses Biblical language to make it seem like he's communicating God's will for our lives. But God's ultimate call for humanity is salvation through Jesus Christ (I Tim 2:4). Does God want us to function well in our social circles? Yes. In Him are we able to do this? Sometimes. Will "The Four Shifts" actually "Make Everything Better," as the cover claims? No. Our behavior doesn't make us better! God alone can heal us of our sickness. Cloud would be proud of my admitting that this book isn't all bad. I would recommend it to a select few friends. And I have had eye-opening realizations about my own social shortcomings because of what Cloud writes about (as a perfectionist and a push-over, I do struggle with boundaries, for example). But the damage it would do to the many Christians who are already chained to moralistic views of Christ's plan for their lives far outways the benefits of this book. God's desire for us does not have an ulterior motive. He simply wants us. Change will happen, yeah, because that's normal when you begin the slow journey of knowing and loving God through the enabling of the Holy Spirit. If His intentions were simply to turn us into nice and well-functioning human beings He would've been better off building robots. I'm not saying God wants us to stay as the disgustingly sinful wretches that we are. What I am saying is that God wants relationship with us. It is then and only then, through heart modification, that we can even think about becoming truly "good people." This book isn't a waste of time. And I think if someone enters it knowing of this main weakness (issues of moralism), they could glean helpful thought-seeds from it. Perhaps I've been too harsh. Cloud is, as I said, very smart when it comes to psychology. He provides a lot of insight into the ways that we as human beings are struggling socially with the side-effects of sin. He has that half totally spot on! We suck at the four aspects he addresses. Healthy relationships do not come naturally to us, because sinning is our human nature. We cut ourselves off from fellowship. We accept manmade views of right and wrong. Or we don't take God-given responsibilities seriously. Etc. Cloud has at least that much going for him. Its just the what-we-can-do-about-it part that seems off to me. Behavior modification does work, don't get me wrong. But that's not what God wants. Tim Keller says it more efficiently than I could: "Let the gospel sink so deeply down in you that it changes your views and even the structures of your motivation."
