I have nothing to add to the previous reviews. A great comedy and a brilliant portrait of personalities. Despite this, it's not one of my favorite novels by the author. ----- My review after the second reading below ----- It was, first of all, a comedy of characters. The author created complex and fascinating examples of those times. Lady (Dowager) Denville annoyed me to distraction, I don't want to know such a person - yet, I believe such aristocracy could exist (sadly). I took pure joy from the language and wit, so common in Heyer's novels. Still, it lacked something to put it amongst the author's stories that I rated the highest. ----- My review after first reading below ----- When I think of this novel as a romance (Heyer's romance) I give 3 stars. The story of Kit and Cressy has some amusing points and the idea of twins is well used. But... Let's say, it isn't the thrilling story like (for example) in Devil's Cub or Cotillion (and in many other Heyer's novels). When I think of this book as a funny book I give 4 stars. Lady Denville is ridiculous. She is a perfect example of a classic character of Heyer's Regency romances. She is so incorrigible almost preposterous. Add to that: Sir Bonamy, Challow, Fimber and the Cliffe and you have homour which makes you smile many times. When I think of this story as a social (those times) analysis I give it 4.5 stars. I don't know if Heyer did it on purpose but: 1) in the Lady Denville we have a sad satire of ladies of the upper class from that period. 2) we have really many about the custom of having mistresses. In other Heyer's book, we can read that someone has or had one (or many) mistresses, but in this novel, it looks like almost everybody has one (sons, fathers, grandfathers). I don't judge it. It only shows the other side of those times. I couldn't stop thinking that maybe Heyer tried to remind us that the sweet Regency times aren't so sweet as we want to believe. 3) we see here the real sides of some marriages and so-called everlasting love. 'My father—years older than she was!—fancied himself to be in love with her! Love? He was dazzled by her face, and her captivating ways, and had no more love for her than I have for Cressida Stavely! That was soon over! Everything in Mama which makes her so lovable he disliked!' ‘You don’t wish to marry me, do you?’ He pulled himself together, declaring valiantly: ‘The one wish of my heart!’ ‘Well, you didn’t look as if it was! Confess, now! You’ve been shamming it—all these years!’ He rejected this playful accusation with vehemence. ‘No, that I haven’t! How can you say such a thing, Amabel? Haven’t I stayed single for your sake?’ A provocative smile hovered about the corners of her mouth; she seemed to consider him.‘That’s what you say, but are you perfectly sure it wasn’t for your own sake, abominable palaverer that you are, my dear?’ So, as a Regency romance - 3 stars, as a story which has something to tell us (about people and those times) - 4 stars.
