A biting critique of the court system and the legal profession by the Victorian master of social commentary Many of the characters of BLEAK HOUSE – including most notably but certainly not limited to John Jarndyce, and his wards Richard Carstone and Ada Clare – are legatees in some version of a will left by a previous scion of the wealthy Jarndyce family. The problem is that there was several versions of the will left behind at various times, in various places, and with varying degrees of approbation and legal authenticity. The interminable multi-generational dispute over which will holds sway and who will be the ultimate wealthy winner of the legal sweepstakes that is Jarndyce v Jarndyce is the core driver of the plot that sustains Dickens brilliant satire and social critique of the law, the legal system, and the legal profession. But readers looking for themes and social commentary in other areas will find plenty of other cuts of meat to chew on in BLEAK HOUSE – a scathing criticism of the outrageous hypocrisy of organized religion and those who would claim to be organizers for so-called charitable causes; the desperate plight of the impoverished lower class in mid-city London; the struggle (nay, call it an embittered and hostile war) between progressive middle class entrepreneurs who welcomed the burgeoning Industrial Revolution and the traditionalist upper class who feared anything but the most rigid adherence to the status quo; and more. Despite the presence of a catalogue of characters who clearly fall on the “bad guy” side of the virtue accounting ledger – Tulkinghorn, Krook, Skimpole, Mrs Pardiggle and Jellyby, Chadband, and more – most readers, on reflection will probably come to the conclusion that the main villains of the piece are more thematic in nature – the institution of Chancery court; the legal profession; hypocritical religion and institutional philanthropy’s gathering of charitable contributions; government insensitivity and the treatment of the poor, to note the most obvious examples. Many readers may be unaware that Dickens’ brilliance broke new literary ground in two different ways. First, his use of two different narrative styles – an omniscient, invisible narrator who spoke in the present tense, and Esther Summerson, a first person narrator speaking in the past tense who, as a matter of obvious necessity, was restricted to presenting her own view of events subject to her own emotions and opinions. This alternating style of narration was entirely unprecedented in Victorian literature and allowed for the interpretation of the same event from multiple perspectives. The second (and I personally am eternally grateful for this) is the use of a detective as a front of stage leading character in the investigation of a murder mystery. Our enjoyment of Wilkie Collins, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, and Agatha Christie’s work is attributable to their standing on the proverbial shoulders of Charles Dickens, the giant. Your personal opinion may vary, but I reckon BLEAK HOUSE ultimately to be a tragedy in which the personal affairs of many of the protagonists are, at least in the short term, resolved. But I think many of these resolutions are unsatisfactory and, well, (you guessed it!) bleak! And that death count, my goodness. BLEAK HOUSE , like Shakespeare’s HAMLET , leaves the proverbial stage fairly littered at the close of the curtain with the detritus of corpses who met their demise by an astonishing number of ways and in a bewildering variety of circumstances. (Our reading group reckoned the final tally to be, of course, lucky 13!!) Whether you agree with my assessment and think of BLEAK HOUSE as tragedy or consider it to be a gritty example of a multi-generation family drama, I hope you’ll agree with me that BLEAK HOUSE is absolutely brilliant and one of the finest examples of classic English literature that you could ever hope to find. If you’re a potential newcomer to Dickens, take your time and don’t give up. Reading, understanding, absorbing, and enjoying Dickens is an acquired taste and a patiently acquired skill. The rewards are well worth the effort. Paul Weiss
