Wisdom of the Ages I thought that this book would be dorky; It was anything but. Also, It is not just about things you learned in kindergarten, it also has anecdotes that are so wonderfully charming that I will read them again and again. In fact, I want to read every book he wrote. It does begin with things that we were taught in kindergarten, and it is a pretty short list since 5-year old don’t have long attention spans: 1. Share everything 2. Play fair 3. Don’t hit people 4. Put things back where you found them 5. Clean up your own mess 6. Don’t take things that are not yours 7. Say you are sorry when you hurt somebody 8. Wash your hands before you teat 9. Warm cookies and cold milk are good for you 10. and a few more minor things I don’t recall learning anything in kindergarten. I only recall two things about my experience, which I will add a little later. Maybe I was just a slow learner, because I remember giving a boy a bloody nose in the second grade. I got into trouble for it, but in the 8th grade when some boys told Billy Newhouse to go kiss me, when he reached me, I grabbed his left arm and pulled down on it, and he landed on his back on the floor. I never figured out why I thought to do that, nor did I understand why it worked. I also got into trouble in the second grader for throwing my arms around the neck of a real cute boy and kissing hm. And then there was the cheating. It isn’t on Fulgrum’s list, well, yes, it was. It is the one that says, Play fair. I learned this in the second grade when I was given back a spelling test, and when the teacher told us how the words were spelled, I wanted to change my mistake, so I broke the tip off a pencil so the teacher couldn’t see what I was doing, and used it to correct my mistake. I aw the teacher coming and placed my hand over the pencil tip. She raised my hand and sent me to an upper grade as punishment. I never understood why it was punishment since I enjoyed being in the upper class and watching a student put up a difficult math problem on the chalk board. I was fascinated. Here is all I remember learning in kindergarten: 1. I was given graham crackers with milk, which was never as good as how my mother made them when she used chocolate icing to hold the two crackers together. Actually, it wasn’t to hold them together, it was to make them taste great. I will pick a soggy graham cracker filled with chocolate frosting over a chocolate cake any day. As for the soggy comment, well, that is when a two-day old cracker really tastes great. Maybe I should have said, soft, not soggy. 2. The other thing I remember about kindergarten was that I was given a blue and white checked quilt to sleep on while there. My grandmother had made it. I only remember because I have always seen an image of myself lying on it in class, just trying to sleep. And now I have an image of my little brother’s Charlie Brown blanket that my mom kept even after hd grown. Why didn’t she save my blue and white checkered quilt? Maybe it was because she got soggy in her middle age, that is, she became sentimental.
