"Who was guilty, then: the monster or the world that created it?" First off, y'all gotta know, I'm pretty biased towards Robert Cormier because he wrote my fave book so him and I are basically homies. Okay, first I'm going to talk about some themes within the book. I don't mean like textbook, how-you-learn-in-school, full-sentence themes. I mean looking-up-on-Sparknotes, one-word-themes-that'll-have-to-do-even-though-my-teacher-asked-for-a-full-sentence themes. So I've recorded some of the themes throughout the book, and yes, trust me, they have something to do with how I viewed the book. Theme 1: Identity Crisis-- this theme goes hand-in-hand with Theme 2 which is perception. No one in this book seems to really know who they are, like they know who they are but not WHO THEY ARE, y'know? I guess it makes more sense in the book. Like they're unsure of their identity. For that reason, the characters are often (Theme 2) concerned with how they are perceived and wonder how people see them. Theme 3 is patriotism/nationalism and theme 4 is bravery. I will not go deeply into these because I don't want to spoil anything, but the themes are mentioned to give you a taste of the book. These themes tie directly into characterization in the book. There is one female character in the book, Kate. In the other books I've read by Cormier (The Chocolate War, Beyond the Chocolate War, and Heroes), the girl characters are often flat. This is my first instance of seeing Cormier really develop a girl character. Originally, I did not like Kate and I wished that Cormier had simply not bothered characterizing her. But then I realized that I probably did not like Kate because her character was part of themes 1 and 2 (identity crisis and perception). Towards the middle/end of the book I began to like Kate more and it was a good time. So I guess good job with characterization? The plot was pretty interesting. I felt the book kind of dragging in the middle but that may have been my fault and not Cormier's (because of how and when I read). The ending was really awesome, the book kept pulling me until the very end. Now to do a 180, the beginning was really well done. All the reader knows is that the characters are all somehow involved in this incident with the Bus and the Bridge, and that is the premise of the book. There were two perspectives in the book, which can be generalized as Ben's perspective and Miro's perspective. I preferred Ben's perspective but his was less prevalent in the book and I guess I can understand why. In conclusion, the book was pretty good. It's only getting four stars because it kind of dragged in the middle, Kate was semi-badly characterized, and nothing can ever top Cormier's The Chocolate War and Beyond the Chocolate War.
