"Bloodline" is the line between love and death, which is expressed in the red ribbon around a girl's neck. I usually read Sheldon's novels in one sitting, because it is much easier to finish one task at a time and these novels give me the feeling of craving to know what is next. I believe I have read enough Sheldon's books to familiarize myself with my own game of analyzing the details and guessing who is the culprit or assassin. The story unraveling at the very end of this novel prompted me to use my hand to cover the texts that I did not read through. I was afraid that I would accidentally look at some names down there, thereby ruining my reading experience. I blame my 3-star rating of this novel on my mom, who spoiled one of the most unexpected parts of the book. She was so smitten with this book that she couldn't resist the urge to tell me about it. Details I like: 1. The female protagonist seems real. She occasionally envisages her future and is sensitive to the point of being a little histrionic. As tough and analytical as she may seem, Elizabeth is naive and gullible too. When Alec told her that he was the one discreetly analyzing the strange events of Roffe and Sons with her dad, she believed him nearly immediately. 2. I love the work Sheldon puts into describing the personalities of a certain character via the perceptions of others. For one person, you may be his muse but for the other, you may be the last person he wants to see. This contrasting difference in judgments hits me hard. Details needed to be ameliorated: 1. I was so so sad that the reasons for why Alec was the assassin were not very lucid. The author painstakingly wrote very long and detailed stories of the characters but in the end, he focused too much on making the readers feel taken aback by the reveal of the assassin’s identity. This reveal is a little bit boring as I am used to Sheldon's style of plotting stories. 2. The assassin should be smarter. Alec, after all of the meticulous work he did, should by no means show up at Elizabeth's house. Detective Campagna - Alec's accomplice - could have just given Elizabeth a high dose of Chloral Hydrate (which makes sure there are no traces of it later) in the coffee he made for her, locked the doors and burned the house afterwards. 3. I, unfortunately, have an aversion to the male protagonist. Why did he hang out with other women when he was infatuated with Elizabeth and then flirted with women once he became her husband? Besides, why did he not disclose the work her father and he did secretly together to her and told her more about what he was doing to gain her trust? This guy had a myriad of problems.
