It lived up to the title and was as entertaining as the website. NJ just has all of these little nooks and crannies not all right near a Turnpike exit that are just "off". It, like much of America has these oddities in otherwise mundane urban or suburban areas that one might drive past every day when one suddenly thing "just what is that anyway?" And lest we forget the magic of roadside attractions. To quote Neil Gaiman in "American Gods": " “In other countries, over the years, people recognized the places of power. Sometimes it would be a natural formation, sometimes it would just be a place that was, somehow, special. They knew that something important was happening there, that there was some focusing point, some channel, some window to the Immanent. And so they would build temples or cathedrals, or erect stone circles, or. . . well, you get the idea.” “There are churches all across the States, though,” said Shadow. “In every town. Sometimes on every block. And about as significant, in this context, as dentists’ offices. No, in the USA, people still get the call, or some of them, and they feel themselves being called to from the transcendent void, and they respond to it by building a model out of beer bottles of somewhere they’ve never visited, or by erecting a gigantic bat house in some part of the country that bats have traditionally declined to visit. Roadside attractions: people feel themselves being pulled to places where, in other parts of the world, they would recognize that part of themselves that is truly transcendent, and buy a hot dog and walk around, feeling satisfied on a level they cannot truly describe, and profoundly dissatisfied on a level beneath that.” 0380973650 American Gods: A Novel / Neil Gaiman. New York, NY. : William Morrow, 2001. pp. 117–18 http://www.amazon.com/American-Gods-N... accessed 01/26/09 used without permission (say the word and the quote comes down) I'm not saying it is true, but there is something special and organic about the old roadside attraction as opposed to branded amusement parks..
