This is a good introduction to the study of Arabic people. The emphasis is on contemporary Arab life and times, with a little history thrown in, and a good deal of time spent on politics, wars, and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Lamb is a reporter who spent 5 years covering the Middle East for the L.A. Times. The book was written in 1985, so much of what is in here is way past current, but it still makes for informative reading. The pervasiveness and supremacy of Islam in Arab life is discussed here. One chapter that I particularly enjoyed give a brief description of the life of the prophet Muhammed and the spread of Islam. It is a fascinating phenomenon, and I am glad to not be part of it. It is a static and rigid way of life; all the answers for how to live are in the Koran, and there is virtually no room left for development of the society or the spirit. (At least that is how it seemed to me when I read this.) The book is full of interesting little facts. There are amusing descriptions of Arab men in suits drinking whiskey on airplanes bound for the Persian Gulf; the next day they are in caftans, lecturing on the evils of alcohol. Arabs are generally capitalistic and materialistic, and the number of religious fanatics is small. There is a discussion of the role of women in Islamic society. One chapter focuses on the sudden influx of wealth into formerly poor, dusty little backwaters like Bahrain. Another sections examines Saudi Arabia, a highly conservative kingdom ruled by the offspring of the great King Saud, who had 42 sons. This is a place in which movies, backgammon, and chess have all been banned as being un-Islamic. Islamic fundamentalism is seen as a response by uneducated Arabs, whose ways of life have generally been unchanged for centuries, to the jarring changes of the 20th and 21st centuries. After reading this, I felt that I had a better understanding of the Arab world, which is an important thing for Yanks, given the unfair portrayals of Muslims and Arabs that our media often gives us.
