Writing in 1945, Schlesinger wrote this book to honor the Democratic Party of Jackson and van Buren for extending the democratic franchise and strengthening the role of government. Jackson can be seen as a populist strong man who fostered white supremacy and racism. And his election was viewed by the elites of the time as a catastrophe. But Jacksonian politics supported universal manhood suffrage, turning decisively away from restricting voting to property holders. It put the lie to the Whig belief that extending the franchise to the poor meant the demise of property rights. It ended the Second Bank of the United States, which under Biddle was a dangerous monopoly used for private gain. Biddle tried to use the powers of the Bank to create a depression to force the renewal of the Bank's charter and nearly succeeded. Jackson provided the key push to get rid of debtor emprisonment: when he came to office, two-thirds of all prisoners in the US were debtors. The Democrats also strengthened the Federal Government, helping provide the powers that would aid the Union in the Civil War. They pushed for codification of the law and for allowing incorporation without requiring specific legislation for each corporate charter: the old method led to monopolies sanctioned by the state. They championed religious freedom. Van Buren ordered a 10 hour work day on Federal projects without loss of pay. Democrats led the successful push for the legalization of labor unions. Jackson and the Democrats supported and were supported by the great original writers: Whitman, Hawthorne, Cooper., Jackson was a strong and often autocratic leader. The extension of the franchise brought with it as well the rise of the spoils system and ward politics. This book reminds us of the two sides to populism and of democracy. The rabble rise up. They may be led and misled. But the voices of all the people need to be expressed, for better and worse. Only if the government speaks for all does democracy thrive. The privileged viewpoint of the elites, however sympathetic to groups of underdogs, does not represent the whole truth.
