I write this review as an aggrieved reader. What I thought this book would be like and what it actually is are so different that I begin to wonder if I am really reading the same author who wrote Tigana. Many or most of you will perhaps disagree with me or my issues with the book, and might complain that a book should not be compared to another book and must be read for what it is, rather than what it should have been. Generally I would agree. However, seeing that GGK Sacrifices so many things in his book to focus on certain aspects, aspects which set him apart from other writers of the genre it is quite fair to point out that the sacrifice in this case was a bad trade. Plot Wikipedia suggests that the book is based on the Albigensian Crusade. GGK as he is known to write his series based on an actual event from history has done this in all of his works. However unlike Lions of Al Rassan, the plot hardly touches upon the crusade itself and focuses on the lives of few characters and the general troubadour culture. The death of a person is the basis of the whole story and later on we realise that there is no story. Nothing really ever happens in this book. Of course characters muse and pretend to play an intriguing political game, but it is hardly intriguing and the characters them selves are poorly contrived. The passionate loss of a country in Tigana is reduced to an affair that is barely explained among other things. One would feel no pity for anyone here except perhaps for himself for grudgingly suffering through. Characters As any GGK fan would know, his novels focus on characters and their emotions and they are what drives the story. In this case, there is not a single character I grew to like nor was there any emotion that the sacrifice of plot, action, humour and fast pace should have bought. The characters if one sits down and begins to dwell upon are shades of the characters in Tigana. They seem to serve the same purpose the characters in Tigana served, albeit poorly. Bertran is perhaps the most infuriating character of them all. A famous poet as well as master of war. This was something I criticized in Kvothe as well. He would have been a much better character if he was any one of the two but not both. For someone who claims to have loved so dearly that he cannot forget anything about the woman dead twenty years long, he certainly seems to be enamored by many. His love so passionate that he held a grudge twenty three years despite doing so undermined his own country (Which he later claims to love more than anything) A stark contract from Robert Baratheon, who tore the world asunder for the woman he loved, only to admit later than he has forgotten her face. Blaise is another problem. He seems to be a very confused man for someone who has seen so much of the world. Some of his scenes and dialogues are cringeworthy at best. He has absolutely no reason to do so many things that he ends up doing that one wonders if he is reading the Wheel of Time. Emotional and Submissive men have often been the staple of GGK's books. That is not entirely true in this situation, however Blaise more than makes up for it. No other character is particularly noteworthy. There is a strong old female countess, a faithful and worrisome Steward. A handsome master of all duke and a female joglar who does... nothing. Women have been depicted as mysterious creatures fiercely beautiful forever surrounded by wide eyed meek men who wish nothing but to submit to them. This is as tiresome as the harpys Robert Jordan depicted them as. (Mind you, this is after claiming women are coinage, to be traded for political gains) Lastly, the villains in GGK's books are often shades of grey. Driven by their own virtues or needs and not spawns of evil. He seems to have traded those for a text book villain who is a villain for the sake of being so. Magic is not so prominent so as to require a separate paragraph. And looking at the author, the pace is self explanatory. Overall, a very surprising book for it carried no surprises, no charm and certainly no emotions. There are no redeeming features in this book. The only thing I enjoyed was the short reference to the triumphal arch. But a glass of water does not an oasis make. A sad note from an otherwise lovely lute.
