I picked this book off the shelf because I was bored with another book I was reading. I thoroughly expected this book to be quickly placed back on the shelf, with the good intention of reading some day, just not today but I was quickly surprise just how quickly I was drawn in. It is not exactly Dan Brown in pace, but neither was it Piers Plowman. It was a highly readable quick paced history which gave generous insights into a number of aspects of Medieval life, the conquest of England and the Irish missionaries that were, if not gapping holes, at least shaddowy areas of my Medieval knowledge. Leo Sherley-Price's translation gives a good feel for the simple, direct history of Bede's Medieval Latin and D.H. Farmer's introduction and notes are worth the time and give many invaluable insights into Bede's allusions or historical references. Bede's History is probably most famous for the passage where Pope Gregory is introduced to some English slaves and on hearing that "They are called Angles", Pope Gregory responded, "That is appropriate for they have angelic faces." (p. 103 or Book II Chapter 1) but there is much more to the book than that. As a true historian, he incorporates many primary sources (especially letters between Bishops, Abbots, Kings and Popes) to complement his history. As an Ecclesiastical historian, his major concern is with the Church, but this is inseparable from the royal families at the time. Never does the reader get bogged down in long geneologies or lists of Abbots and Bishops. But what was best was Bede's honesty. He comes across as a genuinely humble man. His praise for his predecessors and contemporaries gives a clear insight into the values and ethics of the early Christian community in England. He is equally generous to North-Umbrians, Picts, Britains, Mercians, Frisians or Saxons regardless of creed is their behavious fits his peaceful ethic where the poor are uplifted by those in power. Likewise, he denounces avarice and violence where ever he finds it, inside or outside of Christendom and the Church. Amid the wreckage of deserted cities destroyed by the enemy, the citizens who had survived the enemy now attacked each other. So long as the memory of past disaster remained fresh, kings and priests, commoners and nobles kept their rank. But when those who remained died, there grew up a generation that knew nothing of these things and had experienced only the present peaceful order. Then were all restraits of truth and justice so utterly abandoned that no trace of them remained. (p. 72) The miracles are related in a way that does not dominate the discussion. Unlike the Life of Saint Gregory, the miracles are related in a semi-sceptical manner and Bede takes pains to explain his sources. Some of the miracles are genuinely funny while most are related to healings or springs bursting forth: But the man whose impious hand struck off that pius head was not permitted to boast of his deed, for as the martyr's head fell, the executioner's eyes dropped out on the ground. (p. 54) Additionally, Bede gives ample attention to Abbesses and women, as queens, princesses or nuns. Two shinning examples being Etheldreda and St. Hilda. Or King Sebbi wife, who "absolutely refused to be separated from him, [otherwise] he would have long before abdicated and joined a monastery." (p. 222) They appear as strong, autonomous agents and give pause to the feminist interpretation of history which so disparages the paternalistic Church and Middle Ages. But perhaps my favourite thing is Bede's seeming obsession with the Easter conflict with the Irish. In retrospect, the date of Easter seems unimportant at best, but in his time, with very fluid calendars, it really represented a point of unity that held the English Church to the continental Church. The addition of Bede's letter to Egbert gives insight into Bede's Scriptural and Theological learning, which is almost entire missing from the History. And Cuthbert's letter on the death of Bede is genuinely moving and a tribute to the adage that that measure of a teacher is in his students.
