Yes, of course, I read the book but I have to start with what was at the end. Not the end of the story, the end of the book. I learned in the "About the Author" section that David Morrell is a fellow Canadian. He took a big chance at a relatively young age and left for America and the rest, as they say, is history. The author of First Blood, Desperate Measures, Creepers, and Scavengers and the founder of International Thriller Writers establishes a great premise in Last Reveille. He conceptualizes a main character who began fighting in the U.S. Civil War and moved onto the Indian Wars, Cuba, the Philippines and, lastly, America's foray into Mexico to destroy Pancho Villa and his dwindling forces. The story is told through two characters. Miles Calendar, a 65-year old warrior, who has gone decades fighting battles and wars (thus his time-related name). He has become an expert in dispassionate brutality though he chooses to share little of that expertise. Mustered out of the army he works as civilian scout and a hard ass alongside green soldiers. Enter a young recruit named Prentice. As Morrell himself points out in the Introduction the name is a play on "apprentice". The story follows General John J. Pershing's weird push into Mexico to stop Villa's cross border raids. Morrell suggests that the American military knew this campaign was silly but it provided a means to train up soldiers for America's coming involvement in WW1. This involved 5,000 troops or 1/6th of the entire U.S. force at the time. Who would have guessed that in just two years the country would put 4 million men in uniform. The premise is strong and so is the atmosphere. I felt the dust, the cold, the heat and the anxiety of combat, as well as, the boredom between battles. I wanted to buy-into the two main characters. Often Morrell writes a book that seems halfway towards screenplay. Reveille is no exception. Miles Calendar is a Rooster Coburn-ish character but without the interest or sandpaper rough charm. Young Prentice, new to the army, is a blank slate despite a stab at a sentimental back story. It really falls apart when these two establish a father and son relationship in short order. The commanding officer has employed Calendar since the Philippines and lauds Prentice for getting close to the man. In this closeness, Calendar breaks his own code which is not to let anyone in. Certainly not his enemies and this extends to those he fights with. Morrell brings this to light by having Calendar nearly kill an Indian scout. The near murder is explained by Calendar's personal vow to wipe these people off the earth after fighting them for so long. It is one of the best-written scenes in the whole book (I use the word "scenes" deliberately). The other scene involving a pocket watch is equally compelling. Yet, overall the premise of father-son sharing confidences and lessons is not believable. How does an incredibly taciturn, gruff and isolated man who speaks in monosyllables suddenly become a verbose teacher of sage advice? This is not adequately developed or explained. When bullets fly this novel does as well. When it comes to dialogue you want to fast-forward. Having said all this I will now present an irony. This book would be better as a movie. The flashbacks of both characters would make it eminently watchable even if the source material is not that readable.
