It seems fitting that I should be writing this review (having just finished the book), while riding a high speed train line from Xiamen to Shanghai, a contrast to the time of Ma Jian's travel in the late 70s and early 80s. I don't often find myself drawn to travelogues. When I chose to read the book, I didn't realize that would be its style, and didn't realize the book was based on Ma Jian's actual journeys (though I assumed that it was closely based on actual experiences). I found myself unexpectedly enjoying the book. As I travel through a few major cities in China in 2018, and encounter a rather sanitized version of China-- migrant workers slowly sent back home, sanitation workers properly uniformed, broken down buildings torn down, dirtied building facades stuccoed or cleaned, anti-jaywalking barriers, and more ordered lines--- it feels as though some essence of China is lost. (Though it could be argued, that I am merely romanticizing what was poverty). Ma Jian's book captures the old China that I recall when I heard my parents' stories, and when I stumbled around China back in 1993 and 1994, and even later in the early 2000s. Ma Jian travels at the end of the Cultural Revolution, and the beginning of China opening up under Deng Xiaoping. Ma Jian's writings captures a country in movement-- yet at different rates, from the rural countryside that may have yet to hear what has happened, to ShenZhen, one of the first special economic zones where alot of the initial burgeoning activity started. His book reads more as a series of vignettes and snapshots of people and places he encounters-- kindness, cruelty, shifting hopes and desires as China begins to open up. Particularly touching are the kind acts of strangers who house Ma Jian, care for him, and feed him, despite how little those people may have. Others who relocated to remote locations during the Cultural Revolution and have chosen to stay, despite the challenges of living there. The book is also a spiritual journey. Ma Jian, disillusioned by communist, becomes Buddhist and eventually hopes to go to Tibet and find some clarity or awakening there. And the book is absorbed in his reflections on this path. There are several notable themes in the book: the spiritual vacuousness in China, a decisive conclusion that the Chinese do not belong in Tibet, and some highlighting of the diversity of practices among ethnic minorities in China. "The authorities talk about reform but they have no intention of political control. Political freedom gives one a sense of self. Economic freedom encourages greed. If one has the latter without the former, then society becomes warped and this can be very dangerous." "It's easy to be kind when you are poor. I've met a lot of kind people in my travels, but the cost of their kindness is exclusion from the outside world. As soon as a road is built, the kindness vanishes."
