'There is so much good that we can all do, & we must have the energy to do it.' -The Good Apprentice (Brownie) The Prodigal Son is a long chapter where the author introduces the main characters. “He was a God, he had become divine, he was experiencing the good absolute, the vision of the visions, the annihilation of the ego.” Ego, in psychoanalytic theory, that portion of the human personality which is experienced as the “self” or “I” and is in contact with the external world through perception. It is said to be the part that remembers, evaluates, plans, and in other ways is responsive to and acts in the surrounding physical and social world. According to psychoanalytic theory, the ego coexists with the id (said to be the agency of primitive drives) and superego (considered to be the ethical component of personality) as one of three agencies proposed by Sigmund Freud in description of the dynamics of the human mind. Ego (Latin: “I”), according to Freud, comprises the executive functions of personality by serving as the integrator of the outer and inner worlds as well as of the id and the superego. The ego gives continuity and consistency to behaviour by providing a personal point of reference which relates the events of the past (retained in memory) with actions of the present and of the future (represented in anticipation and imagination). The ego is not coextensive with either the personality or the body, although body concepts form the core of early experiences of self. The ego, once developed, is capable of change throughout life, particularly under conditions of threat, illness, and significant changes in life circumstances. Source: Britannica This is the first taste of her fictional philosophy, where our archenemy are ourselves. In my opinion Mark was a God in the sense that for a while his soul was without evil, he was good as God could not do evil. But being a human being, the nature has condemned him to death, because Mark is not outside of God, but responsible for his behavior. This also means that on earth the battle between good and evil is infinite, the humans will never defeat the evil, because evil is human. This means that Edward acted in good faith, he did something of stupid and he will pay the price, but this experience how will change his personality? How Edward will live with his grief and his conscience? if the world was without evil, Mark was alive? A the centre there is a young and handsome boy of twenty years old, Edward and his best friend Mark. Mark is a puritan he dislikes drugs and one drug will kill him, but he is pleased to share his room with Edward, his right opposite. Between them there is a strong friendship, and then between their souls who will never die. Edward was pleased to see Mark because he saw in his face the "Annihilation Of The Ego" a divine experience for his friend and "Mark would be grateful to him later." But his intention caused the death of his friend, for Edward is the beginning of his death, who will be killed slowly by the remorse. The author mining deeply in the human soul with the letters. One of them is for Edward where the Mom of Mark shocked by the death of his beloved son, is tremendously genuine revealing her nature the essence of hate. How Edward will live with his grief and remorse? this is the philosophical plot of this novel. After some pages there is a passage where the author introduces Stuart who like Edward they are in love with death, Edward is depressed and Stuart (The son of Harry Cuno, (the second father of Edward) is a staunch religious. It is clear to me that Edward needs of a stable family the natural father and mother. Edward is surrounded by a person that is superficial, and he thinks that Edward must do the same. An interesting question posed on this novel is 'Can a machine think like a human being?' This is a typical question between Ursula and Stuart, but the most spicy is why the young people are obsessed by sex, probably because they saw too pornography who mined their morality. This is the beginning of a Socratic dialogue, discussing whether the pornography has corrupted the young. Stuart and Edward are very similar; Edward caused indirectly the death of his friend and Stuart has been disappointed by religion he thinks that the antidote is reflection and prayers to live in peace, he thinks that Edward must avoid the rethoric and go in a remote location to try to do some good action to avoid madness. Stuart is the good Samaritan for Edward, maybe he loves him, maybe not, but he care about Edward but not Harry Cuno with a difficult childhood who seems uninterested, for Stuart 'Love is only of God' Stuart wants to be an ascetic. Edward is desperate, his mistake is killing him, which is full of remorse and his sense of guilt, he meets Mrs Quaid to establish a contact with the defunct Mark. At the flat of Mrs. Quaid, a strange woman with an Irish accent, smell the smell of incense the same at the house of Sarah, during the death of Mark. Between Thomas and Edward there is a philosophical dialogue, the reader will ask why Edward chose Thomas rather than a priest, this mystery is resolved by Iris telling us that Edward does not want to speak with a priest because he feels guilty. A guilt should be that Edward declares that he is spiritless and that 'God is the invention of happy innocent' but inside Edward there is a battle with his 'Proud Ego' ‘Truthful remorse leads to the fruitful death of the self, not to its survival as a successful liar’ – ‘Recognise lies and reject them at every point.’ Thomas wants that Edward should change his lifestyle and live peacefully, with his sense of guilt and despair, telling to him that inside him there were different self. Edward once listened carefully to Thomas was not agree with him, telling that it was all un-useful because "I haven't got the motive" After the seance the main preoccupation of Edward was to find his father defined by him as a stranger who does not care of his son and decided to go to "Seegard" the house of Jesse. The childhood of Thomas was not simple, but he was happy of 'possessing' Midge his wife. Edward wants to go Seegard not only to meet his father, but to be judge by his father for having killed Mark. In my opinion Edward wants a rational judgment without any sentiment, and Jesse is the right person because he abandoned him during his childhood. The description of Seegard is oppressive inside and outside, it is located in a countryside, where there is mud, high trees and the sea is closed but unreachable, but with a clear and blue sky. Edward needs to see his father Jesse not only for a judgment but for everything. Physically Edward and Jesse are very similar and in both there is something magical not ghosts but poltergeist, the life in the house of his father is not simple, the Mother May and the three sisters are against the progress. In this house there is the electricity but they do not use it. Edward wants to see the sea but it is impossible to reach it because, in the middle there is a railway. In the dialogue between Thomas and Stuart Cuno about the life of Edward emerges their selfishness and that Stuart is a stoic. Thomas does not like Stuart, he provoke him, telling that he does not want God, but he has the attributes to be God but Stuart is disagree. The most interesting phrase are "Can a man be absolute truthful?" (Edward?) and "Sex is said to be the substance of spirit, the abstention is dangerous, all spirituality is dangerous especially asceticism (Stuart). The asceticism is a sort of fight against the human passions and sensible impulses. Edward lives in Seegard from two weeks, he is nervous because he has not see his loved father Jess, he thinks that Jesse could be with a mistress somewhere in the world. There is the magic between Ilona (Edward's sister) he saw Ilona dancing in the air in the countryside but he was not drug nor drunk. In a piece of wood, Edward reads a phrase written by his father "I am here, do not forget me" what does it mean? Edward suffer enormously for the lack of his father, but one day he discover a room where is father lived. he looks carefully at the paintings, and to every object that could explain the character of his father, here tbhe description is detailed. At one point of the narration Edward and the reader will discover Jesse sitting up on a chair, the description is detailed, it is like a photograph. The met between Jesse and his father is almost cold in the sense that the author use a frugal description of their sensations. Edward discover that his father has wrote a letter to him never delivered and that Jesse wants that Edward should marry Ilona, but Ilona is the sister of Edward. It seems to me that Jesse does not care of Edward, like the other people around him. Jesse is not loved at Seegard House, there is a strong contrast between Mother May and her daughters, the main reason was his behavior. Edward being a victim too, does not find a way to speak to his father, because Jesse is always in trance. Edward meets the sister of Mark, Brenda Wilsden, and she asks to him what happened and why. Edward admit his fault, Brenda does not condemn him for the drug, but for having abandoned her brother in that conditions. Edward discover that he has been invited to Seegard's house by Mother May not for his psychological status but for Jesse. Mother May is extremely rude telling to Edward her truth "Jesse didn't want you to exist, he wanted Cloe to have abortion." The author speaks about the "Death - Wish" telling that it is not so negative, but it is our instinct. To die means also the destruction of our ego, the Nirvana as the cessation of all selfish desires. It seems that the ego is the central problem of the humanity, without it our souls were free to our body, in other words the death is the fundamental ingredient for a better spiritual life, it is our liberation. 'and the liberation of the soul is the aim of true psychology' 'Death is the centre of life. We have to learn that we are already dead; the soul must learn it now, here in the present which is all we have, the lesson of its perfect freedom (The Good Apprentice, I. Murdoch). In my opinion the ego and the evil is complementary in the sense that without them we will free of our personalism and we use out time not to hate the others but to love the our specie. An example is the mother of Mark that through the letters (the most intimate form of humanity) we see her profound hate for Edward not only for having, wrongly killed her son but because he is alive and she wants him dead. Fortunately for Edward the sister of Mark wants to understand what happened and not to judge him, but try to understand what has been happened in that evening. Being in the middle of my reading I do not know the destiny of Edward. The sister of Mark is the only antidote of his madness. Jesse has disappeared for the second time and his son is desperate, he will make terrible dreams and he will meet for the second time Mrs Quay. The most intriguing question is 'Had Jesse died because Edward wanted to see a girl? It was all over again. And down that way of thought madness' (The Good Apprentice - I Murdoch) For the character I must mention is Max Point who think that Edward is Jesse. It seems that for Edward everything is going well until to a certain point ' Edward was now afraid that in the end he might begin to hate Mark, to see him as a demon who had ruined his life' 'Why should not Mark desire revenge?' 'He had ruined Edward's life, but Edward had taken his life away entirely.' Isn't that a great dilemma? The most disconcerting thing in this novel is the description of the Characters. Edward is the most fragile, he is suffering more than the other because he has a sensible soul. The other men are victims of their ego, they want to demonstrate that they are superior and that they must possess the women. The women are not victims, but with the exception of Brownie, the other are cruel. One of them is Mother May who thinks that the death of Jesse is related to Edward, they are like the witches of Macbeth that stir the evil in the cauldron and then stirred up in every direction. The central figure against the madness of Edward is the mother of Mark, because thanks to her letters full of hate, Edward has really regretted his actions, his regret is not the sum of selfishness but by his heart. After having read the letter of the mother of Mark, where they made peace in the name of happiness and rationality, being conscious that the hate does not fix anything but will destroy both. This novel is also about love based on happiness, in other words, the love is selfishness, and if there is a true love it is not paid. The magicians in this novel is not only the father of Edward, but Brownie that 'see' the good and she urges to use it.
