It is a work of historical fiction, set in Victorian England, a century earlier to when it was written. The author is not just telling a story but having a discourse with the readers, putting forward his views and thoughts on his characters, his creations. It is at a same time a romance novel as well as an essay and critique of Victorian customs and the exalted sense of Duty. Sarah Woodruff infamous as The French Lieutenant’s Woman is an enigma to Charles Smithson who is engaged in a match that is socially lauded and acceptable, but Sarah appears to Charles as a figure who he cannot understand yet is magnetically drawn to. It is in short a story of forbidden love. A long period of blind obedience to certain customs had made people comfortable in their prison of puritanical rules, and social class divide. To even accept the reality that something was wrong, something was curtailing their freedoms, was an aversive thought. It may be difficult for us to understand or relate to this, but if certain systems and prejudices are ingrained in the psyche it becomes difficult to part with them. Any threat to the convention and norm threatened an order of life which controlled and gave meaning to their existence. I would like to add that some circumstances may make us feel aloof, but the author has a marvelous way of evoking compassion and sympathy in the reader. Each chapter starts with a relevant Victorian verse or passage which is very intuitive to upcoming events. This book had many interesting quotes. We all write poems; it is simply that poets are the ones who write in words In other words, every culture, however undemocratic, or however egalitarian, needs a kind of self-questioning ethical elite, and one that is bound by certain rules of conduct, some of which may be very unethical, and so account for eventual death of the form, though their hidden purpose is good: to brace or act as structure for the better effects of their function in history Now all this is the great and timeless relevance of the New Testament myth of the Temptation in the Wilderness. All who have insight and education have automatically their own wilderness; and at some point in their life they will have their temptation. Their rejection may be foolish; but it is never evil. You have just turned down a tempting offer in commercial applied science in order to continue your academic teaching? Your last exhibition did not sell as well as the previous one, but you are determined to keep to your new style? You have just made some decision in which your personal benefit, your chance of possession, has not been allowed to interfere? Then do not dismiss Charles's state of mind as a mere conditioning of futile snobbery. See him for what he is: a man struggling to overcome history. And even though he does not realize it.
