Some Notes On A First Reading : Remarkable. We are transported back to the Imperial court of 11th century Japan. My thanks to G.G. for recommending this translation. I had had so many false starts with Edward Seidensticker ’s version. Big differences between editions are the length of the sentences, Seidensticker uses short choppy ones, and the incomparable peripheral documentation here. The illustrations, maps, layouts of houses, footnotes which explain poetic references, and dramatis personae for each of the 54 chapters, beautifully enrich one’s reading. The prose is already excellent, so to have these adjuncts makes for an uncommon reading experience. Genji is borne to one of the Japanese emperor’s intimates, the Kiritsubo Consort. The emperor is so close to this woman, they achieve such an astonishing rapport, that he always wants her with him. This inspires gossip among his other women and the palace fuctionaries. For if the emperor is spending time with her, he isn’t spending time with them. Then the woman dies. The emperor’s grief is so great that he’s remiss in some of his imperial duties. Then he thinks of the son, Genji, living elsewhere, and has the boy brought to him. P. 89 of 1100. We often read of older men in the east marrying young girls, children really. But the persistence with which Genji (19) pursues little Murasaki (10) is surprising. No doubt his imperial parentage ensures that his overtures are always politely entertained, if at first refused. His purpose he says is to train her to his liking. We can only imagine what that means at this point. Then little Murasaki‘s guardian grandmother dies. Her father – a Buddhist monk – is soon to take the girl back to his mountain retreat. Before he does though Genji swoops in and plucks her from her run down house. Genji worries about whether he will gain a reputation for debauchery, but the more I read the more I think he is permitted anything. Perhaps with this exception: he cuckolds his father, the emperor. He impregnates the emperor’s new intimate, Fujitsubo, a woman brought to the palace because of her close resemblance to Genji’s much beloved and departed mother, the Kiritsubo Consort. There is high anxiety as she begins to show, but the emperor accepts the child as his own and Genji manages to keep it quiet. It’s interesting how self-deluded Genji is. He speaks of his honorable intentions. But when he finds a woman who isn’t interested in him, or feigns disinterest, he begins to strategize until he conquers her, or a prospect promising greater physical immediacy is revealed. “It is extremely irritating of her to turn me away like this without even hearing me out,” he said. “She must suspect me of wanting only to amuse myself, whereas in reality I am not frivolous at all. Things cannot help going wrong and the other person assumes the worst, and it always ends up being one’s own fault. I should have thought someone well disposed, someone living in peace without parents or brothers and sisters to bother her, would be far more attractive.” (p. 118) The mythos and Buddhist spirituality underlying this book actually has a basis in fact. The book, though it seems at times fantastic, is for the most part realist fiction. The book can be lacrymose. It is almost morbid at times. And then the author breaks into broad comedy. I am referring to the scene with the Dame of Staff, described as “randy,” who gets her hooks into the sybaritic Genji and won’t let go. His friend the Secretary Captain then comes along and catches him in flagrante delicto with the old girl. Suddenly we’re in the Marx Brothers’s “Night at the Opera.” Genji is now 20. There’s no way around the truth, he is a pig. Astonishing how he goes about virtually raping women, who are then overawed with gratitude. It is difficult, as Vladimir Nabokov showed us with Humbert Humbert, to take a reprehensible figure and make him interesting to the reader despite his failings. The author makes him suffer for his dalliances, and his suffering is balanced by his libidinousness. He conquers but he pays for it. Lady Rokujō is the widow of Prince Zembo and a longtime mistress of Genji. She has great pride, and her jealousy is so strong that subconsciously her ikiryō (wandering spirit) kills Yugao and Lady Aoi, and attacks Murasaki. (from Wiki) P. 200 Few of these noblepersons have names. I’m a little slow getting used to their titles which seem blandly unmemorable at first. Fortunately there’s a little dramatis personae at the start of each chapter which helps you keep them straight, and a grasp on this detailed thread you must never lose or you’ll be completely at sea. Genji is a dense but very satisfying story that requires a careful reader. Bodice ripper’s are by their nature poorly written. But if one could write one well in 11th century Japan, I realize this is ahistoric, this might be it. The unrelenting seduction here is certainly “bodicy,” but not the prose. So perhaps it’s more precise to say there is a thread of bodice ripper running through this novel - and it’s really hot stuff. Must finish. . . This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
