4 adventurous ⭐️ Wow! Me taking a deep breath. This book is a lot, I could not put it down and I need cpr. 😳 It has the vibe of Ken Follet’s “Pillars of the earth”, the medieval setting where women were property and in need of protection. Maybe with a dash of Ivanhoe. ⚔️🤺 I tried to read this through that lens, and not one of a modern woman. If you can’t do that, you will absolutely hate this book. It’s written in 1984 and it did not age well 😂 but it’s a good time, and it certainly made me feel all sorts of things.Small Spoilers: Gavin loved the beautiful Alice, he asked for her hand in marriage, but she told him her father chose an Earl for her, and they could not marry. Devastated he agrees to a marriage of estate, to a girl no one has ever seen, Judith. Judith has pledged her life to a convent and never wanted marriage, but because her brothers are all dead and her father needs grandchildren to keep the title in the family, she has to marry Gavin. Her betrothed doesn’t even visit her to accept the terms of the marriage and he sends his brother in his stead. Gavin is callous and disrespectful to her. At their wedding Gavin is awestruck by Judith’s beauty and kindness but he was simultaneously angry at her for not being Alice, and for being her own soul and not obedient. He did not want her, he wanted Alice! ❤️‍🩹 Alice attended their wedding, and she made Gavin pledge he will only ever love her and not his new wife, and they share a kiss. Judith overhears this conversation and is heartbroken and disillusioned. She wanted her marriage to work. Gavin reacted cruelly to her when he finds out she overheard them, and he dismissed her arrogantly. Yet he is oddly attracted to her at the same time. On their wedding night he strikes her for being disobedient, and he threatens violence quite a lot, he is a jealous man, and in a rage he proceeds to rape her. 😢he is angry at himself, for being attracted to Judith, for the loss of Alice, and for not being able to handle Judith. This was hard to read, be warned. Judith vows never to give herself to Gavin freely. But she will.❤️‍🩹 So how does Gavin come back from this? Good question, let’s debate when you read it 😜 but no he doesn’t. Through the lens of 1425, maybe he does, but in my book this cost a ⭐️ Gavin wants Alice to love, and Judith to bed. His attraction to Judith grows by the minute, and they grow closer, but Gavin keeps hurting Judith. Not always on purpose but by being honest. He starts caring for Judith. We as readers know he is falling in love with Judith, but he is yet to fully understand what is happening to him 🙌 loved this so much, it creates amazing romance, when we aren’t spoon fed. Gavin has 3 brothers and they play a large part in the story. Honestly all 3 would be better MMC’s than Gavin. I adored how they all fell a little in love with Judith and had to remove themselves. Gavin is slowly discovering that he is actually falling in love with Judith and perhaps it was never Alice, but is it a little too late to right all of his wrongs? Heartbreakingly when he tries to woo Judith. Alice’s new husband dies, and she is dead set on getting Gavin back, and she tries very hard to be an obstacle to Gavin’s plans to woo his wife. 🔪 🖤 They are at a stalemate a little too long and I would have like a little more romance over drama. Who knew I would ever say that. Should you read it? YES you should, but Gavin is rage bait, you won’t fall for him, not even a little 😁 It’s not an easy book to read, but you couldn’t have pried it out of my boney fingers had you tried. BINGO SQUARE 35 MEDIEVAL SETTING.
