4.5* 1988 Food, glorious food! When the heroine was a Cordon Bleu chef, that's to be expected! In a twist, The Great Betty Neels had given our plain heroine Florina the Dutch connection! Her mother was Dutch, and made sure Florina was totally fluent in the language and cooking! Awesome! But the most lovely was still the charming Wheel House, which our RBD Sir William had bought, and Florina ended up cooking there. Life there was pretty perfect after Florina escaped from her despotic and useless father. Except in every Garden of Eden, there's a serpent! Wanda the Witch. She was the typical grasping Veronica, who got her hooks into Sir William after months of chasing and scheming. She's obnoxious from the first to the last scene in which she appeared and there was a most epic scene in which Wanda insulted and threatened Florina; she talked back and the Witch slapped Florina! *gasp* But our awesome heroine told Wanda to "cool off" and upended a full jug of cold lemonade on top of her head! According to Sir William, it had a disastrous effect on tinted hair, and little Pauline had not been able to stop laughing when she overheard Wanda complaining to Sir William! In this story, what was the most enjoyable part was normally our heroine would be too "cool" to offer her side of the story and defend herself against the Veronica, but our Florina here was blessed to have the faithful family retainers all on her side! They were on hand to witness such goings on, and did not hesitate to jump to Florina's defense! Thank God! Jolly and Nanny were the fairy godfather and godmother bringing Florina and Sir William together! Hehe! Their POV offered us valuable insights into Sir William 's mind. I had wondered how on earth a supposedly smart doctor like him could have ever chosen Wanda for a wife and stepmother to his adorable little girl! But in the break up scene, Wanda admitted she had lied about loving him and wanting children in order to attract him...good riddance to her! ~~~~~ She became aware that he was slowing the car into the slow lane and she looked at him.‘If I tell you that I love you—am in love with you, and have been since the moment I saw you, my darling, will you be content to leave it at that until we are home? I can’t kiss you adequately in the fast lane, and nothing else will do!’ He smiled at her with a tenderness which made her gulp. All she could do was nod, and he reached out and caught her hand for a moment. ‘We will marry as soon as it can be arranged. Now sit quiet and think about the wedding cake while I drive.’ ~~~~~ It was so funny how Sir William schemed to get rid of Wanda while Florina was broken hearted in Holland nannying... it's summarised here: ‘You mean Wanda doesn’t want to marry you? She jilted you?’‘Yes, with a little help from circumstances.’She cast a quick look at him; he looked smug. ‘What did you do?’‘Oh, nothing really—a long country walk, rather a muddy one, I’m afraid—and the nettles at this time of year. Nanny and Mrs Deakin cooked dinner, and I refused to sell Wheel House and live for ever and ever in London.’ Oh and Mrs Deakin served them instant coffee, not the proper brew Florina made! LOL Not sure how old Pauline was but if she's only just starting school and Nanny just retired, I'm guessing around seven years old? Her precociousness and mature insights into Wanda was incredible. She said Wanda would not have been interested in her father if he had been a mere "Mr Sedley". Wow! Sir William was pretty amazing, rising to the occasion like hoovering the carpet during the Measles Crisis! And coming to their rescue, helping out with Jolly. I was so afraid he'd be angry with Florina when Pauline got concussion! The only reason I'm not quite giving this a 5* because I really had thought Sir William had already broken off his engagement with Wanda the Witch by the time Pauline had the concussion. He had kept asking why was Wanda at his house(but we knew from Jolly/Nanny/Pauline that Wanda was always in and out of Sir William 's London home as though it was already hers, treating all the staff shabbily). And when Wanda sought to humiliate Florina by telling William Florina loved him, and him admitting "he knew"! I felt that part not well handled. Instead of talking about it he packed her off to Holland. I guessed he couldn't propose when he was still engaged to Wanda...the fact that she was his cook never matttered! Still this is easily one of my top five favourite BN novel! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
