This is the last volume of Philip K. Dick's short stories, written between 1963 and 1981. While he sticks to many of the themes that have been a part of his writing from the beginning, the effects of a changing culture can be seen. For one thing, some of his characters have stopped smoking; they now chew tobacco. I imaging the author trying to kick his smoking habit, or beginning to realize that smoking in a spaceship is not a good idea or likely to be happening. One story written in 1974, "Pre-Persons," imagining an overpopulated world in which abortion has been legalized up to age 12, when young people finally develop a soul, apparently enraged a few readers. The story is spun with his usual wit and understatement. He imagines in Stephen King style the terror of the grown children who know that the 'abortion truck' is coming. They would rather see the dog catcher or hear an ice cream truck than hear the abortion truck loudspeakers blasting out a version of Jack and Jill. While you may also be enraged by this thought experiment, you have to give him credit for following the idea to its logical conclusion. One story in particular stands out: "Cadbury the Beaver Who Lacked." Wow, what a strange trip down the beaver hole with an insecure and strange beaver and his search for a mate to replace his nagging spouse. Three females, possibly women, all part of the same person, offer him bitingly honest appraisals of how they would treat him if they lived together. Very strange and totally not science fiction: it is all fantasy - very unusual for Dick - and as a result, very entertaining to his readers. "We Can Remember it for you Wholesale" is the story that became the hit movie, "Total Recall." The story is wonderful, but it is so different from the movie that you have to give credit to the creators of the movie for taking the skeleton of an idea and expanding it into a mind bending feature film. If you are a fan of Philip K. Dick, or simply a reader with OCD who wants to say you have "read everything" by the author, well give this book a spin. I had many entertaining moments from it. My library had to borrow this book from a library in San Francisco! Amazing. Now on to Volume 4, which the library just got from North Carolina.
