This is a review of the UK Hodder edition, credited to the fake author name of Lucy Daniels. In America, this would be published by Scholastic under the fake author name of Ben Baglio. It was really written by Pat Posner, who would write many books in the Animal Ark Universe. This is one of only two Animal Ark books I've given a five-star rating. I love dogs. I usually don't read books about dogs, because they tend to get me really upset. There are upsetting things that happen here. However, Posner had a method with all of the madness. She managed to write a tale as meaningful for adults, if not more so, than for children. People, even sane adults, will make really, really dumb mistakes when they are pushed to the breaking point, such the owner of the Dog at the Door. I thought this was handled in a realistic way, without getting too technical or preachy. I wonder if Posner had started to write this book separate from Animal Ark, but the offer of doing another Animal Ark book was too strong. As far as I know, writers of Animal Ark did not get the copyright to their books, but got a flat fee of about $30,000, or around that range. Posner knew her dogs. I used to have a dog that refused to eat anything whenever I left the house. I stopped going on vacations because of her. And dogs do cry tears. It's rare, but I've seen it happen. This was about the best work Jenny Gregory did of dogs during her short time as Animal Ark's illustrator. She seemed to do better at larger dogs than smaller dogs. The book is set around Halloween, which is my favorite holiday. In the 1990s, it started to get big in the UK. It hadn't been such a big deal before, since it was so close to Bonfire Night. However, when this was published in 1997, many UK kids were going to Haloween parties and dressing up. This is one book where I'm not sure why Scholastic decided to publish it, because it includes dealings with the RSPCA. I believe the American edition changed this to SPCA. There is no American SPCA that can do criminal investigations or bring legal charges to pet owners. I wish there was. We are desperate for an RSPCA American division. They have it in South Africa, Australia, and over a dozen other countries. The ASPCA is nowhere in the same ballpark as the RSPCA.
