The Ugly Duckling is a classic story apt to impart lessons on morality to children. I got this book at the daily kindle deals for free. I picked this up to read for pleasure and diversion. This tiny forty pages book stimulated some ideas that are expected only from fables, stories and fairy tales. This is a story about a baby duck that is born out of a huge egg and looks 'ugly'. In few words, the author presents the reaction of its mother who conditioned to appreciate beauty than character is ashamed to accept it. Though, she attempts to protect the duckling but succumbs to constant critical remarks made by the community. The frustrations of a parent over inability to shield the duckling against the social loathing and the shame associated with the ‘ugly’ part of oneself were easy to read between the lines. The duckling moves away from the community, travels distant places, survives all the torments and struggles to find where he belongs. Finally, one day out of shame it looks down in the lake water and finds a beautiful white swan. It is this reflection that fills its heart with happiness. The story ends with two morals: ‘To savor happiness one needs to go through hardships’ and ‘No matter what your past is, your present defines you and determines your future’. In the entire book, the word ‘ugly’ appeared rather strongly for me. The definitive nature of ‘ugly’ changes when it is used as a ‘Label’. Once labeled, a person is persecuted, detested and constantly reminded of one’s deficits in such a way that the identity of a person solidifies as one of ‘handicap’; becoming a ‘self’ ruptured beyond repair. I would recommend that if you read this story to your little ones, do not just focus on imparting the above mentions lessons from the book, but also impart sensitivity to and appreciation of ‘the differences’ that exist in this world. A story is an instrument that indulges the reader into a world of fantasy thereby granting insight into the roots of the real problems. This is true for any fiction, but fables, stories and tales are unique owing to their simplicity and because they go beyond the limits of societies, cultures and time periods. For me, reading this book was therapeutic. The other component of the book is the illustrations, which were serene and can add a flavor to reading for children. I recommend this book to both kids and adults alike.
