This book was given to me by my Rabbi as a gift on my confirmation. My edition is so old, you can't even find it. It is a Modern Library Book edition with an introduction by Eleanor Roosevelt. It doesn't mean that I am that old (although I am old-ish), but, the copyright is 1952 (I will say I wasn't born then). I still have this book. So this book is very personal to me. For a past I experienced growing up in a very prejudiced neighborhood. The anti-semitic past and hatred I endured living in Southern California. So a lot of times, I had to hide that I was Jewish. To protect myself. And it is especially hard to see the hatred in today's world. I don't practice Judaism today. But it is my history. It is a part of me. And my ancestors have endured a lot. So, yes, this book, Anne Frank's experience, it is personal. Premise: the diary of a young girl beginning on her 13th birthday (6-12-42). {Interesting that I am posting this review on the date that would have been celebrating her birthday 81 years later.} The diary ends August 1, 1944. Despite all that was going on around her, Anne was a happy and cheerful person. She was talkative and inquisitive. She was challenged as a teenager, and didn't always understand everyone or the situation, but she still had a great sunshine spirit. I think this was another reason the Rabbi felt this was an important book to share with us young ones as we were entering our commitment to Judaism. He not only wanted us to understand what it meant to be a Jew, and the sacrifices of those before us, but the joy of a good positive attitude - despite the circumstances they endured. I'm not sure that always worked for me. I questioned why the Jews didn't fight back. Why they allowed themselves to be shuttled into camps so easily once they knew that was what was happening. And as I questioned, I was reminded of the deepness of their religious beliefs of love and fellowship and the goodness and belief in humanity. Thank you Anne. We need to get back there again. Love. Fellowship. Goodness and belief in humanity. Yes?
