Billy Budd 3 🌟 Difficult to read because of unnecessary double negatives and backwards-written sentences (hello, Melville, we're speaking English), this book is still likable because of the plot and characters. Billy Budd is an impressed sailor on a man-of-war during the war between France and England at the end of the 19th century. He is an innocent who is mortally done wrong by the master-at-arms, Claggart, who hated him for sheer jealousy. As to Claggart's character: P.55: "A ruled undemonstrative distrustfulness Is So habitual, not with businessmen so much, as with men who know their kind in less shallow relations than business, namely, certain men of the world, that they come at last to employ it all but unconsciously, and some of them would very likely feel real surprise at being charged with it as one of their general characteristics." This book leaves the reader with a feeling of sadness, and of beauty and innocence cut down in its prime, somewhat like a beautiful butterfly snatched out of the air mid-flight, and savagely crushed in the hand of a cruel human. The Piazza 4 🌟 A man, living (in retirement?) in a farmhouse, has a porch built. He takes the utmost care of which side of the house to build the porch on, as all sides (North, west, south, east) have their own distinct views of scenery, and this porch will be used for appreciating such views. The man, spending much time on the beautiful view of the distant mountains, eventually becomes aware of something glimmering way up yonder, and curiosity overcomes him. Breathless descriptions of scenery, and a moral lesson for us readers. Bartleby 3 🌟 A profoundly sad tale that left this reader with a lot of questions and a feeling of hopelessness for the character of Bartleby, who apparently had not the slightest hope or interest left for anything in his life. This, from a reviewer I follow: "Recommended for anyone who works in an office: it'll make your favorite slacker colleague seem comparatively industrious." Lee Klein, Goodreads member [This review I dedicate to my old co-worker #JuliaPlowman ] Tadiana Night Owl, another Goodreads member had this observance: "There's a reference in the end to Bartleby sleeping "with kings and counselors" that the [Tadiana's] professor pointed out is a reference to these lines from the Bible: " '13 For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept; then would I have been at rest "14 with kings and counselors of the earth, who built desolate places for themselves, "15 or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver' "Job 3:13-15 (KJV) - A reference not just to death, but to a certain equality men have in death, despite their differences in worldly fortunes. Food for thought, like so much of this story!" Benito Cereno 2 🌟 A strange story about two captains, two ships, a big mystery, and a lot of racism. Capt Delano is at anchor off Sta Maria island, Chile, when another ship comes into view. It is in sad, bad shape, and Capt Delano, thinking the crew in need of help, goes to them in his whaler-boat. The ailing ship is a slaver, full of blacks, with a Spaniard for a captain. But he seems terribly I'll, and despite Capt Delano sending him supplies and promising additional aid, this captain will barely speak. Moreover, the black man who assists him, consoles him, gives him medicine, who seems supervisor to the slaves, will not at any time leave him alone. The suspense and the racism is dreadful. The Encantadas 3 🌟 10 "Sketches" of tales about the Galapagos islands off the coast of Ecuador. Each sketch has a particular story to tell about something that happened in its past. For example, on one island, a ship that has stopped on an island to fetch firewood and pick up turtles to eat, is about to embark, when a sailor catches sight of something White moving in the distance on the island. They end up rescuing a widow, a "chola," whose husband and brother died and left her all alone. Their Enterprise was to make turtle oil out of the turtles that were native there. (In Melville's story, a Chola is a mix between an Indian and a Spaniard. Not like the cholos in California.) The most fun of reading these stories was looking each island up on Google maps, and exploring the coasts to find the parts that were talked about in the story. Most were easy to find, but some had obscure parts that I couldn't relate to the story. Interesting and educational.
