With the fourth entry in the *Trixie Belden* mysteries, the Bob-Whites Club welcomes its newest member. Diana Lynch is an old friend of Trixie's whom she's gradually lost touch with after Di's father unexpectedly came into a large fortune. But Honey notices that all isn't well with Di, so the Bob-Whites decide to take her under their wing. As they spend more time with her, they begin to realize that something is very wrong at the Lynch house. At the center of it all is a mysterious man who has suddenly appeared, claiming to be Di's long-lost uncle. Trixie, however, isn't convinced, and her suspicions set the group on another engaging mystery although much to my little heart who always wanted things to be fair, I remember not liking at all that everyone else seemed to think Trixie was crazy for being suspicious. Even, up to a point, her greatest defender and bff Honey Wheeler. Which is part of the reason I really liked this one because it made me empathize so strongly for Trixie. I also loved that she didnt really care too much and kept on "snooping" until she got to the truth. We also see this entry is where the characters begin to settle into the people I remember loving so much as a kid reading this series. In the first few books, they're still being introduced, to the reader and to each other, but by this point they are beginning to feel familiar. Their friendships have grown, their personalities shine more clearly, and it feels like coming home. Once again, I'm reminded why I loved this series as a child. The Bob-Whites are all so kind and genuinely good-hearted. They're not perfect. They each have their flaws, which makes them feel very real, but at the core of every character is a sincere desire to help others and do what's right. That's something I appreciated as a kid, and I appreciate it even more now. I was a bit of an outsider in elementary school. I felt I never really got to build deep friendships because I wasn't allowed to spend much time with friends outside of recess or the classroom. My mom kept us close to family, so I often felt like I was missing out on that close-knit group of friends. While reading this series, though, I was convinced that one day I'd find friends who truly knew and liked me. If I could just make it to Hudson, New York, and meet the Bob-Whites, I was sure they'd accept me into their club too. 😊 I think that's something I needed to imagine- even though I knew it wasnt real- to survive what I was going through emotionally and that's why this series is so special to me.
