Re Luc's Revenge - Catherine George brings us a really sweet boy meets girl and falls head over heels romance. But, as this is HPlandia, the HP rules require some wreckidrama and suffering before our couple can celebrate their HEA. So CG duct tapes on some AMNESIA drama and we are off an running on another HP adventure. The H and h meet when she is the property agent selling the H the house where her mother worked as the housekeeper until her death. The H is kind of weird about it at first, but as this is HPlandia and the Lurve Force Mojo runs strong, passion and attraction soon take over everything else. The H and h start a relationship and the lurve club events are purple and intense. But when the H wants to deepen the relationship and starts talking marriage, our h starts backing off. The h doesn't feel she is the same social class as the H and so it would be a marriage of unequals, but more importantly she can't remember the month after her mother died. Normally this would be put down to grief. But in this instance the h's mother's former employer ended up dead at the end of that month and the h can't help but feel she might have had something to do with that. However, this HPlandia and our HP H just doesn't quit. He convinces the h to go meet his mother, who lives at the H's huge ancestral mansion in France. The H's mother is very, very strange around the h and we finally learn the real truth about the h's forgotten month. The H had a younger brother, but sadly he wrecked himself and died. As it turns out, the h and the younger brother met when she was staying at her mother's employer's house for the month after her mother passed. The H's mother is convinced that the younger brother was in love with the h and killed himself because the h rejected him. The h doesn't know anything about that. She and the brother only met a few times on the beach below her mother's employer's house and it was in a group of people, so there was no romance in anyway. The h was too busy to notice romance vibes anyhow, because her mother's creepy old guy employer was trying to put the moves on the her and on her final day in his house, he attacked her. The h managed to get away when the creepy old guy had a stroke in his attack frenzy and died. The h found a room full creepy pictures of herself that the old guy had taken without her knowledge. The h managed to destroy the pictures after she called the ambulance and then she went into mental shock. The h is happy she can remember her past, but shocked beyond belief when the H's mother tells her that the H only arranged to meet her and seduce her to get revenge for breaking his brother's heart and driving him to his death. The H denies this categorically, he claims that his mother is completely whacked and obsessed with his dead brother. He did want to meet the h and find out her memories of his brother, but he was so gobsmacked with the HP Lurve Force that all other considerations faded away in his persistent drive to make the h his wife. The h isn't really buying that and tells him off. Now the h decides her big romance is now officially over and takes off back England to have mopey moments for several weeks. Eventually the h gets cozened into showing another house in the countryside to a prospective client and in true Dramatic HP Style, the client turns out to be the H. Since the h had been regretting her prior rejection of the H and had been trying to find him too, we get instant True Love Forever Avowals and a very pink sparkly HEA. This one features a very sweet romance, but the AMNESIA drama was very awkward and the only one wanting revenge was a very emotionally unstable mother who had refused to accept reality and substituted her own. That turned out okay too, because the H banished his mother to a nice cottage in the country and married his h and they all lived very happily in their very own HEAs. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
