"Everybody who comes from New Orleans in that group is marked with tragedy." i remember the fever of youth in Jack Kerouac. i remember the carelessness of college days. the hormones acting up and us saying, hey we're so much better than that. i remember breaking out of the box and letting the inner kid in us rule. our endless wanderings. our proclivities to art. our love for reading books. i remember shouting at the top of my lungs when me and my friends get drunk. or eating chocolate sundae fudge on free days. also, i remember our failings and our darknesses as eighteen, nineteen year-olds. this autobiography takes us back to our own youth. it lays out a nostalgic look of our faraway boyhood dreams. what i like about Jack Kerouac is his soul. this total reckless hobo punk who never gave a flying fuck. On The Road is just one colorful fragment of Jack Kerouac's mad life, his endless and inspirational hitch hiking across his beloved America. Vanity Of Duluoz however encapsulates the whole coming of age and relentless badassery of his early adult life. his rise to stardom and ironically, boredom as a football superstar in Columbia University until he suffered this 'void' which made him enlist as a marine and did all this absurdity on board The Dorschester amidst the severity of World War II. until he went back to New York city and the blossoming era of the beat generation. here he was an integral part of a hip clique, with all its energy directed at being recklessly free and intelligent and individualistic. it was also the perfect time to pursue his passion and give up 'rock-ribbing football to turn to Wolfean novels'. and then the drawbacks of freedom and wild abandonment, when all of his friends were caught up in sex and drugs, took its toll as Jack 'Duluoz' Kerouac was involved in the Lucien Carr-David Kammerer murder case which was wildly founded on homosexuality. in so many levels, this is a hipster book with deep philosophy buried in it. it's got everything. verve. hype. soul. heart.
