Why I chose to listen to this audiobook: 1. I read an abridged version as a kid many years ago. I wanted to refresh my memory, this time with an unabridged audio version; 2. I wanted to compare it to The Swiss Family Robinson (SFR), which I read a year ago; 3. it's available as a free loan through Hoopla; and, 4. February 2024 is my "Classics" Month. Praises: 1. unlike SFR, Robinson Crusoe's time alone on a deserted island was much more believable! Although Crusoe managed to salvage some items from the shipwreck and found some food sources on the island, I appreciated that for over two decades, he struggled without various essential tools, and those that he managed to construct didn't always perform perfectly. Trial and error were also constant as he tried to create palatable food stuffs. He would frequently admit that his creations were ugly, inedible, etc.; 2. Crusoe also had difficulty surviving the elements, especially during natural disasters such as earthquakes. He was also afflicted by serious injuries and severe illnesses; 3. I liked his acceptance of his fate which eventually brought a sense of peace to his well-being; and, 4. narrator Gordon Griffin made this an easy listen! Niggles: 1. Crusoe seems to forget his ruminations about the evils of colonialism as soon as someone of color comes on the island. I really wish that author Daniel Defoe had Crusoe treat "his man, Friday" like a companionable human being, rather than a servant/slave. Too bad Defoe didn't think to have Crusoe learn from "Friday" the ways of this unfamiliar territory, his culture, or even to ask the man what his true name was! 2. how Crusoe killed some animals was cringeworthy; and, 3. I also wish Defoe ended the story with Crusoe's eventual rescue. The extra chapters were unnecessary, bordering on boring and even highly exaggerated. Overall Thoughts: Published in 1719, Defoe wrote this book during the height of exploration and the Atlantic slave trade, so although at times, against my 21st-century sensibilities, one must remember that this story is historically accurate and reflects the times. Although I found it to be more realistic than SFR (which was published about a hundred years later), I was more entertained by the portions of the story when Crusoe is alone on the island - his character really becomes unlikable once he began meeting other people. Also, for interest's sake, I would have preferred reading an abridged version.
