A beautiful story about the ways families disappoint and love one another. All of the characters in this novel are flawed and scarred. Emily, Winston, and Mona Mabie are all living in their parents' home again, despite being adults, but all are broken: Emily by divorce, Winston by a drunken driving accident that sent him to jail for five years and Mona by her bad choices in men and fragile psyche. Their parents might function better, but they have issues, too. Things come to a head after Winston is released from prison. All of the Mabies are self-absorbed and determined to keep one another in familiar, decades-old pigeonholes. Events force them to reconsider and find new ways to relate to each other. Antonya Nelson writes beautifully. But the first chapter, detailing Winston's flight home, is a throwaway. The dynamics there aren't revisited. At times, they seem at odds with the character Winston as he evolves over the course of the novel. None of the characters is employed, either, but that jolt of unreality bothered me less than the lack of continuity. "Emily slid out of bed and crossed the floor, resentful of the creaking boards beneath her feet, the fact that she was walking on the ceilings of her mother and sister, who no doubt lay awake below her, wishing they could do something to help her out. So many feelings, loose in the house, so many misconceptions, missed cues, hopeless misunderstandings never to be set right." "She did not feel victorious. She felt lonely. She'd felt that then, too, the secret marital paradox nobody told you about in advance, the way you could be desperately, suicidally lonely, and yet have not one shred of privacy." "It was not her vision alone that seemed to be failing Mrs. Mabie. Her self, she sometimes thought, was turning inward, collapsing in the way of other life-forms, container no longer robust, insides going hollow." Worth a look-see. I'm not sure about crossover appeal for Nelson's short-story fans. There's something unfulfilled in the long haul of this novel that might be less an issue in a shorter work. But it didn't bother me enough to stop reading.
