UPDATE, reread for book group. Warning, rant ahead: This one is not aging well, unlike the Barsetshire novels--and for that matter, certain threads in the later Palliser novels. There are two storylines in this novel, the earnest one about the love problems of Alice Vavasor and newlywed Lady Glencora Palliser, contrasted with the courtship of the widow Mrs. Greenow with her two silly suitors. We're supposed to laugh at Mrs. Greenow, but actually she's one of the best characters in the novel, in knowing exactly what she wants, and getting it, but playing strictly within the very difficult rules of her society. The problem I have with the long, exhausting courtship problems of Alice and Glencora is that in them, Trollope introduces a theme he returned to again and again through his books, this idea that a young woman who falls in love with the wrong guy loses some "precious essence" forever. She doesn't even have to kiss or touch him, much less do the horizontal humina-humina. Just the fact that she fell in love (i.e. was attracted) is enough to render her forever "impure." She knew that she had sinned with that sin that specially disgraces a woman. Really, Anthony? What about the men with all the mistresses abandoned hither and yon? That's not 'specially' enough for you? The clincher is this utterly pernicious line: She had thrown off from her that wondrous aroma of precious delicacy, which is the greatest treasure of womanhood. In this case, as in all the others through other books, a young woman, with properly mandated zero experience (because that's how she remains "pure"), is attracted to a rotter, realizes it, backs off, but then forever after is 'tainted' and therefore must, in honor, remove her tainted self for the sake of the good man who comes after. I can't even. In this book, Trollope's second engagement with this theme, we have to plough through hundreds of pages as the women agonize over their error, but at least both get a happy ending. John Grey is able to convince the extremely tiresome Alice Vavasor that no, she is not going to withdraw herself from the world and live forever in sackcloth and ashes for his and society's sake because she'd briefly jilted him for her first crush before realizing the guy was a total scumbag. (And even then she is determined to give the scumbag her fortune, because she keeps her promises. Unlike him. Cue eyeroll.) But in other books, The Small House at Allington and Phineas Phinn being the worst (in the latter, the woman married an abuser, and in leaving him, must forever be a recluse for the good of society; in the former, the utterly tiresome Lily Dale not only destroys her own life, but that of the decent guy who will love her all his life), the woman remains forever "tainted." This trope, encountered yet again, is the one sigh-making thread in the otherwise much more readable last Palliser novel, The Duke's Children . 2010 review: I waver on this one, the first of the Palliser novels. He obviously wrote it before he decided to follow the family in succeeding books, or he would not have employed his "minor characters with ridiculous names" trope in calling the Duke Omnium. But the duke becomes one of his very best characters, at least as good as anyone in Barsetshire. Here's the interesting thing about this novel for me: I think it's his answer to Sense and Sensibility --he takes the storyline, even certain elements of the plot (most important the rejection of the heroine at a ball by the clay-footed love interest) but he uses the story to foster his ideas about what makes ideal female love. His Eleanor is very, very Victorian from male POV. Glencora is one of his most popular characters, and according to his autobiography, one of his favorites. She's a little tiresome, whiny and willful, but on the other hand, Trollope does a good job of getting inside the head of a sprightly, determined just-out-of-teens young woman coerced by moral suasion to marry someone in whom she had zero interest, and giving up the man she loved. I do think that the Palliser novels are in the silver fork mode.
