The period of the Late Roman Republic was no doubt one of the most dramatic in European history, with men such as Caesar, Pompey, Cicero, Antony, Brutus, and Octavian, and women such as Porcia, Servilia, and the Pharaoh Cleopatra all prominent movers and shakers at the same time, in relation to one another. The events between 48 BCE—and indeed, well before that fateful year—and 42 BCE—and of course, well after that consequential year—would shape the course of Roman history forever. It was truly a watershed moment. Nevertheless, prior to the brilliant Masters of Rome series of historical novels by Colleen McCullough, neither a trained classicist nor creative fiction writer, the Late Republic had been more or less overlooked by serious authors. Whereas John Williams and Robert Graves had famously treated the first years of the Roman imperial era and the machinations of the Julio-Claudians, literature was devoid of well-researched and well-written historical fiction that explored the cultural ethos of the Republic as it slowly fell apart. The Masters of Rome series filled that void, and The October Horse , at first intended to conclude the series—now its penultimate novel—is perhaps the most enjoyable work of historical fiction that I have ever read. As a classicist myself, my enjoyment stems in no small part from the comprehensiveness of The October Horse . McCullough has read, it seems, nearly every ancient author who in some way chronicles the period—Plutarch, Suetonius, Appian, Cassius Dio, Cicero, Sallust, and many others—and she by no means shies away from the sometimes-mundane details that these authors provide in their historical and epistolary accounts. So, for instance, when Caesar moves across Anatolia just prior to his famous veni, vidi, vici proclamation, after he has left Cleopatra in Alexandria, she describes every military maneuver, each relevant political development, and the totality of the Dictator’s financial fortunes and misfortunes. No stone is left unturned. Sometimes, this commitment to historical veracity becomes tedious and arduous for the reader. Yet, when interpreted from a much broader perspective—that is, when one apprehends the entire novel and reflects on the consequential events that have taken place—this exhaustiveness is much appreciated, at least in my view. For the quotidian military tactics and political machinations ultimately add to an extraordinarily rich picture of ancient life for the noblemen and women of the Late Republic, whose minds we so seldom have the chance to enter into and study. The fullness of this historical portraiture is unmatched in academic volumes. There are a number of narrative elements and characterizations of note that set The October Horse apart from other fictitious treatments of the years 48-42 BCE, such as Shakespeare’s famous Julius Caesar . Perhaps most plainly, Caesar says not a word as his assassins stab him twenty-three times, in accordance with most of the ancient sources yet contrary to Shakespeare. In addition to his silence, the death of Caesar is rendered rather uniquely, especially for the fact that the liberatores panic after their vicious attack and flee to the temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus. Brutus offers no speech, Antony misses the chance to provide an evocative funeral oration, and the potent uncertainty in the aftermath of the assassination is appropriately drawn out over several months, as it certainly was in truth. Likewise, in terms of characterization, Brutus and Antony are a far cry from their Shakespearean selves. Cowardly, miserly, and politically apathetic until the end of the novel, Brutus is driven to tyrannicide by his wife, Porcia, far more than an intense desire to restore the Republic, for which Brutus initially cares little. His scruples about the assassination, moreover, are the product of fear and cowardice, and do not at all derive from his friendship with Caesar, to whom he was a mere secretary while Caesar conquered Anatolia. Antony, on the other hand, is quite the brute, more so than I envision when I read the ancient sources. He seems to lack the sharp wit and intellect that I believe he must have possessed in order to have positioned himself so well after the death of Caesar. Yet in The October Horse , Antony seems dimwitted and hyperbolically unscrupulous, save for the end of the novel, when he treats the body of Brutus with far more reverence than his fellow Triumvir. Then, of course, there is Octavian, the most inexperienced Triumvir, yet its most essential member, not least of all for his adopted title, Divi Filius . In my view, Octavian is rendered perfectly, and it is quite the literary and historical adventure to enter into his Ulyssesean mind. Calm yet cruel, refined yet wily, ostensibly trustworthy yet clandestinely deceitful, he is the one Roman other than Cicero whom I truly wanted to achieve his ambitions, however abhorrent I sometimes found his methods. While I take issue with the notion that Octavian anticipated his rise to ascendency and ultimate plan to eliminate Antony as early as Philippi, as The October Horse implies—there were simply too many political variables in 42 BCE for Octavian to have envisioned his later supremacy over the Roman empire—I nevertheless believe that he must have been inordinately calculative in order to have marched on Rome twice, won the consulship by force, defeated Antony at Mutina, and formed the Second Triumvirate. With respect to this aspect of his characterization, McCullough hits the mark. Given that we know so little about Octavian the man—even his busts proffer a cold, steely front—the inner deliberations and premeditated plans crafted by Caesar’s fresh-faced heir spellbind the curious reader. While my love for Rome has never wavered these past four years as a classics major, The October Horse set fire to my ardor for the ancient world in a way that academic study has not. Here, Caesar, Antony, Octavian—they are all truly alive , and not merely disembodied characters whom I know performed remarkable deeds. To be sure, The October Horse embraces Great Men History in a manner that, as a responsible classicist and student of history, I cannot condone. Yet in a work of historical fiction, I enthusiastically commend this approach, warts and all, even more since the narrative cleaves so faithfully to real events. As I read The October Horse , I realized that there was still so much about the Late Republican period about which I do not know, so much that I need to learn. I also realized how infinitely pleasurable it is to contemplate, armed with reliable historical evidence, even when rendered in fiction, the reasons for the demise of the Republic, the vision Caesar had for the restoration of peace and political order in his new Rome, and the way in which Octavian artfully accrued power and auctoritas in the wake of utter political chaos. These questions fascinate me, no matter how many times I return to well-worn solutions offered by reputable historians. Unlike professional classicists, The October Horse rarely tries to answer such questions. While it may have a thesis—that Rome could not possibly rule its empire with recourse to archaic Republican bureaucracy, and needed an innovative autocrat in order to survive—it nevertheless invites the reader to provide answers of her own. So seldom does a work of historical fiction stimulate the academic mind with such verve and vivacity.
