3 Stars ~ Born on the wrong side of town with an alcoholic mother, Nate had struggled to survive growing up under Judge Bates' authoritative eye. Nate was in love with the Judge's daughter, Katy; they were soulmates. Katy had done her best to stand up to her father and to the other small minded towns people, defending Nate with spirit. But the Judge wasn't going to have someone like Nate soil his daughter so he found away to get him out of town for good. It's 16 years later and Nate, having made something of himself, has decided it's time to go home. His hopes of acceptance for the man he is now are dashed. The Judge may have died, but there are a few that remember he'd been a troublemaker, one in particular Lester Brown had made it his mission to see Nate gone again. The biggest shock was Katy. Nate had expected a huge hug of welcome home but instead the spirit broken woman wouldn't even make eye contact with him and limped away from him as if he was bad news. With all her heart—or rather what was left of it—Katy wished a hole would open beneath her feet so she could drop out of sight. “Katy…” She died a thousand times when his gaze flooded over her, taking in her flagpole figure and unflattering clothes. She knew what he was thinking, could almost hear him thinking it. He was thinking the same thing her deceased husband had voiced a trillion times, right to her face. You’re an unperson with no brains and no body. You’re just a scrawny, homely nothing who takes up breathing space. The hateful words tumbled over her, and Katy’s shoulders slumped another notch as her gaze plunged to the floor. Her husband and father had humiliated her countless times, and she had endured, but having Nate see her like this cut all the way to her shattered soul. This is how this heartwarming early romance from Ms. Finch begins. The story follows Nate's determination to show the town that he deserves a second town and how Katy's blossoms into the young woman she was meant to be. Second chances and over coming one's past is the over riding theme. Though I'm glad the focus of the story remained on Nate's fight to be accepted and not on Katy's abusive marriage, I did feel that Katy recovered rather quickly. It makes for good reading, especially when the tables turn and she becomes his protector. I was pleasantly surprised with level of heat in the sex scenes. This is a feel good romance all around.
