I remember my mom reading this story to us when we were young. It's okay; not a favorite and after a second read, I find it the same. I could see some people liking it though. Cleanliness: Children's Bad Words Mild Obscenities & Substitutions - 2 Incidents: Blast him, what the blazes Name Calling - 21 Incidents: Your Royal Awfulness, rascal, Grand Turnip of China, dim-witted, royal tadpole, numskulls, Catchpenny rogues, curs, cloven-footed blockheads, donkeys, greedy little snipe, nitwits, dunce, blabber-tongued hateful prince, scurvy rascals, simpletons, little toad, scurvy riffraff. "Prince Brat" is used several times throughout the book. Religious Profanity - 3 Incidents: Lawks. Gaw is used a number of times throughout the book. Attitudes/Disobedience - 1 Incident: The Prince plays mean tricks and does not care that another boy gets his spankings for his bad behavior. He changes later. Conversation Topics - 1 Incident: Mentions beer. Parent Takeaway The Prince is called Prince Brat and with good reason. He plays all kinds of mean tricks and then doesn't care that his whipping boy gets his lashes. But when the Prince runs away and the Whipping Boy goes with him, they run into some bandits and adventures that will change both of their hearts to kindness towards each other. **Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide a Cleanliness Report, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that! So Follow or Friend me here on GoodReads! You’ll see my updates as I’m reading and know which books I’m liking and what I’m not finishing and why. You’ll also be able to utilize my library for looking up titles to see whether the book you’re thinking about reading next has any objectionable content or not. From swear words, to romance, to bad attitudes (in children’s books), I cover it all!
