“I promised myself no regrets,” she whispered into the darkness. “No what-ifs, no second guessing. I promised myself that I was going to live my life, instead of always taking the safe route.” Rounding out my Christmas 2015 reading list, I recently finished The Christmas Wedding Ring by Susan Mallery. It was a sweet holiday story that had a nice message of being happy with who you are, making the most of every day and living with no regrets. Overall I enjoyed the story, I had a few gripes (which I’ll get into in a moment) but for the most part I really enjoyed Molly and Dylan and was happily swept up in their romance. This book is perfect for the Christmas season because it’ll leave you feeling all warm and fuzzy inside! “I didn’t want you to go. There were assorted reasons, but the only one I was willing to tell you was that you’d promised me an adventure when I grew up. So you handed me the ring and said that when I was ready for that adventure, I was to bring this to you.” She cleared her throat. Color stained her cheeks, and she ducked her head so she was staring at the table. “Well, I’m ready if you’re still willing.” So that’s basically the premise of the story. When Molly Anderson was a teenager, she had a huge crush on her sister’s boyfriend, bad boy Dylan Black. At her sister’s wedding (to another man), Dylan shows up and Molly runs out to talk to him. He’s on his way out of town and gives her a wedding ring that he had purchased for her sister, telling her that when she’s grown, if she’s ever looking for an adventure to come find him and bring the ring. Now, 14 years later, Molly is having the worst week of her life. With everything falling apart around her, she decides to run from her problems (at least for a little while) and she goes to find Dylan to cash in on that adventure he promised her. To Dylan’s end, he’s also being faced with some difficult decisions, and when little Molly Anderson (who’s not so little anymore) shows up looking for him to take her on an adventure he sees it as the perfect time to go out and try to clear his head. So that’s what they do, and along the way they are faced with some difficult moments and a growing attraction to one another. As things begin to develop between the two of them, Molly is worried that the secret she’s keeping may have Dylan running for the hills if he finds out. “I was so gone on you. It’s kind of funny to look back now, but at the time, I was convinced I would never want another man.” “Of course you wouldn’t.” “What?” She looked at him. “Hey,” he teased. “This is me. What else would I be if not the man of your dreams?” Overall the story was sweet and I appreciated that that Molly wasn’t what most would consider perfect, she had a few extra pounds on her and she was pretty but not what most people would classify as beautiful. It was nice to have a realistic heroine, however the fact that we were constantly reminded of this fact and the fact that Dylan was perfect an how she wasn’t his type, became a little tiresome. I get it, Molly is insecure and Dylan usually goes for model thin, perfect looking women, I didn’t need to be told 5 times in every chapter. It sort of cheapened their relationship a little, there were moments where Dylan would muse that she isn’t his type where it almost made it sound like he was settling for her. But there were other moments where I could feel their connection and knew that there was something deeper between the two, I would have liked there to have been more of focus on this and less on their differences. Even if she brought it up half as many times as she did, we would have still gotten the picture. That was my only real gripe about the book, other than that I thought it was a sweet story and I did like Molly and Dylan’s characters and how their relationship developed. They were cute when they teased one another and their tender moments were very touching. I totally loved the ending of the book though. It was a perfectly sweet and happy way to end the story, like I said earlier, it will definitely leave you feeling all warm and fuzzy inside! I would recommend this book for a quick, easy and sweet holiday story! “All my life,” Dylan said, “I felt like I was on the outside, looking in.” Molly leaned against his strong chest, and he wrapped an arm around her shoulders. “Not anymore,” she said.
