3.5 stars. The concept of a church member, not church staff, going through the liturgical year is something that intrigues me. The subtitle is A Year Lived in Faith. I appreciated the author's journey through an "ordinary" year. In the ordinary, she deals with her brother's cancer, death of a friend, volunteering at a soup kitchen and serving houseless people. There is the story of the ordination of the priest, who is gay, at her Epicopal church, and the discussion around that as church members, on whether they should call him to be their rector. Throughout her memoir, I could sense the "stuff" of everyday life that people face and have to make every day life decision on: A friend's illness, a relative's cancer, church life, marriage, etc. It was written in 1998 and you could kind of sense it in some parts. And that was nice. I enjoyed her writing. Anytime a writer gives the reader imagery to see and develop for themselves, I'm all in. Here are a few of the quotes I highlighted: First sentence: Here I am in an empty church. -3 In this church, Trinity Episcopal in Santa Barbara, we practice to be thin, to live in space, to go through the narrow door. -3 In Advent, the holy breaks into the daily. -5 John cries in the wilderness, in Advent, feeling his way into God. -29 I took all this to the Eucharist and sank into its depths, into its heart, into the body and the blood. I put my pain into the flesh of something, rather than into the air, into the blood of a body, into a heart. To sink in there for comfort, as only a body can give comfort, to sink my pain in deep. -34 A friend of mine, a writer, once said he had no gift for religion. A friend of his, a believer, told him not to worry, God would find him. -65 Later, Jesus wold accomplish each f these "temptations," but in reversal of those days in the desert. He would change stones into bread: a few loaves of bread and five fish would feed five thousand. He would "hurl himself from a tower" and be "caught by angels," by giving up his life on the cross. He would be worshipped, by humbling himself as a servant. -85 In the guild hall nearby, Grey Brothers is leading the choir in practice. They are singing, "Domine deus, filius patris, miserere nobis." God the Father, God the Son, have mercy on us. -104 "Abbot Lot came to Abbot Joseph and said, 'Father, according as I am able, I keep my little rule, and my little fast, my prayer, my meditations and contemplative silence, and according as I am able, I strive to cleanse my heart of thoughts. Now what more should I do?' The elder rose up in reply and stretched out his hands to heaven and his fingers became like ten lamps... He said, 'Why not be totally changed into fire?'" -106 And I saw something else, Good Friday's shadows, way in the back of his eyes. -110 St. John Chrysostom said that there is a liturgy after the liturgy, that work in the world is inseparable from worship. -111 St. John of the Cross said it is sometimes easier to see in the darkness than in the light. -126 The intent of crucifixion was to do more than kill. It was to dismantle the human person. "Torture" derives from the Latin word meaning "to twist." -127 We are living in the shadow of the resurrection in community, I think; we are tasting and seeing. -157 The third member of the Trinity arrives without warning and, unlike the youthful, dramatic son, moves into stay. -158 I ask God a simple question: How will I live now, with my brother so ill, what can I do? As I walk one of the great outer rings, I feel the purest peace. And the answer comes, this thinnest of threads: everything is contained in my love, even this. -233 Last sentence: Ann grins. She says, "Nothing is lost." -234
