Certainly interesting — and Barrett gives us many unique anecdotes and reproduces rare documents. This being said, it should have been better. The book is slightly disorganised, dedicating too much time to general history at the beginning and not expounding on Rasta ideas with quite enough theoretical drive for my tastes. That said, it does bring together a lot of strands... but then again, isn't reggae a better and more pleasurable introduction? In fact, Culture's album Two Sevens Clash hits almost all the key points of belief which Barrett outlines in Chapter 4: Track 1: 'Calling Rasta For I' — the symbol of the lion; 'the black person is the reincarnation of Ancient Israel'; inevitability of Rasta rule. Track 2: 'I'm Alone in the Wilderness' — self reflection; Biblical imagery; inevitability of Rasta rule. Track 3: 'Pirate Days' — history of slavery; 'Jamaica is Hell' and Babylon; Africa is the true homeland. Track 4: 'Two Sevens Clash' — Marcus Garvey as a prophet of Rasta; futility of modern politics; inevitability of Rasta rule. Track 5: 'I'm Not Ashamed' — social transgression of dreadlocks; Africa is the true homeland. Track 6: 'Get Ready to Ride the Lion to Zion' — 'the black person is the reincarnation of Ancient Israel'; 'Ethiopia is Heaven'; Africa is the true homeland. Track 7: 'Black Starliner Must Come' — Marcus Garvey and the Black Star Line project; Jamaica as Babylon; Africa is the true homeland. Track 8: 'Jah Pretty Face' — 'the black person is the reincarnation of Ancient Israel'. Track 9: 'See Them A Come' — inevitability of Rasta rule; Marcus Garvey as a prophet of Rasta; 'the black person is the reincarnation of Ancient Israel'. Track 10: 'Natty Dread Taking Over' — inevitability of Rasta rule. (One need only add Culture's later track 'The International Herb' to understand the spiritual importance of ganja). As much as I appreciate this book for being an early and serious academic look at Jamaican culture and history, maybe reggae does it better. Indeed, it's a testament to that genre that I knew most of the stuff in the book already.
