I am late coming to the Elin Hilderbrand beach book party, having only read two of her books before this one. Her novels all take place on Nantucket Island, most (but not all) occur in the summer, all are romances, and all are solid ChickLit reads. While Hilderbrand has been dubbed the "Queen of Beach Reads," don't underestimate her as writing mere fluff. She has some serious writing credentials from The Johns Hopkins University and the prestigious University of Iowa Writers' Workshop. I purposely chose "The Beach Club" because it is her first novel—the one she wrote before she went on to write 29 more. While I don't think it is as accomplished as her later books, it is an impressive debut and one that obviously launched a stellar career. "The Beach Club" is the story of a group of employees working at The Beach Club and Hotel on Nantucket during a busy summer season. It's much like an ensemble TV show cast where no single character pops out as the lead. • The owners of hotel, Bill and Therese Elliot, are trying to hang on long enough to pass the hotel on to their daughter, Cicely, who just graduated from a New England prep school. Cicely has only one interest in life, and it's not the hotel: It's her gorgeous Brazilian boyfriend. Cicely is planning to run away to Brazil, a move that is sure to break her parents' hearts. • Mack Petersen, the manager of the hotel, has just turned 30. At age 18, he fled the family farm in Iowa after his parents' untimely death in a car crash, and now he must decide whether to stay on Nantucket or go home and run the farm. Meanwhile, his longtime girlfriend, the beautiful and smart Maribel Cox, wants him to commit to marriage. Mack doesn't like to commit to anything, especially because he has fallen in love with one the hotel's longtime summer guests. • Jem Crandall is a recent University of Virginia graduate working as a busboy in the hotel to earn enough money to move to California and eventually start his own business as an agent for actors. But if he doesn't stop making major mistakes—some of which are hilarious—he may get fired before September. Real trouble begins when he falls in love with Maribel, the boss's girlfriend. • Love O'Donnell has come to Nantucket for the first time to run the front desk after meeting the Elliots in Aspen, her hometown, the previous winter. Love has an open secret: At 40, she wants a baby, and she wants to be a single mom. She is on the lookout for a man who will unknowingly be the father of that baby. • Vance Robbins has been working at the Beach Club as long as Mack. In fact, Mack's job was meant for Vance, but there was a mix-up. And Vance has never forgiven Mack for stealing that job away from him 12 years ago. Vance is out for revenge…and it could be deadly. And while emotions of love and hatred are roiling inside the hotel, the weather is churning outside, too, as a dangerous hurricane is heading straight to Nantucket aiming to destroy everything. Soap opera plot? Indeed! This novel has LOTS of personal drama and storylines that begin to stretch the level of believability, but it's all light summer fun, making it the perfect book for the beach or your backyard.
