When an angry mom defends her first child, folks listen Up! Back when I was still not past five, I started Grade One. I remember so vividly the first day... Grade One was gonna be tough, and the first Day of it was so inauspicious - a bleak day in November. NOVEMBER, you say? Correct. You see, I had started Kindergarten in September, but my mom had insisted to Dad that I was too smart for mere extended playtime. Of course, she was right in a way - because I had a January birth date - but ONLY under that technicality. But she got her way with him. And then, the school principal said OK, after they locked horns over it. The facts were obvious, though. For you see - I COULDN’T READ YET (whoops)! But Rule Number One for negotiators is, NEVER argue with a furious woman. NEGOTIATE with her... And of course, Rule Two is, if she’s still enraged, give in to her... with CONDITIONS. My condition was, of course, (if I chose to accept it?) if he can’t read after 2 months - He’s OUTTA THERE. My mom accepted the condition in Proxy. The principal gave me mid-nineteen-fifties intelligence tests, which somehow I aced (musta been a good day). So, with a Damoclean Sword poised over my head, on a cold and dreary November day, I walked the dreary quarter mile to school, with my commiserating best pal at the time, Stephen Smith. My arrival in the classroom was no less ominous! From the blackboard, there stared down at all of us twerpy, spruced-up kids - we were really full of snakes ‘n snails... or sugar ‘n spice - a dazzling array of colourful posters depicting smiling cartoon characters. Some had dazzling white teeth. Some had carefully manicured fingernails. But all those posters were spittIng images of PERFECT PARAGONS OF VIRTUE. Hard for me to emulate, even at that age! Yikes. Most of us had not QUITE yet learned these things... and I was ONE of ‘em. But, first off, learning to read was even HARDER. We were each given a Think & Do Book, and - wonder of wonders - our first Dick & Jane Reader. We started with Dick & Jane. First book. See that word? That’s S-E-E. Now close your books. Spell SEE for me - who can do it? Yes, Johnny? In turn, the kids who spelled correctly got to join a Conga Line that sang a little Victory Ditty, tauntingly circling the other ones still left seated, poor dunces. Like me. I think I was the LAST one in that snobbish group of 5-going-on-6 year-olds to learn to spell. I was always such a late bloomer. *** But did you know Dick & Jane books are also FULL of civics lessons? Their hygiene, manners and conduct were IRREPROACHABLE. Impossibly so. For this was the brightly-coloured laboratory where we little Baby Boomers learned our citizenship ABC’s. So old Robert is right. In those first years we learned EVERYTHING WE NEEDED TO KNOW IN LIFE. Well, almost... Back in those innocent days of the fifties we didn’t yet have bright little posters of Birds & Bees. So I could at least keep THAT hurdle for later on... Thank Heaven. And thanks to Mr Fulghum, for talking MUCH more sensibly about those first school years than I have done!
