This is my second time reading this book. Why read it twice, you may ask. Because I recently found a book contradicting the guilty verdict of Jeffrey MacDonald. Alright, settle in, this will be a long review. These murders occurred before I was born. The eventual actual trial occurred before I can remember. The book and the eventual two part mini-series that came out afterwards (back in the day of the popularity of the mini-series) had huge ratings were before I would have been allowed to know of such things. But, I feel I have known of this case my entire life. I grew up approx. 50 miles from Fort Bragg. Things like this didn't happen in NC. I've since seen the movie on Lifetime or somewhere on cable. I read the book in high school. Since then I've become an attorney - mostly working in criminal prosecution. The first time I read this book - and now the second time - I believe beyond a reasonable doubt that Jeffrey MacDonald murdered his pregnant wife, Colette and his two daughters. I don't believe it beyond ALL doubt, but I do beyond a reasonable doubt. The author, Joe McGinniss, was hired to write a book sympathetic to MacDonald. He lived with MacDonald during the trial at the Kappa Alpha house on the campus of NC State during the trial. He was there for the entire trial. And, he just couldn't do it. He couldn't write a book sympathetic to MacDonald - why? For no one particular reason, but one doubt, built on another doubt, built on another. MacDonald - in this book - comes across clearly as a narcissistic pathological liar. Psychotic breakdowns were not unknown in his family and it is highly likely, from the evidence and his own written words, that he was taking a form of amphetamine at the time which can precipitate psychotic breakdowns - as it did in his brother, Jay. If you like true crime, this is practically a classic. Also, just to note - I have started on the book that just came out trying to proclaim MacDonald's innocence (when I think the author really just wants a movie deal) and...on page 38, a quote from MacDonald himself convinced me more of his guilt than anything else b/c of what I know from Fatal Vision and my own personal knowledge of the law and defendants. I'm still not convinced beyond ALL doubt, like I am that Casey Anthony is guilty and O.J. Simpson is guilty and George Zimmerman is nothing but a murderer...but, at this point, I do believe beyond a reasonable doubt that MacDonald did kill his pregnant wife and his two daughters. Let's see how I feel after I finish the new book.
