The work of Lewis Mumford is incredible. This book is part two of a series, but I much prefer this one. He lays out some concepts that were formative for me and altered and/or greatly refined my outlook on life. His concept of megatechnics and the megamachine is astute. His view is well-rounded, if not a little dated, given his age at the time he was writing. But I have found in few other places such an exhaustive conceptual framework for what is happening in our world vis-a-vis technology. This is one of the trilogy of books I read on this subject that altered my worldview, including 2 books by Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society and Propaganda (see reviews). These books caused me to really question the role of technology in our society and to think about the complex part it plays in forming our outlook on life. Furthermore, this is almost entirely ignored by most people, which is absurd. This was also a case where I was searching for confirmation of a key concept that had occurred to me. This was the notion that the introduction of paper money and credit changed the nature of both money and capitalism. I think this is an under appreciated fact that has had far-reaching effects on our way of life. Mumford points out the totalitarian nature of much of our technology and explodes (along with Ellul) the notion that technology is neutral in our lives. I truly believe it is not neutral and that this is one of the biggest fallacies of the last century, as well as this one. These totalitarian edifices in our social structure are quite significant and are to be ignored only at our peril. He proposes a better model, which is always good. This is one of those books, along with Ellul's that set one apart from others even more because it moves one outside of the normal framework within which most operate. It makes it hard to even talk to others without a preceding lengthy lecture on the basic concepts. This is because Mumford deconstructs many common myths and misconceptions and redefines the terms used regarding technics and technology. This is why he is brilliant.
