This was transforming. If I manage to live long enough to grow old despite my overwhelming urge to suicide now and then , I would look back on this book as my first lesson on 'human condition'. This book won Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction(1973). New York Times described it as ' One of the most challenging book of the decade .' And upon googling I came to know that this book is a seminal book iin psychology and one of the most influential books written on psychology in 20th century. It can be difficult to review of a book of such stature. So I'm going to review just a part of it. The basic theme this book explores is this: Man is an incongruous jumble of two identities. One is his material body and the other is his symbolic inner self(You can call this mind if you want to ). This makes man at the same time the most powerful and unfortunate member of the animal kingdom. Why unfortunate , you ask? Because only man has been made aware that his body is going to decay soon, he has come to know death and the absurdity that comes with it. Man has eaten fruit from the ' Tree of Knowledge ', so he been banished from the haven of nature, has to pay for his knowledge by his existential hangover. This symbolic self of man leads to more dilemmas. Man wants to stand out from the rest of nature, to curve out an unique self, to assert his individuality. But at the same time, he wants to merge with the rest of the creation, to have a holistic unification with nature. These two contradictory urges go in the face of each other . If you want to be unique, you can't be 'one' with the rest of the nature, and vice versa. That's the price you pay for your dualistic nature. The symbolic self has made you a virtual God, but it also made you aware of your 'creatureliness'. However much you love your beloved and bask in the ecstasy of her love, you also have to be aware that your beloved has to defecate now and then. So man has to somehow distract himself from his realization of the horrific nature of the reality. For this, he invented 'projects for heroism' in manifold forms, to transcend his animal identity beyond death, to deny his death. Even if your animal body dies, your symbolic self may live on forever through your immortality project. All religions, cultures, societies lays out the framework for our collective heroism projects. Here things are beginning to get a little shaky. Religions aren't that sustainable heroism project now as they were in the middle ages. And cultures and societies are beginning to loose their structure and don't function to secure the identity of man as they once used to do. So the modern suffers from a lack of 'ideal illusion', which is vital to hide the terrors of his existence. He 'knows', knows too well, and therefore cannot be deceived, which is not good for him. Now, how do we deal with this extremely vulnerable, anxiety prone, suffering from meaninglessness, and as Becker puts it, the 'neurotic' model of the modern man? This question goes into the heart of psychotherapy. Becker explored statures like Freud,Kierkegaard, Otto Rank, Carl Jung in search for an answer, and tries to extract a synthesis out of it. Now, I do not agree with the conclusion he draws here at the end of the book. Becker concludes by saying that there is really no way out of this dualistic conundrum in which man has found himself, and all we can aim at is some sort of mitigation of the absolute misery. We need to set a personal heroism project for ourselves , settle somewhat wisely within the walls, though we would never be quite at home. All aim for higher transcendence is delusional. He scolds Jung and Fromm for entertaining the possibility of a 'free man', while praising Freud for his 'more realistic somber pessimism'. And he also dismissed 'eastern mysticism ', saying it's sort of an cowardly evasion of the reality and thereby doesn't fit 'brave western man'. I do not blame him though, as he had written those words nearly half a century ago. And I understand that eastern schools like Zen or Taoism might be too much for a western mind to have a firm purchase on, as eastern schools have a fundamentally different understanding of the nature reality. Nowhere this east-west dichotomy is explained more lucidly than by Fritjof Capra in his book 'The Tao of Physics.' More recently, Sam Harri's book 'Waking up: A guide to spiritually without religion' also does a quite fair job. With the advent of modern noninvasive neuroimaging techniques, the scientific community has only recently been gaining an understanding of the potential for the radical transformation of human psyche that lies at the heart of the 'eastern mysticism '. There is empirical evidence that mindfulness meditation can literally change your neurochemistry and change the way how you perceive the world, and make your existence more at home(Watch the TED YouTube video 'How meditation can reshape your brain.') And every year many scientific papers are being published on the effect of mindfulness meditation on human psyche. To be frank, today more westerns practice yoga and meditation than easterners do, they are slowly absorbing the essence. But it seems to me as far as psychology of well being goes, east will always have the upper hand. But we also need the more analytical western science to look at what is really going on here. It's nice that we live in an era where we are seeing the merger of east and west.
