Discover the hidden meaning of what your color preferences say about your personality and current emotional state. I have a healthy dose of skepticism regarding the validity of tests such as this; I am not a believer of astrology nor do I read my horoscope. Really, how accurate could my color choices be in revealing my current inner anxieties and conflicts? It turns out pretty accurate indeed. The results blew my mind, no kidding. My fiancé and I took this test and the results we received hit the nail on the head as the saying goes. The results of your test will vary each time you take it depending on what’s going on in your life at the moment. There are 8 color cards; you put them in order of your preference from left to right. You then turn the cards over and write down the numbers on the back of the cards. Next you repeat the process and it’s important not to try to select the colors in the same order, just line them up in order of preference again. Your selection of colors should be independent of what colors you prefer for your car, walls, and clothing. Select whatever color strikes you at that moment. The fact that 8 colored cards reveal so much about personality and anxieties in particular is amazing. Perhaps the results are generalizations, thought I, and can be fit into anyone’s unique situation and disposition. But I read some of the other results and they didn’t fit me at all. The results both my fiancé and I received totally captured our personalities and accurately reflected what is going on in our lives. And our results were unique; his results fit him perfectly and mine fit me, they were not interchangeable flakey horoscope results that fit anyone who reads it. Although the book warns that this test shouldn’t be used as a mere parlor trick, I found it to be a really fun and insightful self-analysis tool and would definitely try it out with my friends. I don’t know how psychologically accurate it is but it certainly rang true to us. And did I mention it was fun?
