Rating-2.8 Bloodline is my first Sidney Sheldon read. Mystery and crime-thrillers are my favourite genre, so of course I enjoyed the book, it was like a action-mystery packed, fast roller coaster ride. It's a 20th century book still the plots, character, everything is no less than a modern contemporary novel. But I'm not fully satisfied with the book, there are enough negative points to justify my complaint. The book opens with the death of Sam Roffe--president of the "Roffe and sons". It seems like an horrible accident at first but later things turns out very interestingly, pointing out that it was a murder. Elizabeth Roffe is the daughter of Sam Roffe, she was very ignorant child at her childhood but turns out to be a very beautiful and intelligent woman later. Rhys Williams is one of the most trusted people in Sam Roffe's list, where only a few people resides, he is a good-looking, charming and ambitious personality. There are many more characters, like-Samuel Roffe(the great-grandfather of Elizabeth), Hélène Roffe, Alec, Anna, Charles, Vivian, detective Max and many others. The plot is well written, some characters are very precise and neat. Elizabeth Roffe is protagonist of the novel, after her father's death, she has to take over his position and responsibilities. She proves to be a good leader, and constantly faces problems. Her determination to run the company well leads her to the revealation that her father was murdered and she was also trapped in a death-maze. After the revealation the novel moves faster and un-covers few more interesting facts. Major part of the book consists of back-stories, flashbacks and lust. Most of the couple, most of the time, are so horny that it looks disgusting. The characters are so driven by lust and sexual tension that the whole novel seems to move on this very subject, and that's the part where the whole novel gets disgraced, I believe that there could have been a different and better subject to fill in the voids and make the story move. Despite of everything, up to the second last chapter I was still sure that the end is going to be awesome, but alas! high expectations always lead to disappointment. The ending was like pouring cold water on so brilliantly plotted story. The culprit was caught, the most awaited part--ending, unfolds like any Hollywood movie's climax. But the ending was so unsatisfactory, a trusted and compassionate person throughout the story turns out to be the murderer and he dies the instant, he was caught. At last, suddenly after a few lines' explanation of his an another crime the book ends. Readers are left in haze, no explanation about other things, like--what was going on between Hélène and Rhys? What later happened with "Roffe and sons"? why Rhys kept the report and Hélène's letter hidden in his desk? When reading any mystery-thriller, readers hope that their every question would be answered at last. But here we are, left an-answered. Clearly a bad ending. There are a few more minus points, Sheldon creates so many brilliant characters, and there was the most brilliant one--detective Max, but neither Max nor Elizabeth was able to smell the lose thread and find the killer, instead he keeps hiding and committing crimes under their nose. Overall I am not very much impressed by this book. I have read better crime-thrillers than this one. But I still recommend it to those who love suspense-thrillers and mystery books(if you could ignore the end part, it would be a nice read).
