Wavering between 2.5 and 3*... this book disappointed, confused and frustrated me. For a 1990 book, it sure seemed more chauvinist than some 70s and 80s books I've read! The things Jonas the English father and Greek Anton said, gosh! Right from the start, there seemed a mystery in the real relationship and situation between Jonas Lovell and Anton. Anton was not quite the family enemy like Nina thought, but her father absolutely refused to discuss with her. Now Jason the poor jilted fiancé...somehow things didn't seem as innocent with him. All the secrets, deceptions and drama...like Anton said it's no way to begin a marriage! All the anguish and angst, Nina and Anton were to share the blame! Nina's virginal fears were in direct conflicts with her intense and immediate sexual attraction to Anton. However for her to give her body and heart to someone she thought had bought her was in no way easy. That I totally sympathise with. Now Anton...he betrayed he had stronger feelings for Nina than just physical desire in various little acts and overall jealous possessiveness. He had all the control by then, surely if he just wanted sex he need not marry Nina, yet on marry her he insisted. Just look at how he put the family heirloom engagement ring on Nina! And the sunset scene when they arrived on his Greek island!*swoon* It was one of the most memorable engagement ring scenes I have ever read! However, he's said some pretty horrid things to Nina, like calling her a bitch, not wanting her to bear his son as though he hated her...how he left her alone to Louisa and his mother's mercy who he knew had hostile feelings towards Nina! A$$hole! I hated how NICE he was to Louisa throughout the book!!! So I am definitely confused as hell by Anton's actions and words, what more Nina? SPOILERS SPOILERS I KNEW Jason had targeted Nina to somehow gain the company back for his father! So the real enemy was Jason all along because he had threatened to reveal the sordid affair Nina's mother had with his own father, Jonas's ex business partner. Her mother had left Nina and her father to go join Jason and his father, only she was killed by a reckless driver on the way. Nina's father had always protected Nina from the truth, so Nina always grew up thinking her mother had left them, and died, period. When Jason entered the scene, he had threatened to take it all from Jonas: his daughter, company and pride! The blackmail bled Jonas and the company dry, so Anton was actually asked by Jonas to help rescue the company and Nina. All the rest that happened just muddled things up, but basically Anton fell in love with Nina at first sight and all he did was to protect Nina. Even her daddy's company owned a dud of an asset, so there went Nina's idea that Anton wanted the company at all cost. I'm glad Anton's mother was not as nasty as we initially thought. But the sceptic in me cannot help but feel it's as Anton said, once baby came along, her attitude towards Nina would change. Such a chauvinistic world! I have enjoyed many Michelle Reid books before but this fell short of my expectations. However it's still a better book than many other Mills .& Boons I have read!
