Mary Anne's father and Dawn's (possibly unstable) mother tie the knot, and Mary Anne and Dawn freak out because their parents (very sensibly) don't want a lavish wedding. There is a lot of foreshadowing of what's to come in the next book, Dawn's Wicked Stepsister. (Which was the very first BSC book I ever read!) I read this when I was eight. Things I remember from reading this a kid: I remember the surprise party that Mary Anne's father throws Dawn's mother, and the ring he gives her by putting it on her birthday cake. For some reason I was obsessed with gems and jewels at the time I read this, and I remember being completely horrified that the beautiful diamond engagement ring probably got icing and cake crumbs stuck to it. I remember my train of thought on this matter exactly: when you get the ring off the cake you get icing on your fingers, as well as on the ring, meaning you can't put the ring on without making more a mess, meaning it doesn't immediately go right on the safest place to keep a ring (your finger), instead you have to wash it off, probably in the sink in the bathroom, which means you have to carry the ring to the bathroom, and hope it doesn't fall down the drain. Many, many years later a man I had been interested in for years told me that when he asked me to marry him he would surprise me by putting an engagement ring in my pasta, or in a glass of wine (yes he said WINE not champagne!) for me to find. After so many years of ambivalence about this man (I had been off and on obsessed with him since I was eighteen) I instantly lost interest in him. No way was I going to marry a man who would gunk up my new, beautiful engagement ring. Ironically, I then became very anti-diamond since I learned there are entire communities in Africa suffering so that women all over the world can show off to each other. Even so, I still have regret that I will never own a diamond ring, or diamond earrings. Damn conscience. Marilyn making up a foreign friend, named Gozzie Kunka. I could tell she was made up, and I thought Mary Anne was stupid for believing her, but I also thought it was stupid that the BSC didn't figure it sooner. I also remember being smug because Marilyn describes all the food that Gozzie has eaten as if it was some rare, foreign delicacy. I had eaten all the things she mentioned at least once. Carolyn decorates her room with a cat theme, even though she didn't like them until she saw the stuff for it, which I thought was pathetic. Things I've considered since reading this as an adult: I hadn't realized how self-centered and unfeeling Dawn is in this book. When you take into account that she plays an unforgivably mean trick on Mary Anne in the next book, you can conclude that Dawn is just a horrible person. In this book she criticizes all of Mary Anne's ideas when she is trying to think of a nice birthday gift for Dawn's mother. She doesn't even offer her any help when Mary Anne asks for it, she just makes a big deal about how close she is to her mother and then tells Mary Anne "I guess it's hard for me to be understanding when someone has the wrong idea about her," making Mary Anne sound like some brat who isn't trying to understand the delicate sensibilities of Sharon Porter. Later she assumes that Mary Anne knew all about the move to her house, and that she would be thrilled by it. When Mary Anne is angry with her for this Dawn pulls what is typically a Mary Anne trick and cries hysterically so that Mary Anne looks like the insensitive jerk, not Dawn. Dawn then pressures Mary Anne to share her bedroom, even though Mary Anne doesn't really want to. (In the next book Dawn doesn't just admit this mistake to Mary Anne. Instead she commits the mean prank I mentioned earlier.) Mary Anne and Dawn act like lunatics about their parents having a wedding. I am a very firm believer in courthouse weddings. Weddings are an utter, total waste of money, so if you can't afford one, or don't want the hassle and stress of one, then skip it. I love that Sharon and Richard have decided that since they went through all the mess of a big wedding for their first marriages they don't want to bother doing it for their second marriage. It is much more sensible for them to have a small (cheap) wedding, and use all the tens of thousands of dollars they would have put into a fancy wedding for college funds for Dawn, Mary Anne, and Jeff. It seems to me that the Arnold parents are either incredibly understanding, or completely clueless when it comes to BSC members butting into their business. First Mallory helps the twins tell their parents that they hate dressing the same, then Mary Anne tells them that the twins hate sharing a room. Mary Anne doesn't even ask Mrs Arnold for permission before she gets the twins all excited about moving into new rooms. Why don't the Arnolds pick up on this on their own? And don't they mind that bossy eleven and thirteen year olds are telling them how to raise their daughters? What kind of monsters would the twins be without the BSC to do their parenting for them?
