Hilarious, romantic comedy done HPlandia style ! The Hero: Sexy nerdy, 30 year old investment banker guy named Nick. He's not the big, bad tycoon type of H since he actually works for the bank and although he's paid a comfortable, enviable salary, he has a roommate to help reduce the cost of his mortgage. This is the H, Nick: The heroine: Katie Deakins, the 21 year old dancer, who's Nick's former nemesis ! Lol. Katie was a skinny, rambunctious 16 year old when she first met Nick. He'd been dating her older sister Isabel. Our heroine fell in love with him, but he was clueless and actually believed her to be an irritating 12 year old, who enjoyed interrupting all his dates with her sister - acting like a veritable cockblocker and ensuring that Nick never got past first base ! This is the heroine, Katie: The story begins when Isabel, who's happily married to Nick's older brother, asks the H to let Katie stay at his London apartment for the next 2 weeks. The H hadn't seen Katie in 5 years, because she'd been living with her dad in Australia. He agrees to play guardian-host to Katie, because: 1. He thinks she's only 17 years old. 2. He's still got a mild infatuation with Isabel and, like any agreeable beta male, thinks it's better to avoid conflict. Katie made this novel enjoyable, with her artless, adventurous, humorous personality and by the crazy shenanigans she got up to. She's still in love with Nick, but she doesn't chase after him in any overt manner, especially when she discovers that he's dating a prissy, stuck up wet dishrag. Nick, for his part, fell into insta-lust when he met the heroine at the train station. He even made a fool of himself drooling her, because he thought she was a stranger. He was in full pursuit until it's revealed that the prickly brat of his memory had turned into a goddess. At this juncture: The scales fell from his eyes, and with a terrible sinking feeling he knew her: his nemesis, his evil genius, his black shadow. Katie ! The clueless H then spends the rest of the story masking his feelings for Katie while continuing to date the sourpuss OW, as a defence mechanism against the seductive wiles of the the troublesome heroine. Most of the romantic comedy in this novel is built around the zany adventures of the heroine, who throws Nick's settled, orderly life into a tailspin. The H has to combat not just his attraction to Katie, but also his raging jealousy over all the adoring men who worship at her feet. Throw in a matchmaking maternal secretary/chaperone, an eccentric cranky senile cat, a silly stalker admirer of the heroine's and the lovable buffoon roommate Derek and you get a very enjoyable light-hearted tale of an adorable heroine on a quest to bring some joy and meaning to Nick's staid existence. The oblivious H only realizes, when it's almost too late, that he's in love with the heroine. Thankfully, he comes to his senses in time and gets his well deserved HEA after he delivers a heartfelt apology and grovels adequately for acting like a dumb moron. The sourpuss OW fades into the mists of HPlandia after she realizes that the H isn't interested in taking their relationship to the next level, because he's too smitten with the heroine. She provided a lot of wacky entertainment, however, with her many sly maneuvers to get rid of the boisterous, cheerful Katie. At the end, Nick realizes that his love for Katie is a million times stronger than the tepid youthful infatuation he'd had for her older sister Isabel. I wasn't left with the notion that the heroine was second best. That's what made this ending successful. Nick's too Beta and clueless to be my type of H, but the storyline was very entertaining due to the lovable, drama queen heroine. This novel reminded me of a light, romantic comedy film and I had absolutely no issues with the OW drama in this specific situation. And you can borrow this from Open Library online. Safety: The H goes on a few dates with the sourpuss OW, but doesn't have sex or share passionate love scenes with her during the course of the story. Likewise, the heroine also goes out with a couple of men, but it's all platonic. The H had never been in a sexual romantic relationship with the heroine's sister, during the time he'd dated her briefly. There's no icky "sloppy seconds, keeping it in the family" drama. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
