A couple met in college. Fell in love. Got married. Girl quitted college to work in order to help pay the man's college fees and living expenses. The H was extremely ambitious, seeking money and power. The h was very loving and supportive of him. The first several years were hard but loving. Fifteen years later the couple was living almost as strangers. The H succeeded in his career, a multi millionaire, a workaholic who put his work first, second and third. The h was ignored and only remembered when the H needed her to play hostess etc. We have his pov and he was not in love with the h any more but he was still very attracted to her, he thought her the most beautiful woman he ever met. The h was unhappy. She had everything money can buy but that wasn't what she wanted out of life. She wanted a loving husband sharing life with her, companionship and was longing for a baby for years but the H kept putting it off. The h bought her dream house 5 hours away in an ideal town called Bethlehem. She moved there while the H stayed at their regular house. She planned to ask for divorce right after the Christmas holidays. The H was making similar plans but they never communicated them to each other. SPOILERS They celebrated Christmas at the h's house joined by another couple. The H gifted the other female a very expensive piece of jewellery and the h seen that, and their guilty faces knew they were having an affair. The woman was the h's best friend. Even though the h was unhappy in her marriage, the only thing that went well was the sexual aspect ( except for the last 3 months that the h kicked the H out of the bedroom and never invited him back ). The h thought at least her husband was faithful. Now she knew otherwise. The h fled in the car and had a near fatal accident on an ice-slick road. She spend the next year in a hospital recuperating. She couldn't remember the year before the accident ( nor the accident itself )due to amnesia. Hero was visiting her 3 times a week as he still cared for her and he was also feeling guilty. Released from the hospital the h was accompanied to her Bethlehem house by the H who was to stay with her for 2 months. Again both planned to file for divorce right after Christmas. Heroine made friends with the wonderful towns people and the H started to experience life which didn't involve work and making money. He was spending quality time with his wife and started to enjoy the gatherings, activities and real friendships with the towns warm caring people. Slowly but surely they fell in love and started been intimate. The H was stressing at the idea of the h's memory returning and remembering his brief affair. He thought that she might not forgive him. He didn't want to lose her as he realised how much she meant to him. In the town of Bethlehem there was divine intervention, an angel called Noel, who would appear to the H and h when the times were tough in order to steer them in the right direction. Of course they didn't know she was an angel. On Christmas eve night, exactly a year since the h's accident, the H decided to tell her the truth about the affair but the h already got her memory back. She couldn't handle it and taking the car she fled again taking the same route as the previous year. Noel appeared to her and soothed the situation. The H did wrong but he bitterly regretted it, he loved her now with all his heart and if she would go back to him she would have a wonderful life. They both made mistakes. She went back and made peace with him. The H told her he wanted to start a family with her. They had 16 turbulent years, years without communication and companionship but now at last found each other.
