Mary Elizabeth Braddon belongs to that particular cadre of writers: popular in their time, very prolific, had many bestsellers, and almost entirely forgotten today. That needs to change! She is fast becoming one of my favourite Victorian writers. She gives Wilkie Collins a run for his money. This book is similar to Lady Audley’s Secret , in that it’s about a bigamous woman whose first husband returns to the estate. Drama ensues. Yet it is also a total revamping. In Lady Audley’s Secret , the bigamous wife is unequivocally the femme fatale villain. Part of the tragedy is how this poor first husband was treated - although he’s no angel either, he definitely has better intentions than her. In Aurora Floyd , we spend a lot more time with our titular bigamist. We get in her head. We understand her better. Braddon encourages empathy for her. And when this slimy, mercenary first husband turns up, HE’S the one we can’t stand! This makes the story more emotionally complex: Braddon emphasises that our eponymous, flawed heroine was simply a young girl who made a terrible mistake in her youth. Yet she’s paying the price for it dearly. This book is also a better murder mystery: it’s got more twists and turns. One of Braddon’s major themes - one that Agatha Christie adopted too - is the nature of marriage, and what makes a good marriage. She and Christie advocate for unions based on companionship and teamwork, rather than, necessarily, the most passionate affection. When describing Talbot Bulstrode, the man Aurora initially loves and who later marries her sister, Braddon uses this brilliant metaphor to summarise. She loved [Talbot] as women only love in their first youth, and as they rarely love the men they ultimately marry. The tree is perhaps all the stronger when these first frail branches are lopped away to give place to strong and spreading arms, beneath which a husband and children may shelter. As well as that passage, here are a couple more classic one-liners: How many a grief has been bred of idleness and leisure! Ah! How many a man is watched by loving eyes whose light he never sees! How many a man is cared for by a tender heart whose secret he never learns! Could you ask for a better turn of phrase!? Critics of this book may say that the ending is a tad rushed, or perhaps that the presentation of Stephen Hargreaves - a character with learning disabilities - is noticeably of its time. I don’t disagree! But the book is phenomenal overall. 5 out of 5 stars.
