I am reading all of Iris Murdoch's novels in order. I read most of the books in the 80s and 90s in no order. Then about 10 years ago decided to read or reread all of them in order. I don't even know when I started this project since Goodreads has decided to get rid of the dates on my earliest book records. It's taking me a long time. There are 26 of them and I've got 4 left. So, The Good Apprentice. The book starts with Edward giving his friend, Mark, LSD and doesn't tell him. He just wants him to have fun and have the deep experiences he has had with the drug. It's going well, then Mark falls asleep and Edward leaves for 30-60 minutes to pursue a girl. When he returns, Mark has fallen out of the window to his death. The fallout from this horrendous mistake are many. Edward is overcome with grief and guilt and doesn't see a way forward in living the rest of his life. He's young, 20 I think. In the book we meet 2 generations of Edward's family and friends. It's a very complicated group; they are mostly introduced in a classic Murdoch scene of a dinner party organized to help extricate both Edward and his stepbrother, Stuart, from their current crises. Edward did not grow up with either of his parents. His mother, Chloe was married to his step father, Harry and died very young. Edward's father is the famous painter, Jesse Baltram. Chloe was his model and lover. Chloe's sister, Midge, is the one who throws the dinner party. She is married to a psychoanalyst, Thomas, and is having an affair with Harry. There is a lot more of this type of intrigue and complex relationships. I think my favorite character is Thomas, the psychoanalyst. He's Scottish and Jewish and is kind of an outsider amongst the rest of the family. Some might object to him because he is very manipulative. He arranges for Edward to have certain experiences. He arranges for people to be in places when he thinks it's a good thing. The thing is, he's always right. "Don't hope for anything except the truth, to see guilt and grief in their own being. Live at peace with despair. Live quietly with your sense of guilt, and with the event and its consequences." Well, I have not really gotten across the reason the book has impressed me so. Obviously, Edward is the good apprentice and he is an apprentice to every character in the book as he is able to open himself to what they have to teach. And at the end he is still full of grief and guilt but he's living his life.
