Here is the 4th and final volume of the wonderful documentary fiction Emigrant Novels by Vilhelm Moberg, translated by Gustaf Lannestock (THE EMIGRANTS (1), UNTO A GOOD LAND (2), THE SETTLERS (3), and THE LAST LETTER HOME (4). My five stars reflects the totality of the series. I do not have Swedish heritage, nor can I read Swedish, so I very much appreciate having these books translated into English. The copyright for the Lannestock translation of THE LAST LETTER HOME is 1961; the book was first published in Swedish in 1959. Caution: WAIT until after finishing the story about Karl Oscar and Kristina Nilsson before reading the four, interesting supplementary materials that appear in the front of the book (at least, in my version): Introduction to the Emigrant Novels ix; Introduction to The Last Letter Home xxi; Bibliography for the Emigrant Novels xxvii; and Suggested Readings in English xxix. Note: The PREFACE "The Country That Changed Them" xxxi is fine to read first. It begins thusly: "This is the last installment of a story about a group of people who left their homes in Ljuder parish, Sweden, and emigrated to North America. These immigrants settled in the St. Croix Valley of Minnesota, in the land of the Chippewas and the Sioux. It was a wild-growing region, never before touched by ax or plow." The final book follows Karl Oscar and Kristina Nilsson in Minnesota during the time of the Civil War and the Dakota War of 1862 and the years beyond--- until both have died, and the relatives in Sweden receive the news in the last letter home. ............. I have also pasted my comments from THE EMIGRANTS (1) and UNTO A GOOD LAND (2) below. ............. Who is Vilhelm Moberg? He is a person I would very much like to thank for his gift of this classic 1951 first-in-the-series book of historical fiction THE EMIGRANTS, translated from the Swedish by Gustaf Lannestock. Moberg grew up in Sweden hearing first-hand the stories of those who emigrated to the United States and then, after undertaking much careful research, has provided us with this insightful treasure. Moberg's prose in translation is not especially elegant, but the impact of the content more than compensates for the somewhat stodgy, straightforward language. In particular, Moberg communicates a vivid, historically-based image of the stresses of farm and village life in Sweden in the 1850s as well as providing an insightful look at the feelings, thoughts, and motivations of a range of characters who end up on one ship, headed for the young United States. Moberg introduces us to people, men and women, old and young, literate and illiterate, and makes us feel their ignorance, desperation, and yearning. He portrays the precariousness of an existence marked by unrelenting hard work that cannot truly guard against hunger or financial calamity. A spike in population leads to land divisions, until there is no further division possible, and youngsters end up being legally bound out for years as poorly paid laborers by even caring parents to masters who may be stingy and harsh. Add in the vagaries of nature, limited educational options, deep uncertainty about the future, the strangling impact of debt, and an inflexible social and religious system. Suddenly, the burden of embarking on a costly, unpleasant, and dangerous sea journey emerges as almost logical. In this first volume, the story finishes with the sea voyage coming to an end for key characters Karl Oskar and wife Kristina, along with the other survivors of the unpleasant Atlantic crossing. ............... The second of Moberg's four book series on 19th century emigration from Sweden to Minnesota UNTO A GOOD LAND continues to be fascinating. The author follows various characters, among them illiterate or barely literate peasants from Smaland who have left Sweden and traveled in 1850 to America to settle. Early on in this Volume (2), Karl Oskar (a key figure), Kristina, Robert, Arvid, Danjel, Ulrika,and the others are caught in red tape in the harbor of New York for a few days before they undertake the slow westward journey together. Once again, as I noted about Book 1, Moberg reveals the thought-processes of the illiterate Arvid and his highly imaginative, youthful friend Robert, whose ability to read is not always accompanied by judicious reasoning or correct interpretations. The dynamic duo provide brief moments of humor -- their encounter with a "corpse" as they walk around New York for the very first time and their alligator conversation are two sections not to be missed. More importantly, the depiction of the challenges endured by Karl Oskar elicits empathic wonder interspersed with groans mixed in with respect. The author lets us see our characters who must forge ahead making vital decisions without sufficient knowledge or context in which to decide. We see how close disaster lurks for each, how strangers, fellow emigrants, personal resources and individual natures help and/or hinder their settlement. We watch them stumble into a future with only a vague sense of how ill-prepared, ignorant, vulnerable, and desperate their situation is or could be, secretly cheering when various obstacles are overcome, lamenting when they are not, quivering with their uncertainties. We see their yearnings, and this glimpse into their hearts helps us see what sustains them, how they cope with building shelter and providing food necessary for survival in a strange, new land where language, custom, and nature are all mysteries. It is hard to imagine readers not rooting for Karl Oskar to succeed, yet all the while trembling on his behalf. .....
