I recently had an intense, life-changing revelation. I nearly went insane and spent over 2 weeks in the hospital, diagnosed with hypermania. I found At The Back Of The North Wind in the hospital (I think left for a purpose), and it described my situation perfectly. I did not die/visit the back of the North Wind, but the North Wind was synonymous, for me, with the voice of God that resonated in my head, providing infinite wisdom. It turned me from a pond into a river, and all my fears and limits became intransigent no longer. This was what happened to Diamond. Diamond the Horse represents Christ, and Diamond the boy the enlightened man. He goes from fearful, timid, and non-communicative to fearless, infinitely courageous, and ultimately communicative. The room of boards over the stable was his mind. It is oriented in a specific position and cites Orion (I think MacDonald may have meant Cygnus, a star formation seemingly referred to in Egyptian pyramids; the allusion was attributed, until fairly recently, to Orion) and the North Star as landmarks. The garden outside the house is Paradise, the garden of innocence, and his and Her's (The North Wind's) story is that of Adam and Eve told backwards. He hears the voice of God, eats the fruit (choice), and chooses to accept God, with unwavering faith. He comes out of his shelter (like shedding his clothes) and assumes a new dimension. With it comes total enlightenment and benevolence. *Spoil Alert* The ending is not in the least sad or regretful, except that Diamond's family doesn't know the truth of heaven and consciousness's affinity for transmutation. Diamond, through his infinite love, inspired and transformed the lives of those around him. He is loved by all that choose to give him a chance, but only understood, perhaps, by the other enlightened character, his writer-benefactor. MacDonald refers to the Ancient Greeks, perhaps the most recent "perfect" civilization on Earth. The Cynics, like Diogenes, strove to achieve one of the aspects of Diamond's enlightenment: total happiness and connection to self and environment. Today people are basically beasts controlled by riders: We are so out of touch with our senses and selves that it is like riding an animal, much like the drunken boor of a horseman. In the end Diamond sheds his body and becomes one of the frolicking angels. He moved his own rock and went INTO the cave (The reverse of Jesus), but the cave, for him, was HIS heaven or afterlife or rebirth; he found the one that fit and chose to take it, just like the other angels. This writing is sedimentary; an amalgamation of layered meanings that can be appreciated by youngsters and scholars alike. It is extremely beautiful.
