MAN I LOVE ANTHONY TROLLOPE. Apparently this one is his longest? At any rate, I hear Stephen King once wittily referred to this novel as "Can You Finish It?" Was it over 800 pages? Yes. Did I mind? HECK NO. Go and boil your head, Stephen King. I read it in two weeks, but I could have done it in one marathon sitting if I didn't need to eat, sleep, and work. Very few books are genuinely unputdownable for me, but this 19th century tome did it easily. I can't say much that Rosamund hasn't already said more concisely in her review , but will doubtless manage to say something here. Can I forgive her? It is my considered opinion that Alice needs no forgiveness. Alice is an absolute legend and would be my favourite character in the book by a wide margin if it wasn't for Lady Glencora. From the first couple of chapters, I could tell that Alice was going to jilt John Grey, and John Grey looked awesome enough at first glance that I could tell it was going to be a bad idea - especially with charming bad-boy George waiting in the wings to scoop her up. But then we see the reasoning behind Alice's determination to end her engagement, and it was an explanation that made complete sense. After all, John Grey is little more than an affable idler. Alice, who has no pressing financial need to marry, is a town mouse with ambitions towards political influence, and John Grey has no intention whatsoever to allow her to follow these ambitions. And as clearly as she understands George's shortcomings, at least a life with him would allow her to follow her own interests. Alice, in other words, is a woman with a calling in a world, and indeed to some extent in a novel, that fails to recognise the legitimacy of a woman's calling. Alice is someone with a fierce sense of independence; I loved how Trollope uses this as both her greatest strength and greatest weakness; independence, we see, is no safeguard against manipulation. But it is absolutely a safeguard against frontal attack, and in conflict after conflict Alice comes off as an absolute legend, and I loved her. I wasn't a fan of the way Trollope pooh-poohed Alice's dilemma, her choice between love and calling. "Just marry the man and have some children" is not a helpful answer when you really have a vocation. But just when I thought he was treating the question too lightly - enter Lady Glencora. Lady Glencora Palliser is a brilliant creation - a dedicated troll and something of a disaster girl; a friend pointed out how unusual she is in terms of female characters in Victorian fiction. I've successfully avoided enough Victorian fiction that I can't really be the judge here, but imagine her next to, say, Dickens' Esther Summerson. Cora, at one point, confesses her sheer inability to behave in any remotely proper fashion, and backs it up by never, ever neglecting an opportunity to yank a chain or stir a pot. I LOVED HER. Thematically, she's important to the story because she has married someone she has nothing in common with. Plantagenet Palliser is giant nerd whose life ambition is to be Chancellor of the Excheque and put the House of Commons to sleep every evening with a list of nice, comforting numbers. Glencora not only has no interest in any of this, but hasn't even managed to do her duty by Plantagenet and produce a son (I was tempted to wonder at one stage whether Planty's truly heroic levels of cluelessness had something to do with this). Glencora may be a subplot character, but her predicament is genuinely heartrending: without love, common goals, or children to bind her to her husband, she finds herself wishing herself dead or disgraced just to be shot of the whole impossible situation. See, fiction is the art of empathy, and Trollope was a great enough novelist, whatever his personal views, to vividly imagine and empathise with the predicament of women in his society in ways that are still depressingly rare even today, even among authors who would disagree with Trollope's views on the sexes. As I said above, and will say again in this review, I for one have some areas of disagreement with him here, but the genuine respect, empathy, and love he shows towards his female characters in this book is absolutely exemplary and one of the things that make this a truly great novel. By and large the male characters are not as compelling as the female characters (ironically, it's the one thing I could have wished the novel to do better). However, I have to spare a few words for GEORGE. George, with the shocking backstory, the dreadful scar, and the flair for melodrama, is a large part of the reason I loved the book. Oh, don't get me wrong: George is the Absolute Worst, and I wanted him to die in a fire. But if there's one outrageous Victorian stereotype I did NOT expect to show up in an Anthony Trollope novel, it was the Mustache Twirling Pantomime Villain. George feels like an intruder from a Bronte novel. Every time he shows up, TRULY sensational things happen. He was the absolute worst but also, for dramatic purposes, the best. I loved to hate him. Kate deserves a few words. She's one of those characters Trollope does so well, the sort of person who begins rather contemptibly but goes through a terrible lot of character development. By the end, I was cheering for her. I found the subplot with her cheerfully mendacious aunt, Mrs Greenow, to be extremely funny but the least interesting part of the book; all the same, it's one of those delightful little character pieces Trollope excelled at. Can you forgive her? Trollope asks, but let's be honest, the character we are really in danger of not forgiving here is John Grey. John Grey, who responds to Alice's sincere concerns by brushing her off, and telling her that, basically, she's mentally ill. While the man had many good qualities, I didn't see any particular reason why, having got shot of cousin George, she had to go and marry John Grey at all. The thing left a bit of a sour taste in my mouth. Now, while I did appreciate Trollope's comments on the importance of doing something with your life to benefit others, the happiness or otherwise of the ending, for Alice, depends entirely on whether you think John Grey is beginning to understand that he needs to pay attention to her conscience and vocation, which he brushed off at the start of the book. His final line in the book lends some hope to this, but the fact is that although he abandons the life of a gentlemanly idler, he does so not because Alice convinced him to do so, but because of Mr Palliser. I think many women have been in the identical situation of saying something to a very self-assured man which he shrugs off, only to see him take it seriously coming from the lips of another man - thus proving that it was never the message he objected to, but the messenger. In the end, I think I disagree with Trollope that a shared love, home, and children is enough for any husband and wife to have in common. There also has to be an ability to support one another in pursuing a vocation, whether shared or separate. I grew up within a subculture (not in my own family, thankfully) that assumed no woman could ever have an individual vocation, and which took very seriously the kind of thing Trollope says in this story - perhaps more unctuously than sincerely - about the perils of feminine independence. I think people who have really internalised and taken such views to their logical conclusions would be deeply scandalised by some of the behaviour, to say nothing of the independent thought, that Trollope celebrates and rewards in this book. Indeed, Trollope was one of the wedges that cracked open this kind of thinking for me, primarily by writing female characters and female predicaments like this one. Some of his critique, in this book, of the way his society treated women is scorching . I've rambled much too long. This book is a gem. I loved it. Read it.
