Truely wonderful - I loved this novel, a picaresque farce that combines humor and tragedy as Marcio Souza mocks the pretentions of everyone involved in the madness of the rubber boom in Brazil and other places. He does not forget that harvesting the rubber that paid for the glittering chandeliers and marble columns of the teatro Amazonas and the obscenely over-the-top excesses of the rubber-boom nouveaux-riche was an army of barely fed and horribly mistreated and abused indigenous and simply poor labourers (it did not take place in Brazil but look up the Putumayo genocide). The most incredible thing about this novel is that it is based on true events (see the Wikipedia entry for the real Dom Luis Galvez at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luis_G%... ) but Marcio Souza has recognised that trying to find the reality behind this 19th century adventurer is as impossible, and pointless, as finding the real Roland of the battle of Roncevaux or the Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar before he became El Cid. Souza has taken the facts and woven a marvellous tale full of outrageous behavior, rampant sexuality and a celebration of the Amazon in all its wildness and diversity. I grew up playing in my father's library amongst books by authors like Miguel Angel Asturias, Martin Luis Guzmnan and Augustus Rao so by the time I was a teenager Gabriel Garcia Marques and Alejo Capentier were part of my literary landscape. Throughout the 1970s and 80s there seemed to be a inexhaustable supply of wonderfully startling and imaginative literature coming from the Carribean and central and south America, but of course I am remembering long hours lost in the wonders of richly stocked bookstores (doesn't that make me feel old, like someone talking of Paris before the revolution or Leningrad before it turned into an erzatz St. Petersburg). The point of this digression is to say that reading this literature is as close to being in my DNA as is possible for someone reading in translation. I am probably biased, I haven't met literature of this vintage I haven't loved. Maybe I am indiscriminate, but I am happy to be. Emperor of the Amazon is wonderful and either it is the sort of thing you love or you don't. I love it.
