Imagine you're a nine-year-old boy grungy rags for clothes, belly empty a sadistic father beats you if you don't beg for money (and get it) . Afraid of life an endless, joyless struggle to survive. The only relief from the grim reality is sleep, for a few hours on the dirty floor in something not quite a shelter. Maybe dream of a better existence, then a few hours after a fantasy, everything you desire is no problem to obtain. And the child is now the King of England ! That's the plot of Mark Twain's interesting novel. Tom Canty the unhappy boy is wandering around London, during the last days of the fierce Henry the Eighth. Tom does not desire to go home, no money to give his father and a sure vicious beating as a consequence. He always wanted to see a royal but could never, in the slums of London wonder why ? Arriving at Westminister Palace after a long walk Tom spots the Prince, playing outside. Trying to get a closer view but a mob surrounds the gates. A guard roughs up the boy when he at last approaches the palace. The kindhearted Edward sees the incident and tells his guards, to let the pauper in. Poor Tom is going to talk to the future king ... The prince is lonely too much study not enough fun, Edward takes him Tom to his room. They exchange clothes, look in the mirror and are stunned. The two could be twins, so close is the resemblance nobody would be able to pick who is the great Prince, and who is the little Pauper . All the unlimited luxuries everywhere in the residence, jewels, fabulous clothes, furniture, delicious food, toys and books ... Yes life can be beautiful for some thinks the visitor. Later the Prince seeks to punish the guard, that had mistreated his new friend. Goes out the gates and ... Big mistake, he still has foul threads on. The palace guards believe he's the poor boy and drive him away, protesting Edward says he's the prince and receives big laughs from the rabble, obviously the kid is mad. The two worlds of the city both real same people, but how different separated by a chasm which can not be traversed by either. But the two children see for the first time in their young lives this. It changes them, they will never be quite the same again. With the help of Miles Hendon the prince's new friend, son of a rich man whose been fighting wars on the continent for ten years, the royal lives. A surprise awaits Miles at home however ... The mad boy survives many brutal adventures on the road staying away from his "father " John. Equally difficult the troubles of the other insane child. The phony prince Tom , has delusions that he's not the son of the king. And Henry is dying, what a mess ... Still Tom starts to like being King, servants obey, all his wishes come to pass, everyone bows before him, forgetting about his mother and sisters, not caring that the real Edward the Sixth, is lost and in danger. It's good to be King !
