Dreamgirl: My Life As A Supreme is the autobiography of original Supremes member Mary Wilson. I'm just gonna lay my bias out in front of you. I think "The Motown Sound" is overrated. Obviously some of the artist on Motown were truly talented(Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder, The Jackson 5ive, and Smoky Robinson) most of the Motown songs sound alike. I realize that Berry Gordy wanted to make music that white people would like and buy but I think the music just turned out meh. This is just my opinion, I realize that back in the 60's Motown was considered cutting edge and since I wasn't even alive during Motown's heyday I probably just don't understand or fully appreciate it. Now on to the actual review! Mary Wilson seems like a lovely person. She the kind of aunt who always remembers your birthday, who everyone brings their problems to, and who knows everyone's secrets but won't tell them. She's lovely! But she's not the best type of person to write an autobiography. Mary Wilson doesn't want to hurt anybody's feelings. Its obvious that she HATES Diana Ross' guts but she never says that. She beats around the bush, she tells us catty and petty things Diana Ross did but then she follows that with a compliment. JUST FUCKING CALL DIANA ROSS A BITCH! I love Diana Ross but if I had been a Supreme, I would have punched the bitch in the face. But Mary Wilson isn't that type of person, so she just took it and stuffed her feelings down inside. As I read this book I kept screaming at her to defend herself but she never did. Reading this book made me feel sad because the break up of the original Supremes wasn't just the break up of a group it was the end of friendships. The original Supremes demise mirrored the demise of another girl group decades later Destiny's Child. Instead of Berry Gordy picking Diana Ross(his girlfriend) over the other members Matthew Knowles picked his daughter Beyonce(my lord & savior). In both cases childhood friends were torn apart by fame, jealously and greed. I like Mary Wilson and I think she's a survivor. She may not have handled things the way I would be she did the best she could to try and keep the group she loved together. So while I didn't get the juicy gossip I love to read on these books. I still got a great look at what it was like at the beginning of the legendary music label Motown. The Supremes are the true definition of rags 2 riches. I recommend Dreamgirl to lovers of classic R&B music.
