Jacobo Ladino Baena The three and many whishes of Jason Reid Hazel Hutchins # of pages read: 70 1/8- 87 - Summary: "The three and many whishes of Jason Reid", is a book a about a kid, called Jason Reid hi is 11 years old, he plays all the days beisboll, is pretty good on it, but his own mistake is at the time to catch the ball, is so bad doing it. One day going back to home, he found something misterous in the forest, was an elf, called Tiny Quicksilver. The elf told to Jason he had a power he can led him some wishes(only three), the fisrt wish are a pair of beisball gloves, for doing better the function of catching the ball. then he wish a bicycle, and the last one is obviuosly other three wishes. then he started to wish a lot of things for him, like more bicycles, games,aquariums, etc. But he feel he was doing something bad, all the whishes are for his benefits, so he wish peace and plenty for the world, but this ais a big wish, imposible to made. So Jason started to think in another(and last wish) wish, that benefit, not only him, also other people, but not too bigg as the last one. One day he was walking on the street, and he hear that beisball stadium is going to close, so was the perfect way to hepl him and other kids, and people. So Jason, with the help of Quicsilver started to think a plan for avoing the destruction of the stadium. The theme is the selfishnes, because Jason, have three wishes, but he made them ilimitated, but he never think in other people, only him, almost at the final of the book he decided to help the world, but is a big wish, is imposible to made it, so the elf told him he would need to think in other think, then he think to help the stadium but was at the final of the book. Is a good book, I never get confused, I never get bored, at next time they need to include more images, so the book became more funny, I congratule the author, because I have have read about her life, this is his first book, and is one of the better books i have read. It combinate values, with some fun, and fiction moments. I recommended for kids, an adult will not enjoy it too much, or not as a kid, because is easy to understand, it have some funny pieces, for people who enjoy fiction books. Also because is a good book, it has a formal vocabulary, it doesn't has a lot of unknown words, so it make it easy to understand. 5 vocabulary words - DEAL: Verb (used without object), dealt, dealing. To occupy oneself or itself (usually followed by with or in): Example: Botany deals with the study of plants. He deals in generalities. -EMINENCE: noun High station, rank, or repute: Example: philosophers of eminence. -DRY: Adjective, drier, driest. Free from moisture or excess moisture; not moist; not wet: Example: A dry towel; dry air. -TOWEL: Noun An absorbent cloth or paper for wiping and drying something wet, as one for the hands, face, or body after washing or bathing. Examaple: After taking a shower I dry off my body with a towel. -COVERT: Adjective concealed; secret; disguised. Example: The mission was so covert, nobody can know it, was so important.
