i'm ashamed to say, i actually got a little bit freaked out reading this alone in my bedroom one night when jared was late coming to bed because he was finishing up a paper. this book definitely creeped me out when i was a kid (apparently i was something of a wuss). i think my adult creepy feelings were like muscle memories from childhood or something. so. the highlight of mary anne's day is checking the mail. i can relate to this, i enjoy checking the mail--but that's because there's usually something good for me in the mail, like a letter or a zine or something i've ordered. mary anne just looks forward to the occasional free sample. that's sad. but one day she receives a letter: a chain letter. it warns her that she needs to copy & send the letter to twenty people or she & her loved ones will be visited by bad luck. she opens the chain letter at a BSC meeting, so mallory & jessi are there to get sppoked & tell her she better not break the chain. the older girls mostly scoff, & mary anne throws the letter away. the next day, she has all kinds of "bad luck". like spilling juice on the outfit she planned to wear to school, forgetting that she had a sitting job, jamie newton skinning his knee under her care (hence the cover image), etc. pretty weak examples of "bad luck," if you ask me. anything can be considered "bad luck" if you're looking for it--i got a paper cut organizing the recycling today. oh no! i'm cursed! then i read a negative review of one of my zines! *cry cry cry* & then--wait for it--i brushed my hair & it got really staticky because the air was so dry! & then the broom fell over & startled me! seriously, this is the degree of mary anne's bad luck. though i may be misremembering...soon after mary anne throws away the chain letter, she gets a package in the mail. it's a necklace with a weird little glass charm on it, & inside the charm is a mysterious seed. the accompanying note, which was created using letters clipped from the newspaper (i used to spend hours as a child writing letters that way, usually insults directed at my younger siblings), informed mary anne that the necklace is a bad luck charm & she must wear it...or else. or else what? mary anne's not taking any chances though, & she wears the necklace. the bad luck things that happen to her may have started happening after she gets the necklace--i don't remember. in any case, the babysitters are freaked out now that "bad luck" is happening. mary anne & logan go together to the halloween hop, hilariously dressed as cats from the musical "cats". um...logan? can we talk? thankfully he doesn't wear skintight leggings like the male cats in the broadway musical wear. he makes himself some pants out of fun fur. that's little better in the masculinity department, but at least his contours are disguised. mary anne wears a leotard, tights, a headdress, & she paints her face. i have a hard time imagining shy, retiring mary anne wearing a leotard & tights in public in front of her classmates. i know the babysitters are automatons & not normal middle school girls, but i was once a middle school girl, & at that age, you have lumps & bumps where you didn't have them before & the last thing you want to do is show them off in a tight leotard in from of people you have to see everyday. maybe it's different if you're a dancer or something, but mary anne is the kind of dorky thirteen-year-old who dresses up as a cat for halloween. oh well, i guess we should just be thankful that she didn't dress up as a sexy cat. (logan, on the other hand...) at the dance, cokie mason compliments mary anne on her bad luck charm. mary anne doesn't think much of it, even though no one but the BSC knows that the necklace is supposedly bad luck. mary anne gets another creepy cut-out-letters letter instructing her & the rest of the club to come to old man hickory's gravestone at midnight on halloween. soon after, richard sees mary anne's necklace & says it's just a mustard seed & it's not bad luck. mary anne reports this to the BSC & the gears start turning...they realize that cokie & her friends must be behind the necklace & the graveyard plot! kristy does some fast thinking & hatches a plan so that the girls can go to the graveyard without telling their parents what's happening, & so they can scare cokie & her friends before cokie & her friends scare the club. this involves flashlights, special effects tapes, sheets draped to look like ghosts, & the element of surprise. oh, & charlie being ridiculously willing to drive all over stoneybrook, picking up the club members, dropping them off at the graveyard, & then waiting for them to finish their business. that guy needs a girlfriend. or some D&D buddies or something. the plan works, cokie & her friends scream & freak out, logan sees the whole thing, the snobby girls admit that they told logan to be there because they hoped he would see mary anne freaking out & not want to date her anymore, becaue supposedly grace blume has a crush on him (even though it's always cokie in later books). logan scoffs & declares his loyalty to mary anne & the BSC. the club heads to kristy's house for a halloween sleepover. there's also all this ridiculous shit where the club goes to the library to look up spells to reverse bad luck, but it was really boring so i didn't recap it. claudia displays an incredible antipathy & bewilderment toward the library, considering that her mom supposedly works there. she even claims to have a headache in the hopes that she'll be allowed to go home. you know, claudia, the library has nancy drew books.
