“This phenomenal girl will be the light of my life while I am at Hintock; and the special beauty of the situation is that our attitude and relations to each other will be purely spiritual. Socially we can never be intimate. Anything like matrimonial intentions towards her, charming as she is, would be absurd. They would spoil the ethereal character of my regard. And, indeed, I have other aims on the practical side of my life.” Oh dear, what a cad, and this is a Thomas Hardy novel, so it will surely end in tears. Reading Hardy is not exactly fun but I do keep coming back to read him, I find his novels oddly entertaining, perhaps as a kind of morbid fascination. The Woodlanders is set in a small woodland village called Little Hintock, a place so rustic you would never find a wi-fi signal. This village is part of the county of Wessex, where nothing happy ever seems to happen. The novel is mainly focused on Grace Melbury, the “heroine” of the book. Grace is an unusual girl for Little Hintock, her father sent her away (not sure where) for several years to be educated, and when she comes back (probably with a Ph.D.) Little Hintock just seems kind of lame. Prior to going to college, she had an understanding with Giles Winterborne, a timber-merchant; but in the eyes of Grace v2.0 a timber-merchant is not up to snuff and will never get the ISO certification; so she points him towards the friend zone. Along comes Dr. Edgar (or Edred in some editions) Fitzpiers, handsome mega cad, and philanderer extraordinaire. So they begin courting and – in a spare moment – Dr. Fitz even manages to squeeze in a roll in the hay with another village girl. Soon after they are married the good doctor starts an affair with Mrs. Felice Charmond, a rich widow and another outsider, who comes to stay at Little Hintock from time to time. Heartache, headache, martyrdom, and typhoid ensue… The tragedy of The Woodlanders seems to stem from nobody knowing what they want, or – more accurately –wanting what is very bad for them; they always make a beeline for the absolute worst option. Grace is the worst of Hardy’s female protagonists. She has no agency to speak of, always making bad decisions, and is scared of her own shadow; so much for her education. Fitzpiers is, of course, a terrible fellow, but then he is the villain of the piece and you are not supposed to like him. Giles Winterborne though, poor bloke, much too good for this world; a bit of an idiot to be honest. Hardy’s characterization is first rate for all of them; the characters are very distinct, conflicted and complex. All of Hardy’s favorite themes are accounted for: a rustic, evocative setting, bad marriage, unrequited love, and the class division. Again urban outsiders some “invade” the nice provincial setting and a miserable time is had by all. I am not sure what he is saying about education here if Grace did not go to college and remains a typical country girl she would have married Giles and everybody would be better off. So education does more harm than good in a setting like Little Hintock? Hardy’s plotting is clever and quite intricate, seemingly trivial and random events in the narrative always have significant and unpredictable consequences later on. He often makes the reader reflect on their own relationship with others, though, not just the spouses, but friends and relatives. Be a little kinder, more honest, and more considerate and a heap of troubles can be avoided. If you have never read Thomas Hardy before, start with Tess of the D'Urbervilles or Far from the Madding Crowd . I think they are better stories with more sympathetic protagonists. Having said that The Woodlanders is Hardy’s own favorite of his works so what do I know? I seem to have read all his major works now, though, so I don’t know if I will read the rest. If this is the last Hardy novel I read (rereads notwithstanding) it is a pretty high (but not happy) note to end on. Notes • Wonderful free Librivox audiobook , beautifully read by Tadhg. Thank you! • The trailer for the 1997 film and the movie poster makes it look like a smoldering romantic story. One of the least romantic books I have ever read. Quotes: “So she did as commanded, and opened each of the folded representatives of hard cash that her father put before her. To sow in her heart cravings for social position was obviously his strong desire, though in direct antagonism to a better feeling which had hitherto prevailed with him” “There was in Grace's mind sometimes a certain anticipative satisfaction, the satisfaction of feeling that she would be the heroine of an hour; moreover, she was proud, as a cultivated woman, to be the wife of a cultivated man. It was an opportunity denied very frequently to young women in her position, nowadays not a few; those in whom parental discovery of the value of education has implanted tastes which parental circles fail to gratify.” “Both looked attractive as glassed back by the faithful reflector; but Grace's countenance had the effect of making Mrs. Charmond appear more than her full age. There are complexions which set off each other to great advantage, and there are those which antagonize, the one killing or damaging its neighbor unmercifully.”
