Oh boy, this was a rough one for me. So I read The Perfect Couple this summer and I absolutely loved it! The writing, the characters, the plot, the setting, it was all so great. Once I found how obsessed people are with Elin Hilderbrand I had to get some of her other ones and I have to say this was such a big disappointment! I'm guessing most if not all of her books are set in Nantucket, which I absolutely love! You can tell she cares about the place and her descriptions are beautiful. The Beach Club follows a hotel on the island and the people who run it along with some of the guests. This was by no means a murder mystery like the Perfect Couple but I was here for the drama. I liked how this book was written and to be fair I did fly through the whole thing pretty quickly. Some of the characters were pretty interesting but there were so many WTF moments in this one (and not the good kind) that I had a hard time caring about anyone or anything at all about it. Here's a quick list of what I disliked about this story: - First, when the loving parents try to pawn off their recent high school grad daughter onto the 30 YEAR OLD manager of their hotel. Ok parents of the year. - The main character Mack was the absolute worst! He toyed with peoples emotions, cared about no one but himself, was a cheater, a liar, just awful! I'm supposed to root for him? Not at all. - One character and to mention many times (in detail) his sister's eating disorder. This added nothing to the plot, she played no role in the story, and in a healthy way of looking at the issue he refers to her as a "whacko." - If an employee pulls a gun on a boss for no justifiable reason there is no way it wouldn't be brought up again. - The girl trying to trap a man into getting her pregnant and sharing this with the poor cab driver?? These people are all certifiable messes. The ending "mystery" was dumb. (Don't get me started on the intentions and the blatant sexism.) There was not one redeemable character in this and if the ending was to allude to what I think it was then I'm thoroughly disturbed. I'm so disappointed but I'm hoping this was an anomaly and the rest of her books are as good as The Perfect Couple.
