Dr Bloodmoney is one of a number of books that Philip K Dick wrote during 1963, a year in which he basically just sat in his garden shed hammering at his typewriter and snacking his way through industrial quantities of amphetamines. Many of the novels that resulted were generally considered dreck – titles such as A Crack in Space , All His Strange Bureaucracies , The Girl With Some Eyes , Faux Pas on Venus , Autistic Apostasy , Space Hens of Death , Benny Goodman's Gigantic Face , When Martians Spoke German and Eat My Stars! , not all of which I made up. Mercifully, Dick was eventually stopped by a psychotic breakdown (which would later turn up in the imagery, and atmosphere, of The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch ). The indifferent nature of Dick's prose style often contributes, funnily enough, to its charm – or rather, it makes the oddities of his underlying themes seem even more critically important to their creator. There is a nervy, adrenal quality to his writing which lends an air of genuine psychological commitment to what he writes about – nothing seems like a literary conceit, it all seems deadly serious for Dick, however blandly it's put across. The plot of Dr Bloodmoney is all over the place, and yet that Phildickian paranoid terror, that sense of metaphysical instability, apparently cannot be diluted by sloppy structure alone. The novel's set in Marin Country, Ca., after a global nuclear apocalypse, and it focuses on a small community of survivors rebuilding their lives. As you'd expect, life has become restricted to a small radius, with travel only possible by horse, and items like glass or functioning machinery now rare and valuable. Yet in many ways, Dick's vision of a postnuclear world is a curiously hopeful, even cosy one. There are local committee meetings, impromptu schools, home-made cigarettes and chanterelle-picking trips in the countryside. All of this seems scientifically improbable seven years after hydrogen bombs took out San Francisco, but scientific probability is never the point. Against this background, a series of striking characters and images serve – almost unconsciously of authorial intent – to unspool any sense of sanity. Up in space, an astronaut has been left stranded in orbit, and now broadcasts lonely messages to the world below. A former physicist has paranoid fantasies that he caused the bombs to drop by the power of his mind (and, this being Philip K Dick, the paranoia is seen to be fully justified: he eventually wills more nuclear explosions and, sure enough, they start to go off). A thalidomide-baby handyman with no limbs wheels himself around on a cart, developing his telekenetic powers and harbouring dreams of taking over the world. A little girl spends her time talking to her ‘brother’ whom everyone assumes is imaginary, but who in fact turns out to be a semi-absorbed sentient parasitic twin living inside her, called Bill; Bill is eventually transported out of his sister's body and is then eaten by an owl, before being regurgitated while shouting exhortations about President Johnson. No, I am not making this up – that is a thing that actually happens in this book! None of this makes any sense – or indeed could make any sense, in any conceivable context real or fictional. What you're left with is a frankly astonishing series of visual and mental impressions that feel powerful but without any relation to each other. The book has nothing to say about the nuclear threat or the US space programme, and only a little to contribute to postapocalyptic literature; but it does have quite a bit to say about 1960s California, and it has vast amounts to say about the state of Philip K Dick's fragile and fascinating mind.
