Originally published in 1987, this nonfiction title is both a mini biography and part memoir as Sally Morgan, an Australian of Aboriginal descent, begins the book by writing about her childhood from the naive perspective of not knowing her own identity. As a result, the reader too, reads from this perspective as Sally recounts events in her life as they happen and refrains from judging them. When the children at school ask about her skin colour and she later asks her mother, it is suggested that she tell them they are Indian. In the household, they live with their mother Gladys and father Bill, who is unwell and sometimes dangerous. He is a war veteran of able body suffering from what today would be diagnosed as PTSD. Their Nan also lives with them and as Sally gets to know Nan's brother Arthur, she learns that they are not Indian, they are of Aboriginal origin. Confronting her grandmother elicits no information at all, she refuses to speak of her past, not of who her father was and suggests that Sally forget about it. Arthur agrees to tell his story and over a period of 3 months, when Arthur is in his 90's, she records their conversations and learns about his life and a little more about his sister's, her Nan. They are the children of an Aboriginal woman and the white stationmaster whose farm they lived and worked on. They lived during an era described as "living under the Act" when Australia had laws that not only dispossessed Aborginal people of their land and culture and traditions, but also forcibly removed their children from them, did not allow them to raise their own children, in effect owned them and treated them similar to slaves. People like Nan grew up under this Act and lived their lives under the effect of the trauma it brought. The only way they could see to protect their children was to lie about and withhold their heritage from their grandchildren. This story is Sally's persistant endeavour to find that lineage, those lost family members and that heritage and to find out the story of her grandmother who was too scared to tell it and said she would take her secrets to the grave. I absolutely loved every word of it, the way it is told, the close connection this family has to each other, the evidence of a spiritual connection to their ancestry and the spirits, even though they have not been raised with this knowledge. The real life characters are vividly drawn, the dialogue authentic and the story's of Arthur, Gladys and Daisy (Nan) beautifully recollected. A legacy for this family, a gift to the Australian nation and to the world at large, to have the opportunity to gain insight into a period of history, little known from this perspective. Highly Recommended.
