Mary Elizabeth Braddon has been having something of a moment recently, on the back of the current interest in Victorian sensation fiction. Lady Audley’s Secret (1862), Aurora Floyd (1863), and The Doctor’s Wife (1864) have both recently been republished in critical editions, by Oxford World’s Classics, and Lady Audley’s Secret , in particular, seem to be going down a storm with readers, to judge by the record of Goodreads. I’ve read two of Braddon’s novels now, Lady Audley , and Aurora Floyd , and I can see why people like her. She’s a slick, easy read in a page-turnerish manner; she has a nice, unstereotypical way with female characters; and her novels have the sociohistorical interest of other sensation novels—they give us a perspective on Victorian England that incorporates its seamier aspects, as well as its drawing-room side. Having said all that, I must say I haven’t enjoyed my encounter with Braddon quite as much as a few other recent forays into lesser-known Victorian female novelists. I liked Ellen Wood’s East Lynne more as a work of sensation fiction than either Lady Audley or Aurora Floyd ; and I was really quite excited by Margaret Oliphant, both in comic mode ( Miss Marjoribanks ) and in serious mode ( Hester ). I also feel Braddon suffers, as a writer of sensation novels, by comparison with the great Wilke Collins, who enters similar thematic territory, but with a much freer and more wide-ranging and modern sensibility. I have been struck, recently, reading Collins, by how sympathetically he treats characters who are disabled, or penniless, or illegitimate, or otherwise “other” to the box-perfect, upper middle-class protagonists whom Victorian novelists so often invite us to love. Braddon has a character of Collins’s offbeat type in Aurora Floyd (the hunchbacked “softy”—in the sense of “soft in the head”— Yorkshire rustic Steeve [sic] Hargreaves); but she treats him in an “otherizing”—even demonizing—manner which made Collins even more impressive by contrast. This, for me, detracted somewhat from the favorable impact of Braddon’s sympathetic treatment of her unconventional heroine, engaging as it is. I was very taken by the tomboyish, racing-fan Aurora, especially at the beginning of the novel, when she startles her conventionally-minded admirer Talbot Bulstrode by “lifting her eyes to his face and asking him the strangest question he had ever heard from girlish lips, ‘Do you know if Thunderbolt won the Leger?’” Towards the end of the novel, Aurora migrates back a little more into the weepy, fainty type of Victorian femininity, but her brief flicker is a lot of fun—probably enough, in fact, to entice me to complete my Braddon trilogy with The Doctor’s Wife .
