V.C. Andrews has this absurd way of taking a completely unbelievable situation and spinning a story that sucks you in and spits you out at the end. I'm not sure how she does it, I think it may have to do with the fact that all of her books have a mystic or spiritual element and it puts a spell on her readers. You think? No? Okay, but it's not more far fetched then the idea of bayou babies split up at birth and thrust back together in a myriad of betrayal, deceit, and sex. There is something about the writing of V.C. Andrews that leaves me turning the pages. All of her stories have the same conflict of moral vs immoral values. Blood ties vs family ties. Good vs Evil. There is always a very clear line that is drawn within the pages and then those lines get crossed. You would think that since all of her stories are similar in nature that I would tire of them, but in fact, when I pick up a V.C. Andrews novel I always dig right in. I flip through those pages just waiting for the jaw drop.."What?" or "No Way!" moment. It's always there, I know it's coming, and yet I still groan...Noooooooo! While waiting for that epic moment of the book I am always entertained with great descriptive writing, full of clear details and a straight storyline. No matter how many times I shake my head at the audacity of one of her books I never get lost within the pages. Her stories may be wicked and they may be shocking but they are always easy to follow and keep up with. There are not twists and turns that leave you confused, in fact, the twists and turns along the way actually help spell out the story instead of muddle it. I appreciate that, there are many a novels I have read only to get lost in all the craziness that an author can throw at us poor readers thinking that they are fooling us but in reality are just being fools. Another thing I appreciate is the dialect of her characters. This book, having a cajun and creole feel to it could have been buried under the writing accent of her characters. Nothing is more of a turn off then a book I have to re-read the sentences a few times trying to make sense of what they were saying. Grab this book for a good read. Hell, grab any V.C. Andrews novel for a good read. Don't expect an in depth plot. Don't expect thought provoking writing. Don't expect memorable story lines as I can forget one of her books as soon as I close it shut. You will find, however, an entertaining story. You will find a few pages that might make you squirm. You can find a new author to love and hate at the same time. Thrashdthoughts.com
