Another Bloomsbury influenced read; but this time from the mid-1980s. Henrietta Garnett is the daughter of David Garnett and Angelica Bell, great niece of Virginia Woolf. Before reading this I should have taken note of Dorothy Parker’s remark about Bloomsbury: “Bloomsbury paints in circles, lives in squares and loves in triangles”. The relationships in this novel are very tangled as you would expect. One of the first things that prods your consciousness when you read this is that the author is having a few games with names. The name of the house in Ireland in the first part of the book is Malabay (redolent of Mandalay). One of the main male characters is called Tara (Gone with the Wind; a plantation). The main female character is Catherine and yes she is somewhat dreamy and tempestuous. Those are the obvious ones, but there are others. Catherine is brought up by her uncle Pake at Malabay and the whole of her life revolves around the house and its surrounds. There is a nearby lake which is part of the estate and where Catherine’s mother and father drowned when she was very young. Tara is her cousin and they marry quite suddenly when Catherine is 17 (Tara is ten years older). This event seems to trigger a series of events of a tragic nature. The novel moves from Malabay to a clinic in a mountainous region and then to a remote island owned by Gerald, the other main male character. It is a novel about family secrets which come back to haunt and there is incest, betrayal, rape and estrangement. The most interesting character is Poppy, Pake’s ex-wife who turns up on a regular basis and seems to hold the whole thing together. Some of the events of the novel seemed to stretch credulity a little and the characterisation seemed to me to be a little thin at times. Charming, beautiful and eccentric are all very well, but I need a little more than that. Garnett has created a very enclosed world with charming but fated characters. It just seemed very disconnected and I found it difficult to relate to the characters; they were ethereal and somehow unreal. I think the whole thing might also have being a retelling of part of the Bloomsbury story. There is a lyricism in the writing and some beautiful descriptions and those who love everything Bloomsbury may wish to read it. For me it was interesting, but ultimately didn’t work. Show more
