This book was quintessential Metzger, but I enjoyed it even more than usual because the harp features prominently; my sister plays the harp as does the main character Cristabel. Unlike during the Regency when every milk-and-water miss played the harp, today anyone who plays it is looked upon as angelic--which gets old fast, I can tell you! Listeners never fail to gasp how "angelic" the music sounds--and by extension, how angelic the performer must be. (As if!) I couldn't help recall all the other Metzger stories in which the harp is poked fun at, in which plucking strings at dreaded musicales is de rigeur for Regency misses. We learn early on that Cristabel teaches harp (and piano) at her school in Bath, but she quits soon after, hauling her harp with her. I know from experience how unwieldy the thing is because I had to help cart my sister's to and from high school. So I got a kick out of lowlife Nick having to haul it up the stairs to the 4th-floor attic, her having to hire a special coach because regular coach drivers refused to take it, her schlepping it in and out of inns so it isn't subject to the weather, hauling it to the meeting with the solicitor, then to the "boarding house" on Sullivan Street. A harp is as improbable in a bordello as is naive Cristabel. And when she finally gets a chance to practice in her attic garret, neighbors complain. Too rich for words. But back to the beginning... When heroine Cristabel arrives in London, she is still wearing her schoolmarmy dress and is bedraggled from the rain. She is no insipid miss, however! She has "pluck" (ha) and berates the Naval captain/viscount the minute she meets him. He has a bandage over his eye and bumps into the harp, then trips over her valise. She may be a naif--the only person to not realize she lives in a bordello--but she has principles and won't accept the captain's gift of money. Indeed, the back-and-forth exchange of letters with the 100 pounds is pretty comical in itself. Metzger's classic canine isn't missing in this story, either; in fact, there are several, each with its own distinct personality. She names the flatulent house dog after her previous employer, and the burglary scene, where the pipsqueak defends its larger cherie amour by clamping its jaws around Nick's ankle is laugh-out-loud funny. The only disappointment was the disappearance of the captain's friend after his introduction at the beginning of the book. Did he feature in a previous book that I missed, or does he return in another tale? The story is tied up with a bow when the curmudgeonly captain can, post-eye surgery, now "see" that Cristabel is a lady, and a beautiful one at that. Great story!
