Scientists say that the reasoning part of an adolescent's brain is not fully formed until about the age of 25. I get the impression that they have enough scientific evidence to prove this theory. But, just in case there are still any doubters out there, I would like to offer up V.C. Andrews's Flowers in the Attic as the final piece of conclusive scientific evidence. When I was 13-years-old, I got my hands on Flowers in the Attic , and I not only read it multiple times, I read the entire series, and I even went on to read Ms. Andrews's next series, The Casteel Family . I loved these damn books. Strangely enough, I was a precocious reader who had also discovered both Carson McCullers and Thomas Hardy by that time, and even those good books in my hands didn't cause me to toss the others aside. I repeat. . . I loved these books; I read them like the pages were crafted from meth, and I have long wondered what returning to this beloved series would feel like. So, I returned this week, to crack open the first book in The Dollanganger Family series and be with Cathy, Chris, Cory and Carrie (my dear friends!) all over again. And, let me tell you what I felt like, re-reading them: Horrified. I wondered at the reasoning part of my adolescent brain. Had mine been even less developed than those of my peers? And, if you were a reader who loved these books as I did, you might be wondering. . . is it the incest, Julie?? Is your 40-something self just recoiling that so many young, impressionable minds were left pondering such blatant, three-generational examples of glorified incest?? And I can only respond with. . . the only thing worse than reading a book about incest is reading a book about incest that HAS DIALOGUE THIS ATROCIOUS!!! This is a horror novel, people, and the HORROR for me never ended in this adult re-read. Here's what I found the MOST horrific: the dialogue inauthentic Voice for ALL characters (and DO NOT get me started on how little Cory and Carrie talk!) the narration coming from a grown up Cathy, who never sounds like an adult OR a child the constant back-pedaling of “filling in” the reader on plot points at the most awkward and inappropriate times the writing And, THEN, after all of that, let me toss in the creep factor. Again, not so much a case of “why was there incest in the story,” as a case of WHAT WAS WRONG WITH THIS V.C. ANDREWS WOMAN? Never, in my youth, did I give her OBSESSION with incest a moment's thought, but this time around, my fully formed brain demanded to know why every woman in this story wants to smash her son's face deep into her bosom and why every man wants to kiss his daughter (um, or his granddaughter or niece) full on the lips to warm her, and leave her all tingly . Well, you can do your own Google search, but let me just summarize it like this: she had two older brothers, no sisters she had terrible back injuries from falling in a stairwell (that kept her in crutches and a wheelchair) she lived with her parents her entire life You can see how family relations, house confinement, and fear of staircases all come into play in her stories. Sorry, Ms. Andrews. I'd have given your writing a solid 5 stars as a teen, I'd give this 1 star as an adult. Let's average that out to three . I sure wish you could have left your house and gone out for drinks at least one time with an unrelated man. Poor thing. No wonder you wrote horror.
