I want to like it. Really, I do. I love Elizabeth Hand's two books Black Light and Waking the Moon (especially the latter). Winterlong is a different sort of book. This is the type of sci-fi where you're dropped into a world you know nothing about and immediately expected to hit the ground running. I like some of those types of books if things are gradually explained. Nothing is explained about this world; it's written as though you already know everything. This is frustrating as hell, because I'm constantly going "What? Wtf is that? Why are they doing that thing? Huh? What's going on?!?" To add to that, Hand decided to use a ton of obscure slang and literary words that I'm wholly unfamiliar with. I'm a pretty widely read person, and I'm still having to look up at least one word every other page. There's also a lot of fucked up shit going on. Necrophilia, incest, pedophilia (with VERY young children)...you name it, I'm sure it's in here (I expect scat to show up in the sex play at some point or another). This means that this book wears on you emotionally, if you're the type to imagine too vividly the action on the page. It's also a creepy book, not only for the reasons listed immediately prior to this sentence. It's creepy in a way that I can no longer read it before going to bed (I started Ruth Reichl's Tender at the Bone just so I'd have something to read before going to sleep again). This reminds me of her other book I read ( Generation Loss ), which I hated. Disappointing. Then again, there have definitely been interesting parts, and something other than sheer stubbornness is making me keep reading, so we'll see. I found this book revolting, and then I got a little over halfway done with it and all of a sudden she leaves off most of the disgusting shit that didn't need to be in there at all and starts to actually focus on the plot. It's like she remembered "Oh wait, Chuck Palahniuk has the monopoly on the Nasty Shit Book market. I can pay attention to my storyline and stop trying to compete with that hack." (Yeah, I said it. Wanna fight about it?) And so she did, and the book improved dramatically. And all that buildup for nothing! The ending is supremely frustrating. I shan't give it away, but trust me - skip this one. Read her other two I mentioned earlier. This one has the same themes, but here they seem tired and annoying.
