Early Sebastian Faulks novels convey a wonderful sense of time and place and ‘On Green Dolphin Street’ set in 1959, evokes perfectly the period of the later Cold War, the insidious investigations of the FBI, McCarthyism, U2 Spy Planes, the rise of JFK and his historic election victory of Nixon, Race Riots in Mississippi. This is a wonderful read - and for my money, this is easily Faulks' best novel – as, against this ground breaking backdrop he explores one of Life's most dangerous imponderables: should one stay true to one’s traditional upbringing and marital vows and live a restrained life not knowing what lies beyond the realms of respectability and convention, or surrender to one’s animal impulses and explore, dangerously, deviously and sensually an extra marital affair, and live life to the full no matter the consequences. But this is far more than a will she/ won’t she dilemma, as Faulks explores the essence of intimacy and attraction, need and dependency, and examines the explosive power of desire, and dangerous loss of self control. He captures vividly the emotional plight of two lost souls feverishly grasping opportunity and beginning an emotional journey that is life affirming but imbued with inevitable consequences that must be confronted. His characterization is faultless as the central characters, all flawed in their different ways, confront their future lives with the very real possibility of letting their last chance of happiness slip through their fingers. As Julie Myerson literature critic and author declared in The Observer, this book "is one of the most heart-shakingly accurate depictions of how it feels to be female and in love that I have ever read". Each character has their vulnerabilities, but their inner strengths are also well delineated. For the timorous Mary, 'Everything had come at once, the tenderness, desire, the sublime simplicity of happiness that depended only on his presence and his face, the fierce knowledge that told her it was him or nothing but the void. And that it should have come at this time in her life, when she had thought that such things were past.' Mary has been a 'good girl' and is now a dutiful diplomatic wife approaching middle age, when she experiences an unexpected sexual awakening that shocks her by its rapturous power and urgency. 'At this moment, for the first time in her life, she had experienced the transcendent combination of the fierce tenderness, such as she felt for Richard and Louisa (her young children) with the physical desire that had once before raged, many years ago, with David Oliver (her first lover) and which she had resigned herself never again to know. The simultaneous experience of the two feelings was not a simple addition of their respective effects; it felt to Mary as though the force was squared. She could not imagine how she was supposed to deal with it; but it felt like death - imperative, unavoidable, the only issue.' " The practicalities of what she had fallen into and the vocabulary for them - 'affair' and 'infidelity' - had seemed to her banal and inadequate; she had always believed the adventure of marriage was incomparably more interesting than the petty indulgence of betrayal " Frank Renzo reflects upon his time in New York, ' The city made him feel he could be many people, that in his middle thirties he was nowhere near the finished version of himself, and that even if he ever got there, that too might turn out to be provisional - not a stable compound of temperament and experience, but a bundle of momentary inclinations.' For Frank, also, an all consuming passion comes with a compelling immediacy like first love, ‘ When he first saw Mary standing in front of the table in her sitting room…he had the sense of already knowing her profoundly well. The way he then behaved…. Was unprecedented but that was inevitable as she had opened up in hima depth of anxiety and desire that he had previously never known, and a new fever demanded a new remedy.’ Mary, too, finds their all consuming passion so intense that separation leaves her bereft as with a bereavement, and she reflects upon the morality of her life-shaping dilemma, ‘ To have him, be with him, see him, be part of him, is a natural imperative, because in some way he is me, my inner self.’ "He raked his fingers through her hair, down to the skull, as his body filled hers. All the way, he thought, I will go all the way, till I find her; and with her head between his hands he too let out a cry, because he felt pity for her soul." ‘ As her thought became less coherent, she closed her eyes…. The deeper into sensation she went…the more it was like going into a room of utter darkness, which she felt was familiar from a time before her birth; it was something other or beyond; it was like death or very near it.’
