4.5 stars. Finally, after beginning this series back when I was in my teens, I have completed the Wicca/Sweep series! And honestly, I was so pleasantly surprised by this book, because it really grabbed a hold of me and made me feel ALL OF THE FEELS . This book takes place around 20 years after the previous installment, and follows a now adult Morgan who is living in Ireland with her daughter Moira. She has gone through some absolutely horrible and tragic events in her life up until that point, and just at the point where she is feeling safe, her home and family are threatened once again as they were when she was a teenager in America. The book is told from alternating perspectives as many of the books in the series are, this time going between adult Morgan and her 15 year old daughter Moira. Moira's life is beginning to mirror Morgan's own teen years, and this scares the hell out of her. This book had it all - it was about twice the length of the other books in the series, which usually sit around 190 pages each. It not only had a whole host of new characters, but beloved characters from the series returned, namely Sky and Killian. And I couldn't believe how emotional I got while reading this: I was struggling to hold back tears (and was pretty unsuccessful tbh) for a lot of the first half of the book, and I could feel my heart hurting along with Morgan's for everything that had happened to hear and everything that was happening now. I felt that Tiernan also did a much better job of balancing the pacing of this book, and the extra pages definitely helped in this. There was a lot of emotion as I said, but also a lot of action, and none of it felt rushed. Now let's be honest, in terms of the quality of writing of this book, it's probably more of a 4 (it's a YA series after all, not a wondrous example of english literature), but it deserves a 4.5 star rating for me, not only due to how much I enjoyed it, but also because of how emotionally tied I am to this series as a whole. It won't be for everyone (particularly if you don't have a nostalgic connection of having read most of it as a teen like I did), but it is for sure a series I will continue to return to throughout my life, again and again. A wonderful ending, if I do say so myself.
