This has sat on my Goodreads TBR for almost thirteen years, probably because I sensed that it's the kind of book I would find different and clever more than good and enjoyable. And, while it ended up being a bit more readable than I expected, my misgivings were exactly right. The French Lieutenant’s Woman was published in 1969 and features a contemporary narrator reflecting on an affair from a century prior, examining the social mores that shaped and constrained it. The hundred years between the 1860s and 1960s saw an astronomical change in the sociopolitical status of women, and Fowles brings the view of a 20th century narrator into the then-scandalous romance between a betrothed gentlemen and the disgraced Sarah Woodruff. Fowles paints Sarah as spirited and emotionally intelligent in a way that makes her especially stifled in Victorian England. Charles himself does not think women have the complex interiority of men and is shocked when Sarah challenges him, noting, quite aghast: Sarah seemed almost to assume some sort of equality of intellect with him; and in precisely the circumstances where she should have been most deferential if she wished to encompass her end. I did not find it an especially romantic book, perhaps because it was impossible as a modern woman for me to truly warm to Charles, but it was compelling when the two of them were on page and it was especially enjoyable to watch Sarah shatter his beliefs. In fact, the book noticeably slows when Sarah is not on page. There are a million narratorial asides that have nothing to do with the romance as such, and they drain the already limited emotional tension. There is far too much drag about Darwin, politics, philosophy and palaeontology (this is intentional as evolution of ideas is a major theme— indeed, the entire point of reflecting on an era from a century later). This is key to existentialism, which is the core theme of the novel, with the ending offering up something of an existentialist experiment. Existentialism rejects predetermined purpose, and this is mirrored in the way the rise of Darwinist ideas rejected divine direction and, later, feminism rejected immutable gender roles. Fowles wants us to see that all these ideas, roles and beliefs are not rooted in any kind of natural law; they are subject to change and shaped by both chance and choice. As I said, interesting, especially with regard to exploring female agency in a Victorian setting with the benefit of a century of hindsight shaped by women’s rights, but not a book where the characters or plot points will stick with me.
