I'm doing a chronological read along with my partner, and maybe I'm doing them a disservice because I've already read some of the books in publication order and they haven't (and it is suggested to read in publication order). I just felt like I really wanted to do this chronologically. It'll be fine, probably. We're using this list: https://www.howtoread.me/dragonriders... Reading complete 2/17/22: "The Survey: P. E. R. N. c" Honestly, I was a little scared to go back and read these. (Well, it is the first time for this particular short story, but you know what I mean.) The last time I read an Anne McCaffrey book I think was around 2003-ish. That's pre-goodreads for me. There was no reason to be scared though. This story is just how I remember Anne McCaffrey to be. And I still don't understand all the science stuff. Ha! But I love that she tries to explain it, and the characters and their interactions were interesting to me. Insert Dragonsdawn - https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... Reading complete 7/21/2022: "The Dolphins' Bell" This story seems to be just expanding on what happened previously with the exit from Landing and the dolphins in Dragonsdawn . I will say it has been a different experience reading the events from the other side. I think I just took the destruction from the storm in stride while reading Dragonsdawn because I was more interested in the what was going on with the dragons, but the frustration of the crew is really coming through, and the dolphins are so cute. I found it interesting that the bell came back into play in the end, but not as I expected it would. It does seem weird to me that Jim keeps trying to compare their current situations to Old Earth mostly European history from the 1900's. It's pretty random and that's gotta be how far in the past for them? Thousands of years? Also, just how husky is Theo's voice? Just kidding! Good for them. They're a sweet couple. I am noticing that Anne McCaffrey may have a thing for much older men, though. Reading complete 8/10/2022: "The Ford of Red Hanrahan" Mmmm, I have some ethical concerns with setting up lordships for a select few. For coming from an advanced society, you'd think they'd know how that will end. Jim apparently knows a lot about old Earth ancient history. He'll tell you. Also, doesn't it feel like most people barely give a shit about Alianne, and only care about the gold dragon. Everyone seemed so callous to me concerning that. And poor Sorka couldn't even get a single word in, despite being directly asked a question. Not one single word. There's also this part where Paul and Red are so congratulatory of themselves for including multiple ethnicities in the move that seemed questionable to me. I mean, diversity is good obviously but the dialogue gave me the bad cringe. It actually made me think of how in "The Dolphins' Bell" when Ika adapted coolie hats to protect people from the fall, they were all saying, "Yay, you! You found an ethnic solution! Isn't it great that we have ethnic people in our group!" I think what I'm trying to say is that there's a big show for how diverse the cast is, but it's really only tokenism since the main characters are still all white. Not my favorite. Reading complete 9/3/2022: "The Second Weyr" This story is freaking Sean propaganda. He's so perfect and always makes correct decisions. He - all by himself - created everything dragonrider related. Sounds like a cult. Especially when he's talking about how sexy Torene is and calling Sorka "Woman" and making her get him a towel. Get your own towel! And don't discuss the figures of your charges! You nasty! And we've got more "charming" sexual harassment in this one, this time from F'mar. I do love all the excitement of starting the new weyrs though and Torene really is awesome. She knows what she wants and is going for it. Though, I don't know why there's all this pretense of choosing by lottery and the first random queen to go into heat. I felt that diminished Torene's authority because now she is Weyrwoman by random chance as opposed to because she is a great leader. Everyone knows Alaranth is going into heat next anyway, so just say Torene is going to be Weyrwoman. The queen's flight was very intense and well written as well. The psychic connection between Torene and Alaranth is a thing of beauty, and when Alaranth is caught it feels really surprising. Alternatively, the human sex part of it was not as enjoyable. There was this big to-do about how difficult it was because Torene was a virgin. Also, how did they end up in a private spot when they were previously out watching the dragons? Yea, I just needed more from that. They were really sweet at the end though. Reading complete 10/15/2022: "Rescue Run" This was 100% not what I was expecting the last story to be. And not necessarily in a bad way. It was such a surprising premise and was so intense between Kimmer's politically strained incestuous commune and will they find the other settlers and will they die in space?! The end did fall flat for me as it rushed to wrap up the story though. Welp, Kimmer killed himself (probably) and we made it to the ship. The end. Next: Dragonseye - https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...
