Update after reading The Werewolf Principle : I thought A Heritage of Stars was bad but I had to give it another star because TWP was truly bad and much worse than AHOS. Original review: I am SOOOOOO disappointed. This was my Simak year - his books were finally converted over to e-book format and I had been looking forward to reading them for years. It all started so well. I thought City was great. So too was Way Station . This was my third and was hardly worth wasting the time to read it. I have all kinds of problems with this story: It takes place 1000+ years from now. People are scratching out an existence on a world much different than what we live in now. The planet and it's creatures are the same but we humans are not. Sometime about a thousand years prior, humans began destroying all machines..ALL of them. They called this The Collapse but we never found out why it happened. Simak's view on humans seems to be that we cannot survive well without machines so they aren't very many of us left. All buildings and houses have been either destroyed or are in a state of disrepair. Apparently without machines, we are incapable of maintaining or creating structures to live in. People also somehow reverted back to barbarism. One of the central characters is a robot that escaped being destroyed during The Collapse. If Simak hadn't told me he was a robot, I never would have guessed. He didn't speak, act, think or anything else like a machine should. He had a bad memory and got lonely, murders bears, and likes to go on long walks exploring. All the women were described as hags. Without machines, it seems the women of our species just fall apart. The small group of people we are following came upon two members of an alien species described as being 6 foot tall spheres covered with eyes. Even though they are living with no technology, most like barbarians, they weren't scared of this at all. They walked right up to them and started a discussion. I'll stop here. I could tear this book apart chapter by chapter but I won't. These were just the first few things that popped into my head. Overall, it was unbelievable, ridiculous, and generally a very bad story. NOT recommended for anyone
