Welcome to the elegance of tea-ism. Weaving beauty with simplicity, I have much to learn from Japanese culture. Everything they do is done with such precision. I first fell in love with tea ceremony as a child watching "Alice and Wonder Land", then my love was evoked again in high school when I read "Memoirs of A Geisha" by Arthur Golden. (It's still my favorite book of all time, to this date!) I then found other books on reading tea leaves and using herbs to heal from Chronic Lyme Disease naturally, so ya, you could say I'm INTO tea. In my herbalist certification class, we were told to "sip tea as if it were life itself." And I have ever since. It's similar to the yogic thought process use what you've learned on the mat and live it off the mat, extending it out onto the rest of your life. Same, same but different. I should mention that this title has NO RECIPES in it. It is more about Eastern (Japanese) culture, a history of tea, explanations of elegance and simplicity within tea ceremony, merging yin and yang, and getting the West and East to understand one another. Not only did I find the tea tools lost throughout ancient history to be most fascinating, but the part on Flower Masters was not something I was expecting to be included. It was an added grace of decadence and a free feng shui lesson! (Another topic of interest to me.) A few of my favorite quotes from the text: "Tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage." "Tea was Taoism in disguise." "Matcha- froth of the liquid jade." I am thankful to the community of volunteers who published these works after the author's passing. I've added many of his other titles to my list! For other snippets I found interesting, you can see my highlights and notes on Goodreads. I highlighted close to 50-some passages. I downloaded this e-book while it was free on Amazon. I was under no obligation to write a review, my honest opinion is freely given. #AmazonAffiliate I have added the hardback to my Amazon shop: https://www.amazon.com/dp/0804800693?... OR you can see if the e-book is still free, available for download. Happy reading! See the top books I've enjoyed @ www.amazon.com/shop/itsblee1234
