Wow. Just wow. This was my first ever Danielle Steel novel. I had no expectations. Well, that’s not exactly true. I thought she would be a grocery store romance writer. You know, the kind of writer whose books you find in the grocery store checkout lane, conveniently within reach of the tired mom with two kids and a failing marriage? Not to say that those books are bad, of course. They’re just not books you would expect to change the world of literature. I’m starting this review with two major complaints. 1) Why in the world did she spell clone with a k instead of a c? Here’s my line of thought about this: in the beginning, Danielle used the word clone. When Paul Klone was introduced, she started spelling “clone” with a k. Then it was spelled like that for the rest of the book. It was funny to me, as every time I would see phrases like, “I’m having an affair with a Klone!” It would sound like she was sleeping with a rival, not a clone of Peter. 2) THE FIXATION WITH STEPHANIE SHAVING HER LEGS WAS WEIRD, OKAY? It was like she couldn’t go two pages without mentioning it! It was the reason Stephanie’s marriage failed (according to her) It was the reason she couldn’t get dates. It was the reason her kids hated her. In one part of the book, Paul offers to shave Steph’s legs for her! It was weird! Let’s move on, shall we? This entire reading experience was very weird. I got fan fiction vibes the entire time. That’s what reading this book felt like. Reading a well edited fan fiction written by a fifty year old. In spite of this fact, or perhaps because of it, some of the writing made me laugh out loud. When Steph and Paul are lying in bed, talking about getting married, and Steph said that they couldn’t “because of the social stigma of anyone found out” I laughed so hard I cried. Some Other Complaints: - Steph was an unlikeable main character. She was picky, and rude, and selfish. She doesn’t know what she wants, so she takes it out on everyone else. - What time period did this take place in? It felt like a blend of the 70s and early 2000s. Not a good combo. - The ending was predictable. I knew Peter was masquerading as Paul the second he stepped in that front door. - What was with all of the double flips during “private time”? I was so confused by that. This book was very confusing and cringey. Read at you own risk. But, I did learn a very important lesson from this book and that is this: Danielle Steel really hates it when women don’t shave their legs.
