A curiously compelling read by Hodge on many different levels. Deathgrip tells the story of Paul, a DJ in St. Louis, but it is much more than that. The story starts off in ancient Sumaria-- the world's first empire-- through the eyes of a priest of one of the many gods there. Four people are lead out of the city gates to be chained to the outer wall as sacrifices (scapegoats) to appease the gods. Yet, it seems the gods have an odd sense of humor or spite. After a horrific sandstorm, the priest goes out to check on the four and finds them unblemished; leading the crowd, he demands they leave forever, outcasts. Something happened to the four, giving them the gift of both healing and its opposite. Although we are never sure how, the 'gift' is passed on to others when they die. What does this have to do with a DJ in St. Louis? We eventually get there! Deathgrip has two narrative threads-- one being Paul the DJ and one chronicling the four gifted ones though history. Hodge really has done his homework here, especially regarding the crusades. While we follow the day to day life of Paul, we often switch back to the historical account. During the second crusade, some English knights found four people in the basement of a castle they stormed. Try as they might, the knights could not kill them, and eventually brought them back to England. After an exchange with the Pope, a new, secret order was formed to keep track of the four, who were allowed to go free. Very early on in the book, one of the four (in 1963) fled his keepers and jumped in front of a train. Who got the gift? The secret order has been looking for almost three decades. Clearly, Paul is the 'lost' gifted one, but he never knew it. One day, clowning around at the station, he laid hands on a fellow DJ to cure him of his cold, and by golly it worked! Paul experiments with his gift and finds he can kill as easily as he can heal. Beset by angst, Paul seeks out a faith healer along the lines of Swaggart-- maybe he can help him with his gift... I opened with curiously compelling because this novel is a real slow burn with detailed character development. Hodge's fiction is definitely character driven and often shows a just a detailed probing into the human condition. Laced with philosophy and history, Deathgrip gives the reader more of an intellectual workout then you would expect from genre fiction to be sure. Hume, Spinoza, Hegel all find their way into the novel! My biggest complaint is that this could use some serious editing as it is a long read. 3.5 stars, rounding up.
