I’ve only read one of Brin’s SF books, but I was drawn to this one because its thesis makes a lot of sense to me. I’ve often thought that secrecy is too close to deception for comfort, and that in order to promote truthfulness, the goal should be a world of complete openness. It may have an air of utopia about it, but then, why not aim for utopia, and if we fall short, we still end up with a better society than we otherwise would have. Brin is familiar with the ideas of the extreme privacy advocates, and he sympathizes with their goals to some extent, but finds the implementation to be likely to be unworkable. He points out that “The aim of this book is not to demolish “opponents” or to prove that candor is always superior. (There are no Platonic essences, and even a good idea is wrong some of the time.)” (p. 181) Anyway, to me the key point is this: “If one kind of data acquisition is made illegal, you can be certain that someone will be doing it anyway on the sly, and possibly turning its dissemination into yet another highly profitable criminal enterprise, one that must be policed by yet another bureaucracy.” (p. 80) And this leads to another important point: even if secrecy and anonymity become absolute rights for everyone, the rich and powerful will be much better at it than the average citizen, so they will still have the means to keep their data private while gaining access to the data of others. The government is not the only source of intrusive overreach; if we successfully shut down the ability of governments to access our data, it will still be possible for corporations and organized crime to do so, and we will have crippled the government’s ability to help us respond to the crimes and abuses. Considering this book is from 1995, some of Brin’s proposals are prescient; for example, the idea that “each reader or recipient [of a web link] may add a brief comment, perhaps a succinct plus or minus, signifying “thumbs up” or “thumbs down.” (p. 260) Of course this now exists, but the optimistic faith in human nature that expects this system to elevate only the good and true above the malicious and nonsensical has been shown to be sadly misplaced. Information overload, which Brin calls “data smog” (p. 299) also already exists in today’s web. His predicted solution, software agents that “clean up” outdated or unwanted material, has not solved the problem, because much of the junk that’s out there is intentionally put there to get advertising money. Then there’s his prediction of police bodycams, obviously relevant today: “What if it were possible to have a fair witness next to every police officer in the world? Perhaps by equipping a police helmet with camcorder, plus chips to track an officer’s location and even record his or her bodily movements.” (p. 159) This observation from 1990 seems almost quaint today: “Race relations in several American cities have been harmed by rogue officers who use their badges to mask brutality.” (p. 159) Brin also discusses the “militia culture” of the US and its tendency toward conspiracy theory, and he says: “... some of the most imaginative and self-righteous might actually convince themselves that they live under tyranny, instead of the mildest and most tolerant continental-scale culture the world has ever seen.” (p. 141) On the other hand, there’s also some dated material, including terminology that never took off, such as “netizens” (p. 13) and “netters” (p. 167). He mentions “Service providers such as America Online and Prodigy....” (p. 96), and says that “The Creative Incentive Coalition (CIC) is a powerful trade group whose membership roster reads like a Who’s Who of “content providing” giants, including Microsoft, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Association of American Publishers, and the Software Publishers’ Association.” (p. 96) - but I found no online references to this group after 1998. The potential ubiquity of surveillance is brought up numerous times, as in the possibility that everyone be “armed” with a camera at all times (p. 256), and the proposal for increased use of neighborhood cameras (p. 258). Both of these ideas are indeed coming true, and no doubt there have been positive results. The problems I see with these ideas are the issue of responsibility - whose job it is to actually capture and monitor the multitude of video feeds - and the issue of verification - while Brin mentions the advent of photographic deception (now called deep fakes or synthetic media), he doesn’t explore the difficulty of deciding which videos to trust. On the role of government, in particular Brin is right to have high expectations: we should not have to choose between freedom and order; a society can be constructed to allow both - it just takes some effort. He acknowledges that not all entities in the world will be on board with his ideas at the same time, pointing out that “The open society may ultimately be a far better game for humanity, but it can be difficult to manage when the other side insists on playing by older rules.” (p. 321) In the end, I find his argument fairly convincing, and he concludes that “My main task was contrarian—to criticize too much attention being paid to an appealing but wrongheaded mythology: that you can enduringly protect freedom, personal safety, and even privacy by preventing other people from knowing things. A fallacy no more true because it is believed all across the political spectrum. And yet, I realize the opposite notion, transparency, could be just as bad, if taken to extremes, or if applied unevenly or too soon. We need to study how it has worked at fostering the three greatest, most successful endeavors of humanity: science, free markets, and democracy.” (p. 331) These aren’t even all of the interesting, rational, and provocative statements in this book - the fact that I included so many in this review shows just how quotable it is, and I hope advocates of strong privacy are carefully considering its thoughtful arguments. I can’t say it was exactly enjoyable to read, although Brin is a fine writer; possibly because I found the tone a bit too insistent, while the subject matter was less compelling than it should have been, which probably says more about the reader than the writer. And a minor point: the electronic copy that I read was filled with numerous typos that come from optical scanning errors. But I’m glad to have read it, and I do recommend it for anyone with an interest in the topic.
