3.5/5 STARS About : What is it like to be an intellectual? How about a Christian intellectual? That’s the premise of this nonfiction read. My Thoughts : The most useful thing for me about this book is that it describes the kind of person who will do well as an intellectual. (Or, if you’re a Christian, the person who is called by God to become an intellectual.) Sire marks the difference between having intelligence and being an intellectual. I’m kicking myself for not taking down that quote, but basically it means this: Being intelligent means seeking knowledge for what it can help you do; being an intellectual means examining ideas for the sake of the ideas themselves. Reading this, I knew immediately that I would fit better in the former camp—which is exactly what I picked up this book to discover. I prefer to read things that are of immediate use to me; I want to be intelligent in my field (which will hopefully be writing genre fiction, one day), but I’ll never be an intellectual. I ended up skimming a lot, after the preface and first chapter (although I also enjoyed the chapter “how thinking feels”) because I found it was not relevant to my life after the above revelation. But other readers might find other chapters to be extremely relevant and helpful, such as the one about “Thinking by Reading.” As an English major, I already do that, but it was a nice refresher—especially the section about reading with an attention to the worldview of the author. Other Ideas That Stood Out : “All intellectuals are in love with ideas; not all intellectuals are in love with truth. Some whom I am willing to call intellectuals do not even believe there is a truth of any substantial kind.“ Basically, he says (and I agree) that Christian intellectuals should develop a love of truth, as our worldview clearly necessitates the existence of absolute truth. I found his breakdown of the intellectual virtues stimulating. For example, he discusses courage at length, and here’s a quote I loved: “Courage is also needed if you discover something new or culturally different, something that proves odd to others but true to you. The problem is greater yet when what you come to think of as true is seen not just odd but ‘heretical’ within your own ‘cognitive community.’“ He talks about how it can be difficult to lose friends, this way; but you find new ones! Learning about Lectio Divinia was of major interest, to me, as well. It’s a multi-technique method of deep-soaking in the Bible that I had not come across before. I usually study the Bible, but Lectio Divinia is less about thinking and more about absorbing. He warns us not to do this with other books, as we must allow our “thinking to direct our reading,” in those cases. “We read not just to listen to what others say and to discern what others think; we read to learn the truth, do you know and participate in the reality God has created, not the reality only imagine by others.“ The Bible is the truth; other books are the human’s picture of the truth. On that note, the section on “reading worldviewishly” is extremely helpful for anyone looking to pay attention to the way an author thinks. I think I’ll end this review & summary with the happiest quote of the book, for book lovers worried about all those books they’ll never get to: “Ah! But there’s a heaven! Heaven will be a place that fulfills my longest longings. Either I will have time to read all the books that I have not read before or I will receive something even better.” Overall : I probably won’t read anything else by this author because I’ve hardly broken the surface of the Christian intellectual scene and have a huge booklist as is; but this book told me exactly what I needed to know about myself, and for that I’m very grateful.
