Not shown; another half-star. Am mindful, when reading Updike, of field trips to Chicago's art museums, their impressionists collections. Masterpieces all. The suggestion of a captured glimmering moment from another time down to the merest pigmented brushstroke. None so much as wasted. Essential elements, illuminatingly layered in hyper-realized perfection. Such is Updike's palette, his deftly rendered prose which is worthy of pause, if only to reflect on what a rare, visual art form the written word can become. Secondarily, the reader is invited to process Ben's story (and Updike's own) perhaps after the fact. Stepping back from an immediate sense of awe for his eloquence to call to mind the meaning of the randomized shifts in his narrative and their significance. Our preoccupation with a relationship with his current wife has her mysteriously vanish begetting another spontaneously with a prostitute. Showing off for his son's skinny redhaired wife, he backs carelessly into the garage damaging his Subaru; cut away to another tangent about the origin of the species--a National Geographic (?) article on Neandert(h)al man. He's urinating, cut away to interactive particle physics phenomena about protons. He's also an avid reader of Scientific American. He's rummaging in the attic with his prostitute lust-interest of the moment. Fly off then and back in ancient history on another non-sequitor about Egyptian grave robbers. National Geographic, again? Though no references there to be found, I'm certain, of suffocating closeness in the tomb where one smells his partner-in-crime's "uncircumcised sex." Easter prompts him to go from an emergent budding garden report to a researched encyclopedic biblical visitation on St. Paul, Christ, christology, and crisis theology. Updike's due dilligence is on display as he drills down and holds absolute sway over his embedded literary classroom. Despite his formidable Ivy League intelligence, Updike's not an insufferable bore. Never...well, almost...resurrected perpetually by his endearing sense of humor. The result of, and my own reaction to, this fictionalized journal in the first person pursuing an arbitrary stream of consciousness is contrarily mixed. His passages, at their best, recall perfected Thoreaunian influences (similarly inspired by Massachusetts nativity) of Walden Pond merging Godliness and Nature with the definitude of scientific observation, then leveraging a transcendental, pastoral license (his surrounding opulent forested acreage on ocean beachfront with elaborate gardens--yields details down to microscopic granularity of flora and fauna) that is jointly poetically imbued and metaphorically vivid. The book after-all equates his life with the passing of the seasons. At Updike's worst, he fetishizes in lurid detail (as may be autobiographically discomforting) indulging rude sexual fantasies about women, shamelessly objectifying even those of adolescent age who he has his way with. His libido manifests itself rather grotesquely as he pathetically overcompensates for his lost youth dreading, at 67, his inevitable mortality. The narrative all too frequently devolves into a lecherous wallowing of odors, tastes, sounds, sensations, textures, anatomical fixations pornographically contextualized describing genitalia and various acts (imagined and experienced) with their attendant excretions and exchanges of body fluids. To such a gratuitous degree that Updike's usual high-standard for literary achievement is regrettably diminished. Perpetrations forced upon the reader disgustingly for shock-effect, or self-deprecatingly for humorous effect, or for what ever reason--who knows?--maybe if only to offer up a semblance to his contemporaries like the pervy Roth. Explains, no doubt, his reduced stature given a rating of three-stars made higher by only a fraction of another. One pet peeve that stood out for me was his deliberate, repeated grammatical violation of using "I" instead of "me" for the objective form. So totally affected and pretentious. And disruptive. Can understand the confusion attributed to the preferred usage "who" vs. "whom" (equally pretentious to the detriment of posers who/whom don't know better). His editors stepped aside, took their cut, and wrote it off--Updike being Updike--to a token stylistic preference. In the final analysis, Updike's 47th book is entertaining to the last and in every bit reflects his genius. Every bit. And that's saying a lot at 65. As Margaret Atwood so aptly coined in her NYT review of the book: "It is deplorably good."
