The protagonist of Jalamanta , Amado, has returned to his home after a 30-year exile in the desert, where he was dispatched by the authorities for promoting heresy. Now, reinforced by his exile, he has taken to preaching a gospel of love in which he proclaims that we can all become God. It is light that illumines us and works the transformation. The authorities are no less amenable to his views now than 30 years before, and, in the end, he is arrested and will certainly be condemned to death. The majority of the book is devoted to Jalamanta's talks with a crowd that gathers around him to hear his wisdom. Some are convinced, others are skeptical, and he faces the jealousy of Iago, once a friend, who fell in love with Fatimah, the woman Jalamanta loves and who loves him. In the end he betrays Jalamanta, in an act reminiscent of Judas's betrayal of Jesus. The theology that Jalamanta espouses reminds me with much of Manicheaism. That religion, named after its founder, asserted that we all contain particles of light which yearn to be reunited with the light of the universe--very much Jalamanta's ideas. (I have no idea whether Anaya conscious adopted Manichaean principles for the book.) Jalamanta's speeches can become rather tedious--they are preachy, and don't do anything to advance the plot; rather, they are instruments for Anaya to expound a generous, loving view of the way he'd like us to live. Once appealing aspect, and very different from Manichaeism, is the embrace of physical love as a positive good. In that respect Jalamanta represents a refreshing view of human nature--though he also insists that such love must be linked to the communion of souls. (Not a bad thing!) I suspect plenty of readers will tire of the long passages in which Jalamanta explains his theology. I had to put the book aside after reading about half precisely because I got tired of them myself. (They can be repetitious, too.) But it's an interesting departure from much of Anaya's work and worth the time--it's quite short--for its insight into his hopes and dreams for a better world, even if, in the end, the forces of oppression, authority, autocracy, and cruelty win out (perhaps an unintentional message about what we face now in America).
