Since just about every publishing house worth its salt seems to have released a ‘Best of O Henry’ collection, I had better clarify: this is my review of Juggernaut’s The Best of O Henry: Collected Stories , a collection of twelve short stories by O Henry. This set starts off with what are arguably his most popular stories, The Last Leaf and The Gift of the Magi , and go on to some lesser-known ones, such as Witches’ Loaves, The Passing of Black Eagle and On Behalf of the Management . These are a fairly varied lot of stories, ranging from the pathos of something like The Last Leaf and Two Thanksgiving Day Gentlemen to the heart-warming A Retrieved Reformation to the sheer hilarity of The Ransom of Red Chief (which, in its way, reminded me a little of PG Wodehouse’s stories of the ‘Little Nugget’). Witches’ Loaves too has some of that laugh-out-loud element, but right at the very end; and it’s there, in a subtler way in The Passing of Black Eagle . Besides the most famous standout point of O Henry’s stories—their surprise endings—what I also found very interesting about this collection was the very real role played by the city. Barring a couple of stories set elsewhere, all the stories are in New York City. And how well O Henry brings the city to life: its artists, its criminals, its cops, its small businesses. Its tycoons, its upstarts, its managers. The way a complete stranger can bestow a kindness, year after year; and the way friends separated for twenty years can come together in unexpected ways. I liked most of the stories in this collection; the only ones I found a bit tedious were The Pride of the Cities, Man About Town and On Behalf of the Management . On their own, these aren’t bad. Compared to the shorter, crisper stories in the collection, they begin to appear a bit forced after some reading, since all three of them have some element of repetitiveness and comparatively little ‘action’, so to speak. A great little collection on the whole though, and excellent for a quick read. (Also, it’s free on the Juggernaut app: bonus!)
