A couple of weeks ago I was watching a session of the Joint Economic Comitee where Ben Bernanke (Chairman of the Fed. Reserve Board) was being grilled by Sen. Charles Schumer. Schumer: It’s clear to me, and many experts agree, that China’s policy of keeping its currency pegged to the U.S. dollar helps to perpetrate the imbalances in the global economy by subsidizing even more Chinese exports at the cost of increasing American — increasing American exports. It makes us too much of a consumption country, and China too much of an exporting country and not enough of a consumption country. ... So if China appreciated its currency and moved to the free- floating exchange rate, it would do more for jobs here in the U.S. than any single stimulus program we could pass into law. MR. BERNANKE: Yes, I broadly agree with that. I think the — most economists agree that their currency is undervalued and has been used to promote a more export-oriented economy. I think it would be good for the Chinese to allow more flexibility in their exchange rate. It would give them more autonomy in their monetary policy so they could address inflation and bubbles within their own economy. And I think that they should combine — it would be in their interests also to combine a more flexible exchange rate with other efforts to increase domestic demand, domestic consumption and achieve a more balanced economy. SEN. SCHUMER: Okay, now why do you think — if it’s in China’s interests to do it, why don’t they do it? At this point an almost imperceptible smile creeps up on Mr. Bernanke's face and right at that moment I'm sure we are both thinking the same thing- Because it is not really in China's interests at all to revalue its currency, it will not benefit the Chinese economy, and most importantly its not reasonable to expect the Chinise to take into consideration what benefits the american economy whilst making policy decisions. This is a master class in Doublethink and self deception. In this case you see Schumer equating America's interests to China's and going on to argue that the chinise must therefore be asinine to not advance a policy that benefits America - it's a no brainer....or is it? Let's not forget that China is the fastest-growing major economy in the world, and has had the fastest growing major economy for the past 30 years with an average annual GDP growth rate of over 10%. Last year, in the midst of a global recession China's GDP grew by over 11%. You could argue that from China's point of view it's doing everything right and should continue pegging it's currency to the dollar. To be honest -in the words of the author - 'who gives a shit?' if Americans are stealing their own elections, illegally removing African Americans of the registered voters list, removing regulations aimed at protecting consumers then charging up to 300% on electricity in states like Florida, and are unwilling to investigate the Bin Laden family's business deals with the Bush family? But that was just the starter, as soon as Greg Palast moves his narrative on to the World Bank/IMF in South America and Africa I am seriously pissed off. The level of deception perpetuated by these global money launderers has always been my one soft spot and Greg Palast wasted no time in exposing the truth. I will not cheapen his book by trying to summarize the economic policies of the World Bank/IMF/WTO/IAB, it's Poverty Reduction Strategy, Country Assistance Strategy and it's Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). All in all the World Bank/IMF and it's subsidiaries condemn people to death and take over governments without firing a single bullet. This is modern day colonialism. Please open wide and swallow the economic medicine, it will definitely kill your economy. Back to the comitee meeting, Sen. Schumer is a reasonably smart man, why would he assume that China would revalue it's currency during a global recovery at the expense of its exports? Why, because the U.S, just like western Europe always assumes that there is only one correct perspective and forgets that other nations have their own national interests. This book asks you to question the motives behind foreign policy and the absolute hypocrisy of Globolization. Greg Palast is really good at what he does. This is what investigative reporting looks like - follow the paper trail all the way to the end and then keep going. It's unfortunate I didn't read it when it was published in 2002. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
