This is the third biographical treatment of William Blake that I've read, though both of the other two weren't biographies per se, but were a mixture of biography and critique (Swinburne's William Blake: A Critical Essay and William Blake by Kathleen Raine.) Peter Ackroyd's Blake , while more detailed, does not veer much from the narrative established by the other two (though it is nowhere near the hagiography that Swinburne's is.) It's difficult to rate a biography like this, I think, unless one has extensive knowledge already of the subject matter, and if you did, why would you need to read another biography? I don't have the background to say whether or not this is a definitive work--I think it gets the job done. But when I think of masterful biographies, I always turn back to Robert A. Caro's work on Lyndon Johnson. Sure--five volumes allows you to throw everything in there but the kitchen sink, but Caro gives you not only the man, but his society, and his man in that society. Perhaps that's too much to ask if your subject is William Blake--we don't go to Blake to learn about 18th-19th century London, whereas a man like Johnson is inextricably linked to his times. Blake is so singular that he seems to exist outside his time; so approaching his biography as one might approach, say, Dickens (as Ackroyd has also done) would probably be a mistake. What's left then? I don't want to sound too discouraging--I liked this biography, but I don't know if there's much here that is going to stick in my mind after a few weeks or months, other than some of the broad facts of Blake's life. While knowing the details of his life does provide a few clues when approaching his more difficult works, it was his belief system that is really the key. Here, again, I think Ackroyd does a competent job expressing some of that, enough anyway that I thought it was worthwhile at this point in my Blake studies to read it. But I am skeptical that anyone who has read some of the more in-depth critical studies of Blake's work will find much that's new.
