Have you ever wondered what was out in the woods late at night? Do you live near the pines and know the mournful sound of the wind slipping through those trees as well as the sound of your own breath? Have you ever been to the Pine Barrens or read about the Jersey Devil and all of its other haunts? Well then, you’re going to enjoy this book! In The Pines we’re taken to the legendary New Jersey Pine Barrens and shown all of their iconic creepiness along with the harsh realities of a rural community dominated by crime, incest, murder and isolation. This is no ordinary rural community, here things grow stranger; mutations dominate the trees and land as much as they do the humans and livestock. Nothing is quite as it should be and the longer you stay the eerier it grows. Athena lives there with her son Matthew. A member of a ragtag ambulance crew struggling to help a community of distrustful ‘pineys’, she keeps her personal life and her tragic past to herself. Living in the dilapidated family home of her deceased husband and enduring the resentment of the locals, her life is one dominated by fear and anxiety. As each day takes her closer and closer to the end of her rope she can feel something coming, something that will change life for her and Matthew as it has for the residents of the barrens over and over again since man came to dwell there. One by one people are disappearing again, the heat and intensity of that place building and building as the Devil returns to the pines. I thoroughly enjoyed reading The Pines! The intensity, action and atmosphere of this novel are wonderfully well developed and the characters are very complex. I was reminded of many classic films and great horror novels which really knew how to draw out the story and develop the tone needed to pull off a good story. The work that Dunbar puts in here goes to great use. Having done a great deal of research on the Pine Barrens he’s able to set the scene and mentality of its residents very well while slipping in bits of piney lore and real life accounts from its past. We come away from the novel feeling as if we really visited it and experienced life there. I also liked his take on the Jersey Devil and its origins (I won’t go into this here as I don’t want to ruin one of the really great parts of the novel) there are so many variations on the beast and what it has done over the years that its hard to tie it down and give it any kind of a linear past. Dunbar pulls it off and manages to give you something to consider. I recommend this novel to any horror fan that’s been looking for something really satisfying and consistent and of course anyone interested in the Jersey Devil or the Barrens.
