3.5 stars I will be honest with you friends, I've never been particularly interested in Scotland, as a seat of romance or adventure or otherwise. I'm probably the only period-drama addict who doesn't watch Outlander , and I've never really been into the whole ruggedly-handsome-kilted-Highlander thing either. I have, however, been interested in reading Scott for a while now, for mostly educational purposes and through a curiosity to read more of the popular literature of the Regency era. Also, Sir Walter Scott is credited by many with the first historical-fiction novel, and as an eternal historical fiction reader, well, that is interesting to me. Poor Scott would undoubtedly have still lay unread for many years to come had I not taken a 19th-century-British-novel class in university this year, in which one of the novels we studied happened to be Waverley . Often, there is no surer way to kill one's enjoyment of a novel than to be forced to read it for school. Sometimes, you're lucky enough to be studying one of your favourite books and are free to proclaim your love for it to anyone who might listen (like when we read Pride and Prejudice and I could unashamedly defend Mr. Bingley's honour). But rarely, very rarely (as in like, never), will you actually be thankful that the first time you read a novel was for a class because it actually helped you. Especially not for a 400+ page book that you somehow had to finish in less than two weeks, with barely enough time and energy to muster through the first few chapters. All the elements combined to turn reading Waverley a most unpleasant experience: forced reading for school, super-lengthy book, ENDLESS PAGES OF EXPOSITION AND DESCRIPTION, the most slow-going plot imaginable in all historyand no time to read. But…I actually quite enjoyed this book. I enjoyed it because it was interesting to read a novel that was so popular in the 19th century. I enjoyed it because a lot of the descriptions and passages were very beautiful. I enjoyed it because, deeply buried under the layers of prosy prose lay a very good plot and a sweet little romance. I enjoyed it because discussing it in class was actually fun, and made me so much more motivated to finish than if I’d been reading it on my own. I’m not sure I would have finished it otherwise, but I’m glad I did. It’s just important to be mentally prepared for a historiography and not a thriller.
