Designer Crimes by Lia Matera is the 5th book of the Laura DiPalma mystery series set in contemporary Northern California. Laura is struggling to keep her law office going. Her enemy Steve Sayres (at her former law firm) is poisoning clients against her. At wits' end, Laura visits an attorney to sue Sayres for slander. Suddenly a shooter enters the office, misses Laura, kills Jocelyn. Her dying whisper: "Designer Crimes". Laura flees back to Hillsdale in Northern California, the small town where she grew up. She co-owns a Victorian with her Uncle Henry, the mayor. But there is no rest or peace for Laura: an explosion and a huge fire destroy the town's only shopping mall, shortly after she arrives. She tries to find her client, Brad Rommel, a friend from high school charged with murder. Instead she finds a suspicious crime scene at his mountain cabin. Laura wrangles with another high school classmate, Jay Bartoli, a police detective. Each hopes the other will confide more than they should, for old times' sake. Back in San Francisco, Laura relies upon private investigator Sandy Arkelett. He and his hacker employee Osmil uncover intriguing information about the lawyers' office where Jocelyn died. But they still aren't sure who was the intended target, Jocelyn or Laura. Laura ping-pongs back and forth from Hillsdale to San Francisco. She takes far too much risk for a clandestine meeting with Brad; is almost killed. Jay and Brad are each jealous of Laura's attention to the other. Nonsense, since she now appreciates Sandy all over again (just hasn't told him yet). Odd events occur, and even odder evidence turns up (a bucket of blood in the yard). Laura can't make it all fit into a reasonable pattern. Then she wonders, what if that is the point? Lots of misleading clues to keep her from guessing the truth. The tension ratchets up with deadly confrontations. Sent off on a wild goose chase, Laura comes face to face with a killer aiming a gun at her, in the woods at night. But it's not the end yet...she will still have to fight for her life inside the courthouse. And solve the cryptic clue "Designer Crimes". A shame this is the last book of the series! Inquiring readers want to know...Will Laura thrive in her latest career change? Will she acknowledge how important Sandy is in her life - and tell him so?
