The cover art of this book shows a picture of a scared-looking little boy looking at his closet, while a very large monster-like creature peaks out of the closet at him. The color pallet throughout this book is very muted and calm, yet somehow created a weird tension as I looked at it. Maybe the tension came from the use of the lines that showed shadow all over the room, except where the little boy’s lamp is shining. Some of the illustrations are full-bleed, while others only utilize a small portion of the page. I first thought that the pages with a border of white space around them were the pages when the little boy felt the most venerable, but later in the book there is an opening with two illustrations like this, and it comes just after the boy shoots the nightmare and the nightmare began to cry. I am sure that the boy was not feeling scared at that point, so that shot down my initial thought. I still don’t know what exactly Mayer was trying to accomplish by framing those few pages, but I like that it adds variety to the look of the story. If it weren’t for those pages, the entire book would be seen from just one angle while we watch the story unfold in the boy’s room. I feel that the font is not as much fun as it is in other children’s books, and I’m not sure, but I wonder if the plain font is due to the age of the book. Maybe back in ’68 there weren’t fun fonts available. I really like the details in the illustrations in this book. Even though the poor boy’s room looked bare to me, I love that Mayer changed little things like which toys were left out from night to night, or even that the trash had different things in it on different nights. I feel like these details add to the reality of the illustrations, which already have a fairly high modality, in my opinion. An interesting thing to me was that the image zones seem to be askew a bit in this story. The nightmare is significantly taller than the boy, yet he is not the authority in the story: the boy is. The idea of the left side of the page being old and the right side being new is also a bit off. The nightmare comes from the left side, though he is not new. The boy’s bed is on the right side of the page, so he is almost always on that side of the illustrations. Again, I don’t know why Mayer did this, but I for some reason, feel that the story would be different if the boy was on the left side with the nightmare on the right. I feel like that would make me afraid that the nightmare would eat the kid or something, and I don’t think that a children’s book where the brave little boy tries to defeat the nightmare then gets eaten would sell very well.
