Another stellar composition from Carolyn Chute. Please (pleeeeeeeze) read this one. Each new entry in the Egypt, Maine series unfolds perfectly from the last, and Merry Men is the grand escalation AND culmination of it all, choosing to stride openly in both the sunlight and the shadow of an active extinction, a high tide, the churning cycle of life and decay. There has always been a sense that we’re reaching the end. I don’t want to hand the wheel directly over to recency bias. The end has been happening since the beginning, in overlapping currents, dilating outwards rather than progressing forwards, both static and in constant flux. The end is really many ends and many beginnings. But I will note that I see, now, that there’s been something swelling, some uncontrolled node of exponential growth spinning faster and faster. Maybe it’s no more or less than it always has been, but it’s starting to lodge itself into quite a noticeable position. Going to quote extensively from Kurt Vonnegut’s collection of essays and opinions that I, fortuitously, serendipitously, was reading at the same time: “People want lives in folk societies, wherein everyone is a friendly relative, and no act or object is without holiness. Chemicals make them want that. Chemicals make us all want that. Chemicals make us furious when we are treated as things rather than persons. When anything happens to us which would not happen to us in a folk society, our chemicals make us feel like fish out of water. Our chemicals demand that we get back into water again. If we become increasingly wild and preposterous in modern times — well, so do fish on river banks, for a little while. Our children often come to resemble apathetic fish — except that fish can't play guitars. And what do many of our children attempt to do? They attempt to form folk societies, which they call ‘communes.’ They fail. The generation gap is an argument between those who believe folk societies are still possible and those who know they aren't. Older persons form clubs and corporations and the like. Those who form them pretend to be interested in this or that narrow aspect of life. Members of the Lions Club pretend to be interested in the cure and prevention of diseases of the eye. They are in fact lonesome Neanderthals, obeying the First Law of Life, which is this: ‘Human beings become increasingly contented as they approach the simpleminded, brotherly conditions of a folk society.’”
