Love, love, love!! This novel was so cute ! Ah, I just want to give it and everyone in it a big hug! <3 False Colours seems to be one of those less popular Heyers, because I had rarely heard of it, knew nothing of what was going to happen, and generally did not know what to expect beyond twins switching places and family shenanigans. But it was all so much fun!! What a wonderful ride! I just loved the feels of this book: so sweet, soothing, heart-warming and gentle, all interlaced with Heyer's signature wit and humour. The family bonds were so strong and so touching, too! The Fancots were such a united family, wanting the best for each other and trying to out-kind the others, it was so sweet!! Every scene was basically: Lady Denville : Oh my goodness my sons are the best!! I feel SO sorry for all the other parents out there, who can't possibly have sons as awesome as mine! Ah, I am SO lucky! (No joke though, she really says that at some point) Kit : Aww, I missed you, Mama! *hugs* Let me help you with anything I can, even though I hate this masquerade of taking Evelyn's place! Evelyn : Mama!! *more hugs* Let me settle your debts! Let me help you! And Kester, thank you so much for helping me! Lady Denville : Oh, my sons!! I love you both EQUALLY! Let's have some QUAILS to celebrate the return of Evelyn! Kit : Eve, it's okay bro, I can handle Mama's debts! Evelyn : No, no! It's my responsibility! Kit : No, seriously, I got this! Lady Denville : Wait! I have a better idea, but let's not have quails after all. Evelyn : Oh, oh, Mama is wearing her mischievous face again! Kit : Oh by the way, Eve, sorry for falling in love with your fiancée. I know she's technically yours, so... Evelyn : Oh noooo! It's okay! You can have her :) Lady Denville : Ah, I LOVE MY SONS! GROUP HUUUUUG! *** Seriously, it's like that the whole time. They loved each other so much, and they were all so kind! Lady Denville seriously stole my heart though, she was the sweetest, most adorable Mama ever and she was such a crack-up! Still relatively young (she's 43), the widowed Lady Denville is incredibly beautiful, has an incredible amount of suitors dangling after her, spends an incredible amount of money, and has an incredible amount of debts. True, she is also incredibly silly, and she's not terribly bright, but also has an incredibly big heart, and incredibly engaging manners. She's the perfect definition of a lovely pea-goose. Super cute, and impossible to hate. And her notions of economy, oh my gosh, please, we must take a moment to appreciate them. Spending Your Money Wisely by Amabel Fancot, Lady Denville 1- The first rule to remember is that, if you can pay your interest, YOU ARE OKAY! Interest paid = life is GOOD. =) 2- Economy is so super overrated. Did you know that the less you try to spend, the more you will actually end up spending? Think about it. If you buy a cheap, ugly dress to save money, you'll find yourself totally incapable of actually wearing it, so you'll end up buying that expensive gown anyways, and thus have paid wayyyy more than you would have in the first place if you'd only stuck to the expensive gown. Cheap gown + expensive gown = more expensive than just expensive gown. 3- Let's also not forget the element of luck here. For all you card-players and gamesters out there, THE LUCK WILL TURN ONE DAY. I mean, it just has to, right? It can't stay bad forever! 4- Okay, so if you do actually find yourself indebted at some point and you have nothing more to stake, be sure to have some copies of all those ugly heirloom brooches and family jewels that you never wear. Life savers those, I tell you. 5- And finally, well, remember some principles of kindness. When you already owe a ton of money to your milliner and she's trying to sell you another hat that you really can't afford? You buy the hat. Because it's only nice to spend more at those places where you already owe a ton. Like, oh yeah, sorry I owe you hundreds and hundreds of pounds, let me compensate for now by adding another one of your charming creations to my collection. #ladydenvillelogic The book is FILLED with her hilarious little comments and notions on spending money, and you're just there like "oh my goodness, she can't be serious!" but it makes you laugh at the same time, because she's just so adorable!! And her devotion to her sons! She would literally die for them if she had to. And the best part? Her sons so totally feel the same way, heck they are at their wits' very end trying to find a way out of the enormous mountain of debts without creating a scandal. False Colours is a lot more "comedy of manners" and family-oriented than "romance", but I loved Kit and Cressy a lot nonetheless, and thought they made a charming couple, definitely perfect for each other. The story is almost entirely told through Kit's point of view, and Cressy only plays a secondary role in the book, but she was definitely admirable, and everything I saw from her, I liked. She was bright, intelligent, wasn't afraid to stand up to people and speak her mind, but remained lady-like and proper the entire time and never crossed the line of becoming a hoyden. I also loved her sense of humour, she was always ready to laugh and thought everything a good joke rather than becoming offended at every turn (a good thing, since the family she got tangled with most definitely loved a good laugh!). I wish the romance had been a bit more developed, for it wasn't much beyond "we took a few walks in the rose-garden and fell in love" type of thing, but as it wasn't exactly the point of the story and since Cressy wasn't exactly a main character, it made sense that it was a simpler, less all-consuming romance. Some parts were a little slow, and the overall pace of the book isn't very fast, but it made for a charming, sunny and appeasing little story, and Lady Denville's romance with Sir Bonamy was just icing on the cake. Seriously, it was the cutest and most hilarious thing ever. "'Will you think me very saucy if I say that never did a knight more thoroughly deserve to win his lady than you, dear sir?' 'No, no!' protested Sir Bonamy, much discomposed. 'Nonsense! Very obliging of you to say so, but no such thing! As a matter of fact, I'm a baronet.'" Such a fun, lovely Regency romp set in the country, one I whole-heartedly recommend to fans of the genre. It's completely delightful and loveable! Group read with the Georgette Heyer Fans group for September 2015.
