A HISTORY PROFESSOR LOOKS INTO THE PHENOMENA OF “ABDUCTIONS” David Michael Jacobs (born 1942) is an American historian and former Professor of History at Temple University (now retired). He wrote in the ‘Note to the Reader’ of this 1992 book, “This book is based on the testimony of some sixty individuals with whom I have explored more than 300 abduction experiences, and it includes transcripts or accounts of my interviews with more than twenty of them. A complete explanation of the techniques I used, including hypnotic regression, is included in Appendix A… All the major accounts of abductions in this book share common characteristics and thus provide a confirmation of one another. I have not included one-of-a-kind accounts---no matter how dramatic---because no reliable inferences can be drawn from them without confirming testimony from other abductees… the majority of abductees in this study are women, and … women seem to have a larger number of more complex experiences… The transcripts have been edited for brevity and clarity, but the information and the meaning here have not been altered… Unless otherwise stated, I have personally investigated all of the abduction described in this book.” He recounts, “In 1982 a friend introduced me to Budd Hopkins… I was immediately impressed with his skillful research… Hopkins’s work was excellent, but I found that the overall situation was still confusing. After all, people have always claimed that many sorts of strange events happened to them. They have lived past lives. They have been in communication with denizens of the spirit world and even Space Brothers. They have seen ghosts, danced with fairies, and had near-death experiences with religious implications. To my way of thinking, all of this might be a demonstration of the mind’s mysterious workings. Perhaps these paranormal phenomena arose from the human tendency to create folklore. Or they might emanate from a collective unconscious. In any case, psychology rather than objective reality would explain these stories.” (Pg. 22-23) He observes, “Secrecy appears to be critically important to the aliens in determining the opportunities for abductions. They commonly take place when the abductee is in an automobile, alone in the daytime, or with a small group of people. Victims have reported aliens doing procedures on them in their homes without being abducted. The majority of abductions, however, begin at night when the victim is alone either awake or asleep. No abductions have surfaced that took place in the middle of a very large group of people, in full view at a public event.” (Pg. 50) He notes, “The problem of unplanned or inexplicable pregnancy is one of the most frequent physical aftereffects of abduction experiences. Usually the woman feels pregnant and has all the outward signs of being pregnant. She is puzzled and disturbed because she had wither not engaged in sex or has been very careful with proper birth control. She has blook tests and the gynecologist positively verifies the pregnancy… the woman suddenly find herself not pregnancy. She has no miscarriage, no extra0heavy bleeding or discharge. The fetus is simply gone… During the first trimester the woman may decide to terminate the pregnancy. At the appointment, the physician begins the procedures and is stunned to find that there is no fetus in the uterus… The ‘Missing Fetus Syndrome’ has happened to abductees enough times that it is now considered one of the more common effects of the abduction experience.” (Pg. 245-246) He explains, “Many abductees engage in a lifelong search for answers to questions they cannot fully formulate. For some, the New Age movement … provides an answer. Ini some way they know they are in contact with a ‘higher’ or ‘cosmic’ consciousness. They feel sure that they can communicate with other people by mental telepathy. They know that they have been in touch with another realm of existence. Some unaware abductees become attracted to channeling and might even become channelers themselves… It is not unusual for a person to seek answers to the disturbing qualities of their lives through organized religion---usually evangelical Christin groups… the minister frequently invokes ‘demons’ or demonic possession… Prayer and faith vanquish the demons and allow the victim to lead a life free from harassment… Rather than joining New Age groups or religious sects, many abductees turn to mental health professionals for help. They know that there must be something ‘wrong’… The vast majority of professional therapists are not trained to help abductees.” (Pg. 253-254) He says of an abductee names Karen Morgan, “[She] agreed to use a video camera and … As long as the camera was trained on her, no abductions took place. But when Karen was out of town to visit friends or relatives, she would be abducted…. When she ‘forgot’ to set up the camera or VCR for the night, there was a good possibility that she would be abducted.” (Pg. 259) He points out, “Contactees actively sought money and publicity, and devoted a tremendous amount of energy to getting both. Most abductees have sought neither. Rather, they are extremely concerned that their identities might be revealed and that they might lose their standing in the community and in their work. Only a few of the abductees that Budd Hopkins and I have worked with over the year have gone to the media to tell what has happened to them, and this was at our request and only after they engaged in considerable soul-searching. To the best of my knowledge, none has profited monetarily from these media appearances.” (Pg. 284) He acknowledges, “There have been instances in which a person has fabricated an abduction event… [One] well-meaning but unsystematic researcher simply accepted the woman’s story as true even though it did not match any of the known abduction events. Thus, lying can fool an inexperienced researcher but not one who is familiar with the abduction experience that has been confirmed so many times over.” (Pg. 284-285) He also discusses a number of alternative explanations, including: repression of abuse; hysterical contagion; prewakening and presleeping states; the ‘will to believe’; channeling; hallucinations; fantasy-prone personalities; the influence of hypnosis; psychosis; multiple personality disorder; temporal lobe dysfunction; desire for a baby; the influence of science fiction; folklore; the collective unconscious; birth trauma, etc. (Pg. 285-304) He concludes, “We are left with a puzzle. No viable alternative theory has emerged that takes into account the totality of the data in the abduction experience… If the abductees are relating events that do, in fact, have an objective reality, then we are presented with what might be one of the most important events ever to befall mankind. If, on the other hand, the events do not have an objective reality… then we have discovered something of immense importance. We have found a fascinating and inexplicable new psychological and sociocultural phenomenon unlike anything ever discovered in the human psyche before. It is obviously worthy of intense scientific attention.” (Pg. 304) He admits in an Appendix, “Hypnosis is an indispensable took in unlocking the memories of an abduction. Ever since … Betty and Barney Hill, UFO researchers have employed it to learn about abductions. It is the best method available to gain detailed access to people’s hidden abduction memories. Hypnosis, however, is not foolproof. Some abductees simply do not remember; when they do remember, especially details, it may be an incorrect memory that they are ‘filling in.’ This can be particularly true when the subject is asked to supply details of an event from childhood. It is easy for a hypnotist to ask (consciously or inadvertently) leading questions that steer the abductee into an answer that may not reflect reality. This can be a problem for suggestible subjects. Confabulation, or the unconscious invention and filling in of memories, can become an easy way of providing information to the eager hypnotist-investigator… This problem is compounded by the fact that in abduction research, questions about details are routinely asked in order to gather as much information as possible.” (Pg. 321) This book will be of great interest to those studying ‘abduction’ phenomena, and related matters.
