Definitely a unique book in many ways. The story itself is almost a popcorn read. Nothing too heavy and entertaining enough to keep you reading. The Native American history and culture is its biggest draw. I'm not a scholar or expert on this part of history so I cannot say how much of it was accurate but at the very least the world felt fresh and creative to me. I think the biggest thing that would-be readers need to watch out for is the graphic content in this book, because it gets really intense. The Song of Ice and Fire series is my personal benchmark for graphic content in books and this one is up there. I can't say anything about the other books in this series but this has a lot of disturbing content. If scenes of murder, rape, child rape, or disturbingly creative torture makes you uncomfortable, I would advise that you do not read this book. I was able to stomach most of the graphic content of this book (I do not advise eating while reading this one :P) and it was rather entertaining. The story is contained within this one book (as far as I am aware) but a lot of ground gets covered and the story wraps itself up pretty well. I found the magic system kind of confusing at some points (mostly towards the end), but it served its role as a storytelling device well. Most of the characters in this book can fit into some sort of archetype but I wouldn't say they're bad. At least it was never grating or clumsy. The archetypes include things like scary-looking badass warrior and creepy child character. Nothing overtly racist or offensive (at least to my knowledge), just characters that you have likely seen in other stories. Some characters do stick out though, Green Spider and Tall Man being the most striking examples, so there is something to spice up the story. There was a weird concentration of incredibly attractive people in this story but it didn't get in the way too much. I just thought it was weird. Overall, this is a book that uses a lot of familiar elements but has enough uniqueness to it to make it interesting. I appreciate how this is a book entirely contained within a Native American culture, and the story provided a detailed look into each tribe the characters interacted with. No one culture or person was put on a pedestal, they were just people and I liked that a lot. Oddly enough, I found this to be a great way to diffuse my Wheel of Time fever. It was really hard for me to put those books down but this helped a lot. I think the fact that some WoT cultures are inspired by some Native American cultures was a key factor. The interactions with some of the tribes felt nicely familiar after those books and the length (about 750 pages) is nearly comparable to a book from that series. Might not work for everybody but I recommend this book if you are struggling with the same ailment! To wrap up, I think this is an entertaining read with enough uniqueness to set it apart from other books. My only warning is to read at your own risk. This book is most definitely not made for younger readers with its graphic content. Anyone who would be bothered by that should not read this book.
