I love a good romance: they really have the ability to take my mind off whatever is going on in the "real world" and put me in a place where dreams come true. This book was so full of cultural inaccuracies, however, I couldn't stop rolling my eyes long enough to make it through the pages! Janelle, I have read many of your Native American romances, and I think most of them are passable, and some are good! This one was a GIANT flaw on your record. The premise: a young white woman, captured at a very young age from a wagon train in which her parents were killed, abused by the Kiowa, then stolen by the Lakota and raised as the chief's daughter, until a painter traveling with her photo alerts her grandfather that she is alive, at which point he and his half-breed ranch manager travel north to find her and bring her home, which they can only do so by tricking her into a false marriage with the half-breed... there's more conflict after that, but this part leaves enough to dissuade anyone with a knowledge of Native traditions from reading the book. Now, I am no expert, but I know most Native tribes valued their women, and treated them as equals to men. Women sat on most tribal councils, held respected positions within the tribe, and were revered for their skills keeping their families fed and clothed. Any young woman, white or not, who was raised within this culture would NEVER have referred to women's work as "slavery, drudgery, being treated like an animal." That's strictly a white thing. Secondly, MANY tribes allowed people to follow their heart; that is, if a man wanted to bead moccasins and bring up water, he was welcome to live as a woman, and if a woman wanted to hunt and fight, she was welcome as a warrior. The idea that this young woman was trained and is "more skilled" than many warriors, yet is not allowed to act as one, is another example of white ideas of Native culture being offered as Native culture. A little thing: the Cheyenne were noted for their chastity, and the warrior the chief is trying to get the white girl to marry would NEVER have mentioned the Cheyenne warrior's "prowess in the bedroll." That would've been far outside Cheyenne culture. Maybe you have the ability to look past these things and read for the sex scenes, but I love a romance that is truly well-written, well-researched, and flawless. This one is full of white ideas of Native culture being passed off as facts, which just makes me tired.
