Title: Henry and Mudge – The First Book Author: Cynthia Rylant Illustrator: Sucie Stevenson Genre: Juvenile Fiction, Transitional Chapter Book Theme(s): Dog, Fiction, Play Opening line/sentence: “Henry had no brothers and no sisters. “I want a brother,” he told his parents. “Sorry,” they said. Henry had no friends on his street. Brief Book Summary: Henry had no friends or siblings, so after begging his parents, he finally was able to pick out a dog. He chose Mudge, an 180 lb. dog and they became best friends. But one day, Mudge couldn’t wait to go on a walk, so he went by himself and got lost. Henry was so upset when he woke up to find Mudge missing. He decided to look for Mudge and after a long time of looking, he finally found Mudge. They both were so happy to be reunited and they never left each other’s side. Professional Recommendation/Review #1: Recorded Books (Recorded Books, LLC.) “Henry has no brothers or sisters, so he asks his parents for a dog. When they choose Mudge, the wriggling puppy has floppy ears and straight, soft fur. Mudge is tiny. But Henry knows he’ll grow. Now Mudge is three feet tall, and he’s the best friend Henry has ever had. Mudge trots to school with Henry, and he sleeps on Henry’s bed. But one day the big dog goes for a walk by himself and gets lost. When Henry comes home from school, he is along. Where’s Mudge? Cynthia Rylant’s Henry and Mudge books are filled with the wonderful adventures of the young boy and his lovable dog. Designated as Ready-to Read books, they are perfect for beginning readers. The First Book moves along at a frisky pace and teaches quiet lessons about friendship and security.” Professional Recommendation/Review #2: Sylvia Marantz (The Five Owls, March/April 1987) (Vol. 1, No. 4) “We can never have too many good stories to lure the beginning reader. They are most satisfying for all readers, including parents and teachers, when they present characters we care about doing interesting things, depicted in an appealing, un-intimidating format using the necessarily limited vocabulary. Cynthia Rylant has met the challenge. Although the text in these first two books in her series about Henry and his dog Mudge does not have the poetic lilt of some of her other picture books, her depiction of the relationships of boy, dog and family and of Henry’s thoughts and emotions raise these above other similar stories. In short chapters in The First Book, Henry chooses Mudge, their mutual love grows as he does, Mudge is almost lost, but all is well at the satisfying end. In Puddle Trouble, Henry struggles with the ethical question of whether to pick the first flower or let it grow as mother advises. Mudge solves his dilemma. They have a glorious time in a puddle, with Father surprisingly joining them. Finally Mudge heroically defends some kittens. Sucie Stevenson catches their spirit in her simplified but naturalistic black outlined lively watercolor illustrations. I wish they were more even in their effective reflection of the text and more consistent in their anatomical accuracy. First graders listened intently to both these books, found many things to discuss, empathized with Henry, worried about Mudge, cheered the endings. Most important of all, they were eager to read them on their own.” Response to Two Professional Reviews: The reviewer’s mention how appealing and appropriate this book is to beginning readers. The plot is about a close-knit friendship between a dog and a young boy. The way the stories are written follow a poetic, quick pace, easy read. This helps beginner readers follow along. Similarly, the illustrations are calm, watercolor pictures that allude to the important scenes within the story. This is a great transitional book to use with student’s challenging their reading abilities. Evaluation of Literary Elements: The plot contains a beginning, middle and end, along with a problem and solution. Unlike the other stories, this book you can clearly locate the different parts of the book. The setting takes place in a neighborhood, at a school, which can be really relatable to a lot of young readers. This makes the book a lot more appealing to the reader because they can place themselves in Henry’s situation. The pictures simply guide the reader visually as the text directs the story. Consideration of Instructional Application: For an activity, I would have my students identify the parts in the book that they believe are the beginning, middle and end. From there, we would create our own stories and also identify the beginning, middle and end. Another activity could be identifying different words that are repeated multiple times throughout the story. We could go over all the words so that the students understand and can read them.
