After thoroughly enjoying book 1 and 2 in TG's 'Rizzoli and Isles' series, I decided to set myself on a mission - to read all of these books within the year, and in the right chronological order. So what did I make of 'The Sinner'? Well, unfortunately I am disappointed to have to report that I found it much weaker and far less appealing than the previous novels as it felt like going 'one step forward, two steps back'. Like the other books, the opening was very strong, interesting and original, setting the scene and adding the highly sought after mystery factor which gave me a certain eagerness to continue to discover the jewels and delights contained within its covers. And then the similarity ended. This book had a good solid storyline, with some interesting characters, but the emphasis of the story seemed to be based more upon the romantic lives of the two main protagonists rather than on the thrills and excitement of the medical, murder, mystery adventure itself. A big, big let-down. So much so that in this story Dr Isles appears to be leading the police investigation rather than the irritating, cold and constantly moaning 'tomboy' Rizzoli who seems more preoccupied about her image and private life rather than getting on and actually solving the different elements of the case set before her. Yes, too much 'best seller' romantic distracting 'mush' for me and not enough rough, tough action or the deeper development of actual events set around the crimes themselves. More emphasis given to the initial events, the Nun's lives (especially the Abbess), life in the convent and the role of the Church itself would have been fascinating and added much value to the journey rather than concentrating on ridiculous, blind relationships (Isles and the Priest - how(?)), personal issues, overtly melodramatic pieces of dialogue and vague, slightly far-fetched distractions that detracted from the pleasure and enjoyment of the overall complete reading experience. So generally, where does that now leave me regarding my mission? Well, my interest has unfortunately waned but the storylines, characters and medical police procedures offered by the author still appeal enough for me to continue with the series, but this excursion did feel like a slight 'knock' and the noticeably negative change of focus of emphasising and concentrating on the private lives of these personalities rather than the murder mystery thriller aspect didn't quite cut it enough for me. Anyway, let's see what book 4 provides and just hope that the series returns to its earlier winning formula whilst providing that 'feel good factor' to the reader. Time will tell, fingers are crossed, but things, right now, are definitely in the balance. I hope I touch lucky. Rating - 3.2 stars.
