'The Secret of Skeleton Island' (The Three Investigators #6) by Robert Arthur. “See?” Bob said. “When the tide rises, this cave gets full of water. If we wait for the tide to turn, we’ll be under water.” The rising water gurgled as it lapped around them. Nobody had anything to say. They knew Bob was right. Rating: 4.0/5. Review: The Secret of Skeleton Island is the sixth book in the once popular Three Investigators series. Although I remember reading this story earlier during my school days, my memories are muddied due to the passage of time and the altered plot of the German movie adaptation of the same story. I must confess that this book feels somewhat different from the previous installments in this series. The book veers off from the traditional T3I formula and tries to emulate the Hardy Boys plot to a great extent. Everything goes wrong for the three investigators in this book – they get stranded multiple times, Jupiter gets a cold, the team gets separated due to unexpected circumstances – and there's a miraculous rescue at the end. All of which, if you are a staunch Hardy Boys fan like me, might recognize as plot elements similar to multiple Hardy Boys books. The mystery that lies central to the plot is predictable as well. It was easy to decipher the motive behind the thefts, the identity of the culprits, and the location of the hidden treasure right from the first few pages of the book. However, I don't think one should go in expecting the book to have an engrossing mystery. Rather, it works well as an adventure book with a slight dash of thriller elements. I had planned on dropping a few stars from the rating considering the predictable nature of the plot and the weak mystery elements. However, when I looked back at my time (re)reading this book, I was thoroughly engrossed with it and consumed it in a single sitting. It would be unjustified if I gave it a low rating for technical reasons because it does its job well. Considering I, as an adult, was hooked to the story despite its straightforward and predictable plot, I'm sure it would have been a thoroughly engaging read for its intended audience of young adults back in the day it was first published.
