I'm going to have to review this book in the light of the time period in which this was written. I first read this entire series back when Harlequin re-released them with the pretty flower covers back in 1988. I loved them then, and reading them now, can get a sense for why. Back then I travelled considerably with my family - and the idea of a book from each state that talks a little about that state and its history AND gave a romance story to match that, excited me. By the time 1988 rolled around, I'd done considerable exploring of 32 different states, so these books were a lot of fun. Reading them now, I get a little cringy about the heavy-handed male brute of a hero. As is pointed out by the other readers, some of this (grabbing hard enough to leave a mark, hand on throat) really pushes what your typical romance readers are comfortable with. Given this is Harlequin, this seems a little over the top, and even for the crowd accustomed to Christian Grey this might seem a little bit much. Given the book was written in the 70s, I'll have to say from reading other romances of this era that this was in fact the popular trope of the time. Men needed to be strong brutes who let a woman know he was in charge. And yes, women of the day LIKED this, so before we judge with the lens of what we feel is write and proper today, keep in mind that Harlequin ruled the world in romance novels at this time - (NO KINDLE back then!) and gave the readers EXACTLY WHAT THEY WANTED. Given these books were reprints from earlier series, repackaged, tells me that these novels were frequently requested, and bestsellers, so the rough tough man here that we would scream about and denounce as abusive now, was not seen so then. So maybe we need to put trigger warnings on these books? Or at least this one? I need to re-read the rest to be able to speak better about the series as a whole. In this particular book you have a girl pretending to be her cousin so that her cousin doesn't have to do the mundane task of meeting all her fiance's family. Again, view the plot in the time period. In the world of social media, Skype, and cell phones, this would never possibly work today. The deception seems innocent, but when its discovered, we have a fiance who doesn't seem to mind switching out who he's engaged to. I find myself wondering just why he wants to get married in the first place? What makes this particular book even more odd, is that our hero, Rian, is barely seen at all. The entire story is told, for the most part, with him absent. I noticed this in another Harlequin written in the 70s so I'm starting to form this opinion that maybe in the 70s we wanted strong, forceful men in very small doses. He was best if he traveled a lot, and only showed up for sex and the occasional romantic dinner out, while all that forceful power is put toward garnering great financial success in the business world. Wait, we might be on to something here....
