"Hearts can break. Yes, hearts can break. Sometimes I think it would be better if we died when they did, but we don't." Hearts in Atlantis is quite an unusual book is that it is comprised of 5 interlinking stories (technically 2 novellas and 3 short stories) that contain the same recurring characters and take place chronologically. The stories refer to events that take place in the 1960s, primarily the Vietnam war. I also feel like this will be quite hard to review without spoiling, so bear with me! Low Men in Yellow Coats is the first novella and was actually my favourite part of the entire collection. It tells the story of a young boy Bobby Garfield, who comes into contact with a strange man who moves in upstairs, Ted Brautigan, who possesses some physic abilities. This story contains amazing Dark Tower references and connections, and as a DT junkie, this was SOOO exciting. The next novella was the self-titled Hearts in Atlantis, which focuses on the story of Peter Riley, who gets addicted to playing the card game Hearts in the dorm when he is a student at the University of Maine. This addiction interferes with his studies, which leaves him open to the possibility of being enrolled in the war. Again, I really enjoyed this one! The last three short stories (Blind Willie, Why We're in Vietnam, Heavenly Shades of Night are Falling) are focused on veterans and fallout from the Vietnam war. The first two short stories are decent enough, but I only really enjoyed the last one. Mainly because it involved Bobby Garfield! One of my favourite things about this collection is the relationship between Bobby Garfield and Ted Brautigan. King writes these kind of relationships so well. You can just feel the love and admiration Bobby has for Ted, it's absolutely beautiful. Ted becomes a surrogate father figure for Bobby. Their discussions about books and literature are so heart-warming, it's necessary for every child to have this kind of person in their life - the person who ignites that passion for reading. But not only is Ted under possible attack from the Low Men, but also from Bobby's mother, who has her suspicions about their blossoming friendship. I kinda feel like a main theme within this book is that of survivor guilt. Those who either avoiding fighting in the Vietnam war or those who went and fought and came home alive. In Hearts in Atlantis, the university students who become addicted to playing Hearts are basically flunking themselves out to war. The main character just keeps getting closer and closer to the edge of that cliff until he forms a relationship with Carol (from the previous novella). Blind Willie is focused around a veteran's penance for his previous actions (in the first novella of course!). Why We're in Vietnam is about two veterans basically discussing how their generation squandered the promise of the 60's and their resultant commiserations. The last short story is kind of more of an epilogue than a story, revisiting both Bobby and Carol from the first novella. A touching moment as they reminisce about the past. This was definitely a very enjoyable read, more so the two novellas than the short stories. It makes you think about this period of time and the Vietnam war, and how savage and pointless war can be. Especially when you look at the impact it has on people who are living through it, as well as those who come out the other side. Hard-hitting and emotional. Great work by the King!
