This book is about the main character, Betsy Brown, a young girl growing up and discovering her way through her teenage years. She is 13-14 years old, living in Saint Louis Missouri, 1959. The author gives a glimpse into life for African-American family and youth during this period of time. From the perspective of Betsey, we can see racial tension, the way African Americans were treated during this time, and the culture in a traditional middle class family like her own. We are able to see an interesting family dynamic, and watch the maturing of a young girl into a teenager who faces issues with family, friendships, and deals with emotional and sexual topics that her and friends are constantly battling. Main Characters: Betsy Brown is a young girl (the main character) who struggles with young adult issues that most 14 year olds don't need to deal with today. She balances love, friendships, family, and work. Through these trials she learns about herself and is very observant of her surroundings, especially social. She often talks about her views of black and white people, and the differences between their actions and ways of life. Betsy yearns for independence, but also has very childish ways that she slowly starts to leave behind. Jane is Betsy's mom, who is a middle class woman. She is married, and her own mother lives with the family to help take care of the children. Jane is much lighter skinned than most, making her an upper class and giving her a sense of privilege that she has experienced through her life. She is very sophisticated, appreciates being held upon a pedestal, and beats to her own drum. Her and her mother struggle with Jane's husband who takes pride in his african roots and is much darker than they are, as he is much more socially active in the community and wants to involve their children. Greer is Betsy's dad, married to Jane. He is a top doctor in Saint Louis at the time, which was extremely rare for an African American. Unlike his wife, he is very passionate about African history and his roots. He quizzes his children every morning about African culture and social issues that press them during the time. Greer is so involved that he wants his children all involved in political and social change, while Jane wants them safe and at home. That causes Jane to leave him and for him to have to parent on his own, which is difficult for the whole family and he hires housekeepers in her absence. He loves that the schools have become integrated, and while he is busy at work and disagrees with Jane often he is absolutely in love with her and tries to do his best to be a good father. Vida is Betsy's grandmother who is very harsh on everyone. She is growing in age and shakes due to her joints, and often fails at tasks so Betsey tries to take over. She is a bit pretentious and looks down upon Greer for his dark skin and passion for African culture. Carrie is one of the housekeepers that Greer hires. Although she is very different from the family and has issues with Vida, Betsy's grandmother who is harsh on anyone, she is the most successful in keeping the house and children in order. She also ends up having a romance with a gardener that Betsey is able to watch and take in as a romantic herself. Betsey becomes close with her. Opinion: This book was definitely relevant and interesting for its historical context (I live in Saint Louis now). The writing was very detailed and the author does a great job giving each character such a distinct personality, but I often struggled in reading this book. The style of writing was not something I am used to reading. There wasn't a main plot and climax of the story that really drew me in. It was just like I stepped into the head of a 13 year old girl during this period of time and felt the emotions that she felt for a short amount of time. Personally, it didn't pull me in as much as I hoped it would, but a good read on a coming of age and social context during this time.
