. . . let it come alive, let it shimmer in your mind and then take that inner awakening and put it to work. All of us are deeply grateful to those who make life throb to a swifter, stronger beat. These great teachers from the past have done that for me, and I encourage you to apply this language of the heart from the wisdom of the ages to your life. God bless you, Wayne W. Dyer - Introduction The measure of mental health is the disposition to find good everywhere. - Ralph Waldo Emerson If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured and far away. - Henry David Thoreau , Walden Lives of great men all remind us We can make our lives sublime, And, departing, leave behind us Footprints on the sands of time. - Henry Wadsworth Longfellow I found Wisdom of the Ages to be an inspiring collection of great thought. Favorite Passages: Introduction Many of these profound teachers were considered troublemakers, and some were even put to death for their beliefs. Their teachings, however, could never be silenced, as evidenced by the variety of topics from differing historical eras that are in this book. LEADERSHIP - LAO-TZU I am frequently amazed at how many contemporary politicians refer to themselves as "leaders" by virtue of the fact that they hold public office. Historically it is clear that public office holders are seldom the true leaders causing change. PATIENCE - CONFUCIUS Impatience breeds fear, stress, and discouragement. Patience manifests in confidence, decisiveness, and a feeling of peaceful satisfaction. TRUTH/BEAUTY - JOHN KEATS So what is your truth? First and most important, your truth is what is real for you. And what is real is what you experience with emotion or feeling. Thus, if you feel it, know it, and experience it, it is more than true, it is beauty made manifest. Your feelings of accomplishment are true and beautiful. Your appreciation of a loved one is true and beautiful. Your inspirations are true, and thus beautiful. NONCONFORMITY - HENRY DAVID THOREAU Refuse to evaluate yourself as sane or insane on the basis of how you fit in with the expectations of those around you. If you feel it, and it harms no one, then it is authentic, and very sane. SELF-RELIANCE - RALPH WALDO EMERSON "Whoso would be a man [or woman], must be a non-conformist." I suggest the best way to employ this profound truth from Emerson is to learn how to be quietly effective in your life. That is, have no need to make public pronouncements about how you refuse to conform, and instead take solace in the comfort of your own inner strength, and proceed as a silent individual who knows how to rely on yourself. PRIVACY - GANDHI The two divisions of our one reality are ego and spirit. ________ "If you follow the pack, you are going to end up stepping in a lot of what they leave behind."
