Family - greatest gift or curse? Creative life - long suffering or fulfilment? Raising the questions of humanity in the microcosm of a single family, Hesse creates a painful, yet beautiful picture of the balance between liberty and suffocation, between creativity and middle class life. Without taking sides with any of his main characters, he shows their incompatibility and their power to hurt each other for being different from each other and for not living up to each other's dreams. The plot is simple and straightforward. A famous artist, at the height of his creative power, lives as a recluse with his estranged wife in a beautiful country house, Rosshalde, and their sole connection is the youngest son, over whose love and affection they fight jealously. The destructive dynamics are chilling, and scarily realistic. A child, a token of love and affection, reduced to an instrument to exert power over another person. An unhealthy competition with a young and impressionable human heart as a prize. The reader realises early on that there can be no winners in such a contest. Are children loved for their own sake, or for being images or copies of their parents? Most people would happily say the first, while acting according to the second scenario. Hesse brilliantly outlines the difficulties of family patterns without sparing his main characters. Only when tragedy strikes they are able to break the spell of mutual pain, and move on to try to start a new life. The artist, being more focused on future projects than on past experience, feels relief, while his wife resigns herself to the bitterness of failed middle class aspirations - thus illustrating the confining role of a wife and mother in a traditional family set up. Her remaining son is the only consolation. Failure of middle class marriage, seen through the lens of the specific needs of an enthusiastic and egotistical artist, beautifully described in Hesse's dry and compassionate prose - a little gem! Highly recommended!
