Aside from one story in this collection ("Beatnik Bayou"), all the stories date from the same period of time as the stories included in Varley's excellent first collection _The Persistence of Vision_. After the first 100 pages of this book I figured this was sort of a second-rate collection of that material because the first several stories don't _quite_ work as well as most of the stories in the previous collection (indeed, a few of the ones further into the book aren't as good either, particularly "Lollipop and the Tar Baby"). However, there are a couple of excellent pieces here and, overall, the collection shows Varley working through some of the history and societal details that he would put into play in his later novel _Steel Beach_. By far the best story in the collection is "Equinoctial," a revenge story about a human forcibly separated from her Symb and their children in the rings of Saturn. "Manikins" is an interesting feminist story that _almost_ could have been written by Joanna Russ (I suspect the level of paranoia might have been taken down a notch or so if Russ had written it), and the story provides some interesting insight into why feminist social critics like Donna Haraway and Katie King at first embraced Varley's fiction (while later rejecting it). "Good-bye Robinson Crusoe" has some great moments, particularly the speculative angle into the potential problems of a Common Economic Market dominated by the inner planets at Pluto's expense. This story, however, ultimately is uneven and somewhat unsatisfactory because there is literally 4 different stories going on all at the same time and Varley seems unable to decide which one he like better or wants to tell more. The other outstanding piece is the title story (of the second printing, that is) "Picnic on Nearside" which is a Heinleinian juvenile in short story form about the differences in social customs among the "Earthborn" and those people born and raised on the moon after the aliens invaded and occupied Earth. Ultimately, what this volume demonstrates to me (despite its unevenness compared to its predecessor) is that Varley was much better at writing shorter pieces than novels early in his career. This book and its companion are easily better than any of the novels in the _Gaea_ trilogy, and stand up to the best in the (still uneven) first novel by Varley, _The Ophiuchi Hotline_.
