The ways in which kids feel pain, and love and loss are distinct. The Body is an adventure from the outset, a tale of friendship and a coming of age novella about the loss of four young boys innocence. Do the people you surround yourself with hold you up, or do they hold you back? Will they stand by you? This theme is questioned throughout the book, notably from the wiser than his years Chris Chambers. One of my favorite scenes in the book comes near the end, when the boys are making their stand against Ace Merrill and his crew. Vern and Teddy abandon Chris, but Gordie stands with him. "Stick with me, Gordie," Chris said in a low, shaky voice. "stick with me, man." "I'm right here." This scene solidifies Gordies decision to stick with Chris, because Gordie realizes without him, Chris will drown. This is followed through at the end of the book, when Gordie discusses studying with Chris for college, while Teddy & Vern goof off and get high. This novella is as much about friendship as it is about growing up, and I love it for that. Friendship isn't always easy, and it doesn't always last. Friends are like seasons – they come and go. This is a poignant novella to read as an adult, and would be a wonderful introduction to SK for a younger audience, despite all the swearing. The themes here are important, relatable, and prominent. Connections: Castle Rock Story Chamberlaine, Maine is the town that Ray Brower is from - same town Carrie is set in Possible The Shining reference pg 41 "A Gordon Lachance halfway along in the process of losing the shine" most likely indicating a loss of innocence, but interesting wording for constant readers Bannerman - not present but discussed - Character in Cujo & The Dead Zone Ace Merril - Pop Merrill's nephew. mentioned in The Sun Dog , Needful Things , Skeleton Crew: Nona Vern Tessio - Skeleton Crew: Nona Teddy Duchamp - Character w/ same name mentioned in Carrie , as it is established in The Dead Zone , that Carrie is a fictional story with in the SK universe, possible that Gordon Lachance is the fictional writer of Carrie? A stretch but fun hypothesis Emporium Galorium- owned by Pop Merrill The Sun Dog Shawshank redemption mentioned (and coincidentally where Ace Merrill eventually ends up) Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption: A Story from Different Seasons Possible Night Shift reference on pg 75 "We knew about the night shift" when talking about a book of scary stories The Dead Zone reference pg 110 "The Wheel of Fortune" Mentions Derry, Jerusalem's Lot & Lewiston - all locations used in SK's works Aunt Evvie Chalmers - referenced in The Sun Dog , Cujo , Needful Things Literary References The Invisible Man review to be updated
