A book of place set in and around the small town of Gualala, Mendocino County, Northern California. A sprawling crime noir with many characters and sub-plots. A paranormal thriller in which the devil takes over the body of people who are about to die. Already Dead is a lot of things. It only really works as a book of place. Johnson's descriptions of the small American towns, valleys, hills, flora and fauna and many psychos and weirdos who inhabit these towns make you wish you lived in some of these places. It is almost as if these small American towns contain some kind of hope and magic for all these lost criminal minded characters. The book's firsT page: Van Ness felt a gladness and wonder as he drove past the small isolated towns along U.S. 101 in Northern California, a certain interest, a yearning, because he sensed they were places a person could disappear into. They felt like little naps you might never wake up from—you might throw a tire and hike to a gas station and stumble unexpectedly onto the rest of your life, the people who would finally mean something to you, a woman, an immortal friend, a saving fellowship in the religion of some obscure church. But such a thing as a small detour into deep and permanent changes, at the time, anyway, that he was travelling down the coast from Seattle into Mendocino County, wasn’t even to be dreamt of in Van Ness’s world. Well, it does not work out for Van Ness when a girl he gives a lift to accuses him of sexual harassment when a police officer stops the car for speeding. It reminded me of Norman Mailer's Tough Guys Don't Dance which was set in Provincetown and the small town has a magic of its own and influences the character's actions. Already Dead is too rambling to work as a crime thriller. There is no real action or suspense after a certain point in the novel. The paranormal parts of the book were indecipherable to me. The devil or paranormal entities taking charge of people who are already lost is an interesting idea. Here it just seemed added on without any real inspiration. The Yvonne character is barely developed. The plot is interesting. Nelson Fairchild is growing marijuana in a remote patch with his friend Clarence Meadows. He hopes to make a lot of money after harvesting the crop. But he has two big problems. Two men working for Harry Lally to whom Nelson owes a large sum of money because he messed up a drug operation, are trying to kill Nelson. Nelson hopes to pay off Lally using his inheritance. But in his will, Nelson's fiercely Roman Catholic father has named Nelson's wife Winona as beneficiary of all his prime coastal property. This is to keep his son in line. Nelson Sr is seething and revengeful after his wife left him and is against the legal dissolution of marriage. His will is a ploy to keep Nelson Jr from divorcing. Other characters include - Yvonne - a witch/sorceress who holds seances. Officer Navarro - a cop who reads letters from Bill Fairchild saying that CIA is trying to mess with the minds of residents. Navarro is always in the periphery of the sinister criminal activities in Gualala. He has an affair with a waitress called Mo. The messed up Fairchild family with the criminal drug trafficker and producer Nelson Fairchild, the reclusive and batshit crazy Bill Fairchild who sends weird letters to the police about CIA activity in the hills and their domineering father reminded me of the Stamper family in Ken Kesey's Sometimes a Great Notion . Nelson Fairchild is an interesting character whose relevance gets buried with all the boring sub-plots: I sit out here and think convulsively until I’m numbed by dope and confused by my own brain—think about my business woes, my wife, my mistress, my region and my region’s demands and allowances. My idiot brother. My ugly father. Free will? Personal decisions? It’s not that simple, not at all. What am I but the knot, the gnarled dark intersection, of all these strands? They keep me from acting, and they tug at me to act. Stand fast, and I’ll be torn. But if I want to move, then all of these things must break, they all have to be ripped apart, and that’s the end of me just as much as the end of them. I had an inkling about what was going on until around 300 pages. It was tough going after that. A lot of it was indecipherable. The book is downright sleazy at times. Frankheimer rose up, covered his exquisite body with a ragged robe of brown cloth, headed toward the dining room, shutting behind him the door to the study and closing the robe’s folds over the arc of his sesquipedalian dick. Now they were linked, Fairchild and this giant, Melissa the author of this union and in some sense its offspring. Now in this woman they were mixed. Fairchild had known him as a plumbing contractor, the kind you’re sorry you hired, who sometimes had to be rousted out of this very house, where he sat surrounded by his weird books and theories, the kyrie eleison on his stereo, the cocaine and the channeling, the people inside his walls. Now they were married. Maybe it is my fault. It is not an easy book to read. Parts of the book are epistolary with the letters Bill Fairchild writes to the police, interrupting the main plot. Johnson also jumps back and forth between events. It confused the hell out of me. The narrative switches between first and third person and sometimes I did not know which character was doing the talking. Even the dialogs were random at times. Some of the sub-plot choices featuring Inspector Navarro and Clarence Meadows ( Nelson's partner in crime ) were downright dull. Frankly, I really enjoyed large portions of the novel. But after a point, I did not know what the hell was going on. But I finished it anyway. Already Dead is testament to the fact that a writer can do whatever the fuck he wants with his novel. A film director or a music composer would not be this daring. But this is exactly why I keep editing my review. The writer has worked so hard on the novel. I read Angels and loved it. So I keep reading passages from the book. It is an interesting artifact. It is like an alien I want to be friends with because I liked a large portion of it. Nobody can meander and go deeper than the writer. Already Dead is a book which I could not get a grip over. I really wanted to. I loved most of the first 300 pages. I loved the descriptions of the place. Who cares about the characters as long as they are free enough or crazy enough to do whatever it is they wanted to do? If I may say so, none of the characters were properly developed. The long scene with the two assassins' of Nelson Fairchild inside the Buddhist monastery wasn't funny or engaging. Nelson's slow death with him meeting all the spirits of his father and the woman and the two hunters ..... what am I supposed to think about that? Already Dead is like one of those sprawling three hour 70s movies made by pompous filmmakers who harbored a tendency towards excess. Denis Johnson is a writer whom I want to access or be friends with. But Already Dead does not make us good friends. Though I did order another book by him. I like him enough to read all his books.
