Camus makes me think. He is the author who has the power to steer my thoughts, along the line of his beliefs. He is dead. If he were alive, I am sure he would have supported the readers' movement against the irrational outlook of GR administration as regarding the freedom of readers to express their views. He would have hailed their rebellion and joined in to support, because I am sure he understood that all readers have their own opinions. He wouldn't be bothered by criticism. As the choreographer, Mark Morris ( http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/20... ) says : “You don’t have to like me, you don’t have to like my work, but you have to be able to say something about it. I love a vicious review, really ripping something apart, there’s nothing better than that! But it has to be done really courageously and accurately.” I think Manny is one reviewer who has stood for what he feels is right and I join in to add my support by deciding not to review this work, which, as I read, I know will influence me for times to come. Posted with Manny's permission, his deleted review : In the shower just now, I suddenly had a Eureka moment. The aspect of this current censorship war that's been upsetting us most is the feeling of powerlessless. Goodreads can arbitrarily change the rules, and they hardly even bother to respond when we complain. But we are not powerless. There are twenty million of us, and only a few dozen of them. We just need to get a little more organized, and we can easily resist. So here's one concrete way to do it, based on the legend of Hercules. You will recall that Hercules had a difficult time against the Lernean Hydra; every time he cut off one of its heads, ten more grew back. We can do the same thing if we adopt the following plan: 1. Back up all your reviews, so that you have a copy of everything you have posted. 2. If you think that one of your reviews has been unreasonably deleted by Goodreads, repost it with an image of the Hydra at the top. 3. If you see someone else posting a Hydra review, make a copy of it and post it yourself. We can improve this basic scheme with a little thought; for example, it would be better to have a place where we keep HTML marked-up source of reviews, so that they can immediately be reposted with the same formatting, and we need a plan for duplicating deleted shelves. But we can sort that out later. Without getting too bogged down in the details, I'm sure you see what will happen. The net result of Goodreads unreasonably deleting a review will be that it immediately comes back in many different places. People who know their Greek mythology will be aware that Hercules did in fact defeat the Hydra, and Goodreads can use the same method if they dare; they can close down the account of anyone who participates in the scheme. That will work, but I am not sure that anything less drastic will be effective. I think Goodreads will be reluctant to escalate to this level. A large proportion of the most active reviewers are now part of the protest movement, and they would be losing much of the content that makes the site valuable. Even more to the point, the media have already started to get interested (maybe you saw the article in the Washington Post). They would love the story, and it would create a mountain of bad publicity for Goodreads and Amazon. I'd say the odds are heavily in our favor. Why don't we try it? I promise now to respond to any Hydra calls.
