This is the account of the Cuban Missile Crisis from Robert Kennedy who was a crucial member of the team assembled to deal with the crisis and whose opinion was obviously highly regarded by his brother. His statement that within "a few minutes of their (the missiles) being fired eighly million Americans would be dead" was chilling to me as I was a child of 10 at the time and lived in the Southeast so it was quite likely that I would have been one of the victims. He goes on to say that if the tactical air attack, so strongly urged by the military and many others in the small group convened to determine official policy, went wrong the advantage would be that no one would be around to know that they had been wrong. Again, quite chilling. But the strongest argument against military intervention was that it might "erode, if not destroy, the moral position of the US throughout the world". Cool heads prevailed. Patience and restrainst ruled the day and the crisis was finally averted. The US under the leadership of President Kennedy in that situation struck the right balance of diplomacy with assurance that other action could be and would be called for if the Soviets did not remove the missiles albeit a plan done in secret without the perusal and/or approval of Congress. Robert Kennedy's insight was most interesting and gave us a seat at the table (so to speak) on the intricacies of the heated deliberations over those tense three weeks. The book was written shortly before RFK's assassination and published the next year with an afterword included from two men who assessed the crisis and placed it in a historical perspective given wars before and conflicts following up through to the Vietnam War. The book ends with addresses and letters from President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev during those three weeks which if nothing else made me wonder about how this crisis did finally lead to detente and SALT talks eventually making the world a safer place and one less likely to go to the brink as it had done during those frightful days in October of 62.
