James Sire's Habits of the Mind was one of the books assigned while I was a student of the Summit Semester program in Pagosa Springs, CO. In the course of the program, we covered only the first two chapters, due to time constraints. The book has sat on my shelf ever since, until this semester. Upon reading, I was amazed and excited to Sire quoting and referencing so many familiar names - George Marsden, Josef Pieper, Steven Garber, who I've read and appreciated since Semester, and many others who I've not yet been able to read, but intend to, such as Wendell Berry, Simone Veil, Karl Barth, Thomas Merton, and John Henry Newman, among others. It's the Blessed Newman who Sire holds up as a model of Christian intellectualism, and Sire spends two early chapters exploring his life and thought. Not having read Newman prior to this, I found him fascinating and insightful, though Sire's use of his quotes seemed just a bit excessive. As another reviewer pointed out, Sire leaves out any reference to community, and, I think tellingly, dismisses Peter Berger's work on the sociology of knowledge off hand. Steven Garber, who I mentioned above, builds strongly on Berger's work in his own The Fabric of Faithfulness: Weaving Together Belief and Behavior , a book both Sire and myself highly recommend. This focus on the individual mind, alone, is the biggest critique I would offer of the book. Case in point: In Chapter 5, Sire writes: "Indeed, public intellectuals are notorious for their failure to live up to their stated moral values. But at least they can think of themselves as worthy intellectuals. They do not have to bear the burden of doing in order to lay claim to knowing ". (Habits, p. 105) Sire's explanation of this is that these intellectuals do not really know what they claim, thus, they don't do it. But this seems both dismissive and overly simplistic. What about desires, affections, habits, environment? Each can play a role in how a person acts, and are often realized by the individual themselves. For a more complete picture, I would recommend Steven Garber's book The Fabric of Faithfulness: Weaving Together Belief and Behavior and James K.A. Smith's paradigm-shifting Cultural Liturgies series, beginning with Desiring the Kingdom: Worship, Worldview, and Cultural Formation . On a more positive note, much of what Sire has to say about the intellectual disciplines themselves were worthwhile. In particular, I found Sire's section of Lectio Divina both particularly informative and helpful. I thought Sire rested a bit heavily on quotes from other writers, particularly Newman and A.G. Sertillanges, to make his point. The book tends to feel like a collection of quotes, rather than an expression of Sire himself. The writing style also felt a bit disjointed. Though Sire wrote in everyday language, such as would be accessible to the general public, much of the quotes and material are in far more academic language, leading alternatively to Sire seeming overly simple, and the quotes seeming inaccessible and out of place. Also, on a design note, block quotes are frequently inserted into the text, often slicing paragraphs and sentences in two. This design faux pas severally disrupts the flow of reading, and often makes keeping track of what Sire's trying say difficult. Another point of contention: In the last chapter, Sire names C.S. Lewis, George Marsden, Nicholas Wolterstorff, and Alvin Plantinga as the only four examples of Christian intellectuals he sees as assuming a public role as Christian scholars. Frankly, this seems absurd to me. What about Dorothy Sayers, Owen Barfield, or Malcolm Muggeridge? What about Walker Percy or Karol Wojityla, better known as Pope John Paul II? How about Wendell Berry or T.S. Eliot? Each certainly fit Sire's own definition of an intellectual, and have had a significant impact both in and out of the church. I may be misunderstanding Sire, and I hope I am, but it does seem a huge oversight. Though helpful in parts, and though I agree with much of what Sire says, I can't recommend Habits of the Mind. It's fairly derivative, borrowing heavily from other writers, by-and-large one-sided, and occasionally unclear. There's simply better books to read on this topic.
