The non-linear narrative of Shani Mootoo’s Cereus Blooms At Night along with its simple, easy-to-grasp language stands in a stark contrast with what governs the lives of its characters. Set in a fictional town in Lantanacamara, Paradise buzzes with a vibrant flora and fauna. Whenever there is a pause in narration, the book depicts it with an insect that is etched so beautifully in the pages that one cannot help but gawk at them. I did not notice any repetition in the insects that are on the pages and I can only wonder how diverse the island must be. This book is one of the few expensive books that I own and its expense should clearly not be a deterrent in owning this book. Its silken pages are a delight to touch. The novel begins with an elderly woman, Mala Ramchandin, being admitted to Paradise Alms House. Mala has an air of mystery surrounding her which discourages nurses away from her. Tyler, the only man in Lantanacamara to be trained as a nurse, is given the task to look after her and although he is advised to not give in to the whims of the old woman, he looks after her with such love that Miss Ramchandin slowly opens up to him. She barely talks but echoes the sounds of birds and insects and seems to be communicating and being in a close contact with the vibrant fauna of the world around her. Mala grew up in a difficult environment. The difficulties of her life can be fathomed by how she and her sister, Asha, laughed with each other only after making sure that their mouths were cupped. Her father, Chandin Ramchandin, is one of the few early converts of his day who is very close with Reverend Thoroughly, the Christian missionary, and has earned the town’s admiration. Conversion in Cereus Blooms At Night is quite similar to the Christian converts in Chinua Achebe’s Arrow of God . It is shown that people converted not because they had faith in the new god that the white missionaries brought with them, but because of a better prospect, a better future that the new religion promised. Most of the dialogues in the novel are in pidgin English, though it was not difficult for me to comprehend what the characters are saying because of my proximity with most of the people who were brought to the town as slaves from India. The novel packs a blizzard of sensitive themes such as gender, identity, sexual as well as physical violence, incest, etc. which made me contort with abhorrence and repulsion. It is so beautiful and yet so painful that I often found myself asking and wondering if I have a limit beyond which I cannot partake in what is a fictional account to me. I cannot imagine it to be anything but fiction because it is so painful that I might lose myself if I do not. At times, self-delusion is a bliss.
