I particularly love fiction when the allegory and the story march hand-in-hand to a natural conclusion. I don’t need to be spoon-fed, I just relish when the character and the polemic arrive at similar points, after similar journeys. Sounds simple… but, not so much. The Big Sky is a beautifully written novel that takes some getting used to. It’s about the mountain men of the West during the years 1835-43 and A.B. Guthrie’s style is a perfect fit for the era and the people, whom he so lyrically describes. It takes a while to shift gears enough to fully appreciate a three paragraph description of the sound and feel of the north wind in the trees but, once you abandon yourself to the stunningly descriptive style, you’ll begin to get a feel for the things that drew mountain men west. The book certainly doesn’t fit the mold of the western adventure. Do not come to The Big Sky hoping for something in the vein of Lonesome Dove - you’ll be frustrated and disappointed. Expect, instead, a Walden -like meditation on the unblemished frontier, permeated by an intimate look at the type of soul who ventured there and devoted some of his life to its discovery. The reviews here of The Big Sky are punctuated by laments over the despicableness of the character Boone Caudill and I could certainly pigeonhole Caudill as despicable, though I don’t. Instead, I put him into the same category as the allegory Guthrie’s driving home throughout the book, and that is the telling of a tragic story of the ultimate destruction of something pure and good and holy, precipitated unwittingly by the very men who found it most so. In that, Caudill turns out to be, in my thinking, one of the most heart-breaking characters I’ve ever encountered and the seminal events in the destruction of the American West, as described so subtly and agonizingly by A.B. Guthrie here, among the most calamitous. The Big Sky is a profoundly moving study of man’s inexplicable, maddening propensity to destroy the things he loves, woven through a gorgeously poignant ode to the vast, lost American West. Guthrie lays out a righteous, graceful polemic counseling future generations to more wisely shepherd America’s wilderness than did those who came before and, through it, he inspires a deeper contemplation of our place in the world.
