Revived review RIP Larry McMurtry 3 June 1936 - 25 March 2021 He described Lonesome Dove as a "pretty good book". **** Larry McMurtry is as surefooted as any cowboy’s favourite horse. He never trips or stumbles. It doesn’t take many pages before you know this is a 5 star book. As you know this is the enormous story of a big old cattle drive from Texas to Montana. That’s kind of it. Bits get added on here and there but the main idea is to get these thousands of cows across 3000 miles of dangerous territory, through sandstorms, blizzards, bandits, droughts, through Indian nations, across rivers, via grizzly bears and hardly a single town in sight the whole way. It becomes clear that these cowboy guys did not need a 7-Eleven or a Stop & Shop. The whole natural world was their Stop & Shop. If they needed lunch they shot it. There are a couple of things that might set modern readers on edge a bit. Nearly all the female characters are or were whores (their term). And the Native Americans take the usual beating: “How many Indians were they?" Pea tried to think. “A bunch jumped us,” he said. “About twenty, I guess. Gus shot a few.” There are a few oddities. There is an awful lot of loping in this book. Horses never canter or gallop or trot, they lope. Loping is also done by coyotes, wolves and men. There is one of the greatest ninja warrior manic dream pixie girls, a wild child called Janey. And the cowboys, tough as they are, don’t swear. They say “Dern” when provoked. LOVE IN THE OLD WEST In a beefy tough guy story like this love looms large. You might not think, but it does. But it’s the kind of love unknown in the modern world. A man sees a woman two or three times, perhaps doesn’t even speak to her, and he’s in love, and stays thinking about her for the next year. He’s a thousand miles away, it doesn’t matter. These days the internet allows us to fall in love with people we never met either, so times haven’t changed that much. AN EXAMPLE OF MALE FEMALE RELATIONS IN LONESOME DOVE “What was it you said?” he asked finally. “I said we oughta get married,” Louisa said loudly. “What I like about you is you're quiet. Jim talked every second that he didn’t have a whisky bottle on his mouth. I got tired of listening. Also, you’re skinny. If you don’t last, you’ll be easy to bury. I’ve buried enough husbands to take such things into account. What do you say?” THE TOUGH MINDED WOMEN IN LONESOME DOVE : Clara is looking after someone who is ill : “Oh , you don’t have to thank me for a washrag,” Clara said. “I’m not much of a nurse. It’s one of my failings. I’m too impatient. I’ll give a person a week or two, then if they don’t improve I’d just about as soon they’d die.” THE TOUGH MINDED MEN IN LONESOME DOVE “I once drank the urine of a mule. It kept me alive” Po said. LARRY MCMURTRY’S EYE FOR DETAIL IN EVERY ASPECT OF LONESOME DOVE : Some of the cattle were so weak the cowboys had to dismount, , pull their tails and shout at them to get up. (He knows the cowboys would pull the tails). A RATHER BAD SCRAPE ONE OF THE CHARACTERS GETS INTO He was naked, unarmed, without food and something like a hundred miles from the wagon. He didn’t know the country and was up against some tough Indians who did. THE OLD COWBOY SONG LONESOME DOVE REMINDED ME OF : Old Paint When I die, take my saddle from the wall And put it on my pony, and lead him out of his stall; Tie my bones to his back, turn our faces to the west And we'll ride the prairies that we love the best. LONESOME DOVE IS LORD OF THE RINGS, ALMOST And something I noticed – it could be that this is in the nature of most epic stories, but there was a Lord of the Rings vibe about the shape of the whole thing. The first 100 page is as leisurely and unhurried as the first 100 pages of LOTR leading up to Bilbo’s birthday party. A little later the Company of the Ring is formed (nine members). In Lonesome Dove the two ex-Rangers put together a Company themselves for their epic task - seven members. There isn’t a Mordor or a Dark Lord, but the Indians are the Orcs, for sure. Then after the task is accomplished, there is an elegiac, lengthy return to the Shire encountering old faces along the way, exactly mirrored by Captain Call’s return to Lonesome Dove. FOOTNOTE : MODERN WESTERNS This is the 6th I’ve read so far. All either good or great. True Grit by Charles Portis The Sisters Brothers by Patrick deWitt The Thicket by Joe R Lansdale News of the World by Paulette Jiles All the Pretty Horses by Cormac McCarthy When I was a kid Westerns were all over the tv (Bonanza, High Chaparral, all those 1940s horse operas) and I more or less despised them. Then Clint Eastwood rescued the whole genre. Then Hollywood and tv mostly got tired of the Western. But now these modern writers have kicked the whole thing back into life.
