Maggie Blackburn is a quite pianist and music teacher at the renowned Forest Park Conservatory. Maggie's acquiescent manner means that she is usually left in charge of extracurricular work, including being in charge of the graduate students, and having the party the night that alters Maggie's life. The day after the party, when one of her new graduate students shows up alleging he has been assaulted by Rolfe Christensen, a Pulitzer prize winning composer who teaches at the conservatory, Maggie helps encourage the student, Brendan, to report it to the school. As things about Rolfe's past start to come to light and the situation becomes more complex, Maggie finds herself embroiled in a tense situation. I really enjoyed this one too, it's the second to last ARC I got for Joyce Carol Oates, and it was one of the one's I've enjoyed reading more. I didn't like it as much as Double Delight or Starr Bright Will Be with You Soon but it was no where near as terrible as Snake Eyes. I really enjoy her writing style and definitely am going to get more of her books, probably ones she hasn't written under the alias Rosamond Smith. All the one's I've read so far have been written under that alias so. There is rape involved in the book in case that's something anyone wants to avoid. Spoilers ahead. Like the other books there was a reoccurring theme of twins and black outs/hazy memory, which can probably get annoying if you keep encountering it again and again, so maybe I'll wait a while before picking up another one of her books. I do think the twist towards the end for this one was much more obvious and I felt a lot less connected to Mary's feelings for Calvin, so when he spares her at the end it didn't really get to me. I couldn't quite grasp why she was even in love with him honestly, she really did not know him, which he even tells her at the end there. Also Brendan trying to deal with the rape and the whole time when he kept insisting he wasn't gay but what women would want him now, that was pretty hard to read, in a good way. And everything he had to go through, even before the murders, and how Rolfe even had a history of sexual assault that had been covered up before. It might just be because we've been seeing a lot of that unfolding in public lately so it just felt more intense and real when reading the book. I just loved Mary so much the whole time because she kept trying to help Brendan out, even when it looked like he had committed the murders. So a lot of my enjoyment came from watching Mary digging into the investigation and clearing Brendan, probably because most of the times when we've seen these things happening we don't get someone like Mary coming along. The only thing I thought was ridiculous was the Calvin thing, with his wife being his secret twin. That felt unnecessary honestly, and it was kind of obvious after reading some of the other books written by Oates. It just felt like an implausible soap opera twist and cutting it out wouldn't have really made that much of a difference to the book. Calvin still could've been victim to Rolfe's blackmail.
