Kenny Watson is a ten-year-old resident of Flint, Michigan. The year is 1963, and Kenny, having grown up in an overwhelmingly black neighborhood and never visited his mother’s family down South, has not personally experienced much racism. He’s seen violence against people of color on TV, but those scenes might as well be happening on another planet to him. He just worries about playing with his plastic dinosaurs and evading his brother Byron, who’s thirteen and an “official juvenile delinquent.” Unfortunately for Kenny, Byron has become such a problem that their parents declare an intervention. This summer, they’re going to drop Byron off with their old-fashioned maternal grandma who lives in Birmingham. If she can’t make him shape up, nothing can. But as they pile into their signature car, the Brown Bomber, the Watsons have no idea that they’re driving into a maelstrom… Content Advisory Violence : Kenny sees the corpses of the girls killed by the bomb carried out of the smoking ruins of the 16th Street Baptist Church. This is the moment his childhood ends, and he spends the next few months in an apathetic fog. Byron terrorizes the neighborhood. While he has no problem with beating up on Kenny, he sometimes comes to his brother’s defense by bullying those who bully Kenny. On one of these occasions, he forces a boy to slide on the ice, smashing himself into the fence around the school over and over again. Another time, he throws a donut at a bird sitting on a telephone wire, knocking it to the ground dead. Then he gives the bird a funeral and buries it, complete with a little cross made of twigs. Kenny, his friend Rufus, and Rufus’ little brother get a lot of cruel words thrown at them by the schoolyard tough guys. Sex : Kenny catches Dad “accidentally on purpose” brushing his hand against Momma’s “chests.” The lad notes that the last time his parents acted this goofy “was when Byron and me found out we were going to get a sister.” It’s implied that Grandma Sands’ equally ancient male neighbor has moved in with her, although I doubt kids will pick up on it. The hoodlums in the Watsons’ neighborhood have a secret stash of dirty magazines, which Kenny finds gross but has perused anyway. When Momma lists Byron’s many “Fantastic Adventures”, she mentions a “… problem …” with a girl named Mary Ann, the details of which are left entirely to the reader’s imagination. The beleaguered school bus driver tells minor bully Larry Dunn to leave Rufus alone: “You don’t want to start panning on folks…Not with what I know ‘bout your mama.” Language : Byron frequently drops mild swears and occasionally addresses his brother as “Your jive little a$$,” though he usually substitutes “behind.” On one occasion Kenny informs us that By muttered “the S word” which he does not print. Substance Abuse : Somehow the only JV thing that Byron hasn’t done, apparently, is try any illegal drugs or alcohol. He does smoke though. Nightmare Fuel : Kenny ignores his family’s advice and goes to an unsafe swimming hole with a whirlpool. Little sister Joetta didn’t know what a whirlpool was, so Byron concocted a nonsense story about “the Wool Pooh, Winnie’s evil twin brother” who lurks in the water and drowns people. Kenny laughed at this and went alone to the swimming hole anyway, only to find himself trapped in the whirlpool. Struggling for air, he hallucinates that a big blobby, faceless creature is dragging him down by the ankle. He also sees the Wool Pooh in the ruins of 16th Baptist, holding a shoe that Kenny believes belonged to Joetta. I'm not sure if the being is wholly imaginary, or perhaps the personification of Death. Byron tells Kenny and Joetta that Momma makes them wear so many coats in winter because otherwise their “thin Southern blood” would freeze in their veins. He claims that the early morning garbage trucks are full of “froze-up Southern folks,” stiff as statues. Conclusion Christopher Paul Curtis has been one of my favorite authors since I was ten years old. His historical novels are a deft blend of humorous and tragic elements, told with great warmth and often based on personal or family experience. The Watsons was his first book, and his style has gotten more streamlined over the years, but for me, the long episodic chapters of this story add to its considerable charm. The reader gets to know Kenny, his family, and his world so well that we feel him lose his innocence as if it’s happening to us. I really can’t do justice to how this man writes, so here are some quotes from the book: ”Kids,” Dad said, “I almost wasn’t your father. You guys came real close to having a clown for a daddy named Hambone Henderson…had more knots and bumps on his head than a dinosaur. So ask yourselves…if you’d rather be a little [cold] or go through life known as the Hambonettes.” If Momma was trying to make Byron relax she wasn’t doing a real good job at it. All this talk about love and not getting hurt was making him real nervous. There is a chapter entitled “Nazi Parachutes Attack America and Get Shot Down over the Flint River by Captain Byron Watson and His Flamethrower of Death.” [Momma] told us that same sad old story about how when she was little her house caught on fire…We’d heard it so many times that Byron…called it Momma’s Smokey the Bear story. Another chapter title is “Every Chihuahua in America Lines Up to Take a Bite out of Byron.” I loved when Dad talked to me like I was grown-up. I didn’t really understand half the junk he was saying, but it sure did feel good to be talked to like that! Warmly recommended for everyone, but especially middle-school kids who want a book with both humor and depth.
