Rock 'n' roll, the great visceral release for the middle class. Everyone fantasizes at some point about either being the bad boy or doing the bad boy (or both as the case may be)*. Nick Kent looks at the truly dark side of living the rock 'n' roll life - not the glamorous, delightfully-high-with-a-groupie-on-each-arm side - but the OD on heroin in a bathroom alone side, the losing your mind until you're a vegetable side. And Kent has the street cred to pull this off, having been a rock 'n' roller himself and genuinely friends with many of his subjects. And I did frequently wonder how he managed to pull this off and remain friends with the people about whom he wrote such scathing portraits. I kept thinking of the scene in the movie Almost Famous where they call the doe-eyed, aspiring rock journalist kid "the enemy". But despite his friendship, Kent does let us know that many (most?) of these rock-n-rollers are indeed assholes or seriously fucked-up at best. The essays run the gamut from 60s icons (Brian Wilson, Syd Barret, Brian Jones and more) to 90s icon Kurt Cobain and many more in between. The selection of musicians discussed was right in my comfort zone of music taste and even the few people discussed here that I don't care for (Neil Young) nevertheless made for mostly interesting essays. Guns and Roses however sound like they may be even more boring as people than their music but that's a minor quibble. The Iggy Pop and Miles Davis essays were among my favorites perhaps because they both managed to come back from the near-dead and that can generally make for a more interesting tale than someone who shoots up and dies. The essays are frequently an amalgamation of multiple interviews that he'd done over many years of an artist's career and Kent has a way of writing the dialogue and describing a person so you really feel like you're present at the interviews. So, go ahead and curl up on your sofa with your snuggie and read about the dark stuff and be glad you're not a heroin addict. *Sadly, there are no rock-n-roll chicks in this book. Kent had a fling with Chrissie Hynde so I guess he just decided to stay clear of the bad girls. -------------- Before Reading.... Another find at Amoeba. Some sample chapter titles that make this look promising: The Cracked Ballad of Syd Barrett Brian Jones, Tortured Narcissus Sid Vicious - the Exploding Dim Wit Morrissey, the Majesty of Melancholia and The Light That Never Goes Out in Smiths-dom
