4 ☆ In real life tragedy and comedy were so intermingled that when one was most wretched, ridiculous things happened to make one laugh in spite of oneself. I had watched a PBS episode of "A Very British Romance with Lucy Worsley." British literature in the late 18th century is sometimes called “the Age of Sensibility,” in recognition of the high value that many Britons placed on the explorations of feeling and emotion in literature and the other arts. In 1811, Jane Austen published Sense and Sensibility in which Austen esteemed a middle position rather than an endorsement of either extreme. Despite being a fan of Austen, I wasn't enthused about Sense and Sensibility. Released in 1961, A Civil Contract was Georgette Heyer 's contribution to that discussion. I've come to regard Heyer as a novelist whose love of the Regency period was used primarily for entertainment, not social criticism. But A Civil Contract is a cut above many of her other novels, and it surprisingly fascinated me. Many of Heyer's novels have fallen just a bit off of the mark for me, especially with her abrupt endings. Heyer also had indulged in too much detail -- be it clothing, a long list of London attractions to tempt callow gentlemen, the patois of Yorkshire folk or any other class. (I have no idea whether all that slang was even accurate, especially as it sometimes reminded me of the 1920s). While all of these details may have flaunted her knowledge of the Regency period, they also often interrupted the flow of her stories. "Lord, if we were all to marry our first loves what a plague of ill-assorted marriages there would be!” After all, life was not made up of moments of exaltation, but of quite ordinary, everyday things. But in A Civil Contract, Heyer revealed her total comprehension of the mores of English society, which is more challenging to represent than material details. The late Viscount Lynton was a gamester and he died in a hunting accident before his luck could turn. Adam Deveril, the new Viscount Lynton, was shocked by the shabby state of his financial affairs. Fontley Priory - the ancestral home in Lincolnshire - and the London townhouse must be sold. Even with these drastic measures, Adam couldn't be sure whether he and his two sisters would escape ruination. Adam broke the news to Lord Oversley, a longterm neighbor and the father of Julia, the young lady whom Adam desired as his bride. Adam knew that his plight precluded approval for his suit. "I say that you owe it to your name to seize any honourable chance that offers of bringing yourself about," [advised Oversley]. "Honourable? Adam ejaculated. "Selling myself to a wealthy Cit's daughter? Oh, no! Not myself: my title!" Adam was initially repulsed but his pragmatic side overcame his delicacies. A "Cit" was an insulting term for someone who made his money as a member of the merchant class. Aristocrats' wealth, on the other hand, were derived from their land holdings. Oversley, whom Adam wanted as his father-in-law, introduced him to Jonathan Chawleigh, possibly the wealthiest financial wiz in London. Mr. Chawleigh liked Adam and suggested his only daughter Jenny as a marital prospect, one with a dowry that would permit the Deverils to keep Fontley Priory. There was a suggestion of squareness about [Jenny]; she was already plump, and would probably become stout in late life. She was certainly not a beauty, but there was nothing in the least objectionable in her countenance. She was as unlike Miss Oversley as she could be. There was no brilliance in her eyes, no allure in her smile, no music in her flat-toned voice, and not the smallest suggestion of the ethereal either in her person or in her bearing. ... looked as though she had more sense than sensibility. Within a month of meeting the Chawleighs, Adam entered a marriage of convenience with Jenny. His personal affairs, such as the need to sell out his captaincy commission, required a great deal of attention. Dreams were without a future, and [Adam] did not try to discover what his might be, being too tired to force his brain to look forward... Adam, back in his unquiet dream, only observed the dictates of his breeding. Good manners demanded a certain line of conduct, and it was second nature to him to respond to that demand. But Julia Oversley was a fairy-like creature who reveled in her sensibility. She wouldn't relinquish her hopes of a future with Adam. A Civil Contract followed Adam and Jenny's life during their first 14 months together against the dramatic backdrop of Napoleon's capture and escape and the epic showdown at Waterloo. This couple had the widest social gulf of all the pairs I've read in Heyer's novels. The author unobtrusively highlighted the unwritten social rules that separated the aristocratic and Cit classes. Then there was the question of how to behave in a marriage that had arisen only because of the transfer of funds. Life was further complicated by Julia's insistence upon forming a triangle. All quite interesting as I've written. The only complaint I have with this story is Jenny's behavior. She completely effaced herself and epitomized a Stepford wife. Her subservience to Adam was so thorough that it could only foment the women's liberation movement a few years after this novel was published. As Jenny told Julia, "[Adam] didn't choose between me and you, Julia; it was between me and ruin. You say he won't be happy but at least he'll be comfortable."
