Sherlock Holmes, the greatest consulting detective, has a reputation of being cold, calculating, single-purposed and lacking in human empathy. ... So, did he believe in God? This book has been on my bookshelf, waiting to be read, for many years. Being a huge fan of the Conan Doyle stories, I’d become aware of many writers who tie their beliefs or proclivities to the Holmes name. Some explore his favorite foods in order to collect cookbook recipes. Tour books tie tourist sites to story locations. (I haven’t found a Sherlock Holmes guide to romance, though!) So this book (which had been an impulse buy) sat neglected on the shelf. Perhaps it was a case of the right book at the right time, but I loved this one. At the time of this writing, the writer was the Parish Minister of the Universalist Church Of West Hartford, Connecticut. (Having once been a Unitarian Universalist myself, I had to smile at his joke about Universalist prayers beginning, “To Whom It May Concern.”) A fan of Holmes stories and mysteries in general, he explored the religious purpose served by the detective story. This book is the result of that investigation. There were a number of points made that caught my attention right away: * Holmes doesn’t remain a “constant” character throughout the stories. He experiences personal growth and he does change. * Before the Great Hiatus, Watson grows increasingly concerned about Holmes’ cocaine use. There is no mention of Holmes taking drugs after his return. * During his 3-year absence, Holmes engages on a spiritual journey. In fact, part of it was in an area that would have put his life in extreme danger had he been discovered. * The Truth is important to Holmes ... finding the solution. However, there are multiple times that he releases a wrong-doer who was caught-up in a tangled web and is unlikely to commit another crime. The writer also asserts that a fascination with solving a “mystery” (and taking comfort from the world seeming a bit safer place for the moment) might be a stepping stone to being curious about God’s “mysterion.” After all, a serious exploration of religion begins with an exploration and understanding of oneself. Sherlock Holmes developed his talents through observing what he saw, and paying special attention to what “the small things” revealed. He would spend time organizing the minutiae into a recognizable pattern. (The writer doesn’t mention it, but I wonder if a “three pipe problem” was a form of meditation.) When Holmes returns from The Great Hiatus, he is a different person. Had he turned that gift for introspection on himself? There are many, many worthwhile discussion points in this book. Some of them will be points I intend to explore in my own meditation sessions. Others caused me to recall events from a beloved story in a different light ... and have awakened a desire to reread them. Best of all, this isn’t written in a “dry” style of a textbook. I was engaged throughout and would recommend it to spiritual seekers and/or devotees of the Sherlock Holmes stories.
