Wow. I don't know what to say. I don't have the right words. Guy Gavriel Kay had them all though. This may be the most beautiful single read of my life. In one standalone book I feel like I went on a journey the likes of which I usually can only experience over the course of a long series, and not even then. For the last 5 hours finishing this thing I was an emotional wreck, and I can very honestly say no work of art has done that to me since Harry Potter 7 came out the summer after I graduated from high school in 2007, a read that marked the end of my childhood. A Song for Arbonne has put me in a wistful mood, a mixture of both happy and sad--leaving me sensitive to the poignance of the fragility and beauty of our lives. I feel like I want to be a better person. Like I want to break out my ukulele and sing love songs to my wife as I used to when we first met. Like I want to cry over unrequited and lost love from my youth. I don't understand what fell magic GGK reached for to craft this masterpiece, but I know I was under its spell from start to finish. If I had to try to describe what kind of book it is, I'd say it's a character driven political epic with an unceasing heartfelt/elegiac tone created by the most elegant prose I've ever experienced. Kay does what most fantasy authors fail to do with political plots, which is truly getting the reader to care about the fate of the places at stake if war is to come or if they fall under evil hands. In most political stories, the stakes are felt mostly for the characters we've come to care about, but here Kay got me to fall in love with not only the people but the country of Arbonne. I always felt grounded in both the history and the present-day political situation, which was nuanced and multi-faceted enough to feel complex while not overly so to the point of being convoluted. It took me a long time to read this, since I was in no rush and often felt satisfied just reading a chapter a day or every few days--each one felt like its own perfectly crafted short story with its own sense of closure, often leaving me with a feeling of wistfulness after having been left on a particularly poignant note or image. I was continually in awe of how beautiful I thought the writing was while at the same time being fully immersed in the characters' internal lives and the outward plot events, which always seemed to be moving forward with great import and momentum. I have an urge to discuss all of the characters and themes and plot events that captivated me, but it was basically everything, and I'll let you discover it all on your own if you haven't already. I think I've found a new favorite author and maybe even a new favorite book. Bravo, GGK. Bravo.
