A DOCTOR’S VISION OF HEAVEN AND HELL Richard E. Eby was a certified obstetrician and gynecologist who taught at the College of Osteopathic Physicians and Surgeons. He wrote in the Foreword to this 1971 book, “It is the author’s prayer that the reader will find in these pages the evidence of things not always seen and the substance of things he can still hope for… we can seek and find His Kingdom on earth as it is in heaven wherein each dwells within the other. The author is using his personal experiences and memories to illustrate Divine truths in lives during the unbelievable human experiments of the twentieth century when God graciously tolerated mankind’s abysmal foolishness and over scorn… God still forgivingly awaits our awakening!” The first 200 pages of this book detail Eby’s background and life (and frankly, it was of little/no interest to me). But eventually, he recounts what is one of the earliest Near-Death Experiences (NDE) put into print. He recalls, “Maybelle [his wife] has described for me the day’s activities preceding my unscheduled visit to Paradise (the reception room to Heaven)… since my memory of that day was mercifully erased… Quickly noting the broken railing and broken cement slab, she saw the body lying… head-down in a pool of blood… She instinctively screamed in anguish and bent to check for pulse or breath. Neither.” (Pg. 200-201) He recounts, “In the twinkling of an eye Jesus took me out of this world… My initial gasp… was as quickly followed by an overwhelming sense of Peace… so complete that I instantly knew that it was the promised gift of the Spirit from our Lord… Aside from the complete absence of pain… I looked like me, felt like me, reacted like me… Being a physician, my first instinct was to inspect my new body, and I instantly admired it!... I was clothed in a translucent flowing gown… I was instinctively aware that the Lord of Lords was everywhere about this place, though I did not see Him.” (Pg. 202-203) He continues, “My gaze riveted upon the exquisite valley in which I found myself… There was no single light source as on earth. I realized that everything seemed to produce its own light… I had been aware of the most beautiful, melodious, angelic background music that the ear of man can perceive… I was not prepared for the … all-pervading aroma of heaven… Never can I be the same again… Fortunately for me, Jesus elected not to show me more of the heavenly wonders that day. I could not have coped with another revelation… I decided to find my wife and share this unbelievable peace and joy… I heard her distant voice calling ‘Richard, Richard…’ My mind stopped working and all was silent and black. Later I would realize that I was back on earth where the prayers of many had been answered for my return! And the next day I would hear Jesus speak to me on the fourth floor.” (Pg. 204-208) While visiting Lazarus’ Tomb in Jerusalem, the lights went out, and “In the twinkling of an eye Jesus was standing beside me. I could not see Him nor touch Him, but He was there… I heard the same wonderful Voice… ‘My son; I showed you heaven, now I show you hell. You must know about them both… You must be able to tell them they can choose heaven or hell… They must choose between My love and eternal life, or Satan’s lies and eternal death.’ … Then He was gone, and my two minutes of hell started!... A sense of absolute terror gripped my being. The immensity of my isolation… was overwhelming. I would have screamed but there was no voice. If it were not for Jesus’ explicit command that I tell about it, this experience would be too frightening to relate… No one could help but Jesus, and He was gone!... I would never see another person… I would never hear a voice again---either friend or enemy… Despite the utter silence I heard demons taunt me… And then I noticed the COLD… and the SMELL! Horrid, nasty, stale, fetid, rotten, evil… The clammy wet walls held me crushed for eternity without escape, without a Savior, without anything to maintain sanity! And then it was over…” (Pg. 228-230) He advises, “[Hell] was designed for Satan and his demons---not for man! To get there one must buy a ticket from the Devil with a soul as payment. It is not worth it… not when Heaven’s mansions are free!” (Pg. 231) This ‘early’ book may interest some Christians studying Near-Death Experiences.
