November 11, 2017: Setting aside for good. Have checked other reviews and this isn't the right biography for me. Not sure it is the right biography for anyone unless they really don't like Luther, or they are sure they don't want to like him. October 31, 2017: Picked this up again, only a few chapters in. Still not sure if this is the biography of Luther I want to read. It just happens to be the bio I have . The author is secular and seems somewhat hostile to Christian faith in general. Marius does not hold Catholic beliefs and practices in any higher/lower regard than their Protestant counterparts. Reading my earlier comments (below) I cannot tell if I missed his skepticism and dismissive attitude about basic tenants of faith or just chose to overlook them, as I sometimes do early in a book, trying to give an author the benefit of the doubt. I want to learn about Luther, but I know there is SO much written about and by him, I cannot afford to waste time sorting through prejudice/bias/opinion. Not sure if I will be able to finish this. Going to try to read a bit more, and/or skim read. So far it is a 1.5; the author not even sounding like he cares one way or another about Martin Luther. If a biographer does not like who he is writing about, how can he be trusted? Feb 9, 2011: My initial reaction was, 'Not an easy read. Marius paints a tortured picture of Luther.' The first few chapters nearly put me off the book. But I put it down, tried another bio on Luther and that was worse, so I came back to this one and picked it up further in where Luther was engaged in his famous debate with Eck. In so doing I skipped some of the initial psychological profiling and got into the story of his life. It's still slow going at times. The author tends to give way more detail than I want, but occasionally throws in some very interesting historical info about letters from Erasmus and arguments with Sir Thomas More, etc. -- fascinating. His speculative philosophizing about Luther's mental states could be left out. All in all, however, I think he does a fair job of presenting the historic time period with all its many faceted politico-religio-socio-economic dynamics. Unlike so many books written about Luther and the Reformation, Marius takes great pains not to take sides but to film the scene from all camera angles. Not a bad effort ... so far ...
