One Fearful Yellow Eye is the 8th book in Travis McGee mystery series by John D. MacDonald . Travis McGee is a beach bum in Florida who gets involved in cases, trying to help people get out of some sort of trouble. He's not technically an official PI, but somewhat more like The Equalizer, but one who works more by the seat of his pants and his intuition in helping these individuals. McGee gets a phone call from an old friend, Glory, who is now living in Chicago. The two had a past, when Glory got into serious trouble back in Florida and McGee helped her out and helped her find herself again. He also introduced her to her husband and stood in at their wedding. Her husband Dr. Foster Geis has passed away and she has now discovered that his estate has somehow disappeared and that Foster's children from a previous marriage believe that Glory has hidden it someplace. McGee agrees to go to Chicago to help. Glory is the good Dr's 2nd wife. While his first wife was dying, he had a relationship with his house-keeper's daughter and she got pregnant by him. She was married off and he helped fund the child's life. He also had a relationship with his scrub nurse which had been broken off. Money he had set aside for Glory and his two adult children (50 / 25 / 25) has disappeared. Foster had removed it from trust funds and converted to cash. His financial adviser provides as much info as possible to McGee and McGee begins to check out the children, the cook, the nurse and others in his investigation. McGee struggles trying to find out what happened but thinks Foster may have been black mailed about something in his past. I'll leave the plot at that. I always like Travis McGee. He's a straight shooter and a trust worthy ally. I found the middle of this story got sort of muddy, almost too much description and time spent with McGee speculating on life, his past and his surroundings. But it still moves along and when McGee begins to grasp the plot, it moves at a high speed pace with sufficient action and tension to satisfy anyone. There is a mysterious sub-plot that comes to fruition at the end of the story, a fascinating unforeseen (by me anyway) conclusion. The description of wintery Chicago even gave me chills. The characters are all well-defined and three dimensional. The story is all in all satisfying and an entertaining read. I had some doubts initially but thought the last chapters brought the story to new heights and made it worth starting and working through. (4.5 stars)
