Not a Good Mystery, Not a Good Romance. “Passion’s Bold Fire” by Rosalyn Alsobrook tries to serve two masters: as both a mystery and a romance, and it fails to achieve excellence or even anything approaching goodness in either category. The Story: The first person we are introduced to in the book is the heroine, Karissa Caine. Although Karissa is wealthy and a prominent socialite in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, she is far from happy. The primary reason Karissa is unhappy is her father, Lawrence, is dying. As the book opens, Karissa is visited at the Caine family home by a woman, Jacqueline (Jacque) Lawler, who drops three major bombshells on Karissa: Bombshell #1: Jacque overheard four men planning to kill Lawrence while she was working at a bar. Bombshell #2: Jacque and Lawrence were lovers for six years. Bombshell #3: Jacque is seven months pregnant with Lawrence’s child. Soon after Jacque’s arrival, Lawrence is assassinated and Jacque is shot, but manages to survive. Before going into hiding, Jacque tells Karissa the names of the four men who were planning to kill Lawrence: Shawn, Thomas, Joey, Jack. The four names, however, were said as a ruse to throw her and anyone else off the trail of the real killers and the mastermind behind the killing of Lawrence Caine and his manager, Clay Jones. At the reading of Lawrence’s will, another semi-bombshell: Lawrence names Karissa head of his business interests, much to the dismay and anger of her half-brother, John, who has been running things. The reason: Lawrence doesn’t trust John’s business sense, with good reason. After the reading, Karissa decides to find her father’s killers herself, even though she has no experience in detective work or investigation. Identifying herself as Catherine Sobey-her mother’s Christian and maiden names-Karissa takes a job in the Lucky Choice Tavern in the mining town of Black Wall, Pennsylvania, near her father’s coal mine. Later, we meet the hero of the book, Shawn Madden, a private investigator who is working in Black Wall, investigating the Molly Maguires, the infamous Irish American group who were involved with coal miners in Pennsylvania. Using a cover as a mine worker, Shawn was hired by mine owner Richard Porterfield to find out about the Maguires and find out who killed Lawrence. Shawn meets Karissa in the bar and they are attracted to each other. Later, after Karissa is nearly raped by one of the bar patrons, Shawn tells everyone that Karissa is “his woman.” We also find out that Shawn is a widower; his wife, Nicolette, died giving birth to their son, who passed away shortly thereafter as well. Shawn previously worked as a business broker and as a Pinkerton agent before becoming a private investigator to help dull the pain of losing his loved ones. As part of his cover for being in Black Wall, he has helped spread a story that he killed his wife and her lover after finding out she committed adultery; this is not true. John later shows up in Black Wall, expecting to see the man who killed his father sentenced and hung, but that man escapes from prison, with help from Shawn, who knows the man is innocent. How does Shawn know? The man was with Shawn when the murder was committed. Later, Porterfield tells Shawn Karissa’s real name, and also tells John that his half-sister is not mourning her father’s death as she said, but is actually investigating it. John then sets out to bring her back to Pittsburgh. That’s not all he plans, however. John is the person who murdered his father (in the interest of fairness, he didn’t pull the trigger. He did, however, pay the men who did.), and later, he tries to kill both Karissa and Shawn. Karissa kills John, however, saving both her and Shawn’s lives as well as three others, and eventually Karissa and Shawn have their happily ever after. While most of the problems with this book are not major, they do collectively add up to a big problem and a disappointing book, although, I should be used to this with Rosalyn Alsobrook. There is also one very big problem. Issue #1: In the trailer on the back of the book, it is stated that “Catherine” gets drink orders wrong. That doesn’t actually happen. Issue #2: Recycled names. Kelly, John, Frank, Catherine/Katherine, Sobey, Bebber. All names that Mrs. Alsobrook used in previous books; all used again in this book. Issue #3: Uninteresting characters. Neither Karissa/Catherine nor Shawn were terribly interesting. Then again, this book was written by Rosalyn Alsobrook, who has a history of taking promising concepts and writing non-interesting books. Issue #4. A sloppily written mystery. Karissa and Shawn don’t discover that John is the killer until Chapter 22, pages 450 to 474 of a 478 page book. We the readers, however, find out that John is the murderer...in Chapter 8, pages 160 to 165. 300 or so pages before the lead characters do. There, Mrs. Alsobrook lays out-in a way even Stevie Wonder can see-John all but acknowledging his guilt and laying out the motives why he did what he did. I do not read or watch a lot of mysteries-although I am trying to change that-but that comes across as incredibly sloppy work. The final 300 pages or so were anti-climactic. Either Mrs. Alsobrook or her editors caught this fact and tried-badly-to throw a red herring in, with Shawn arguing with Porterfield that he may have been the murderer. Very poor execution. Sex: Mrs. Alsobrook’s 1970’s Harlequin Romance love scenes are in full effect here during the one incredibly boring love scene. Violence: In addition to the violence above, John brutally assaults his housekeeper. That is mildly graphic but none of the violence is really descriptive. Bottom Line: I am so glad I am almost done with my Rosalyn Alsobrook books, for now. I will finally get the chance to hopefully read some good books by some good authors soon. “Passion’s Bold Fire” is more like Passion’s Flickering Match.
