End of the year book report time. While crowds of people pack themselves into Times Square a couple of miles due west from me I'll give some thoughts on this particular book. I expected to love this. After Karen's glowing review of Winter's Bone . Instead of being blown away by this book I was just kind of eh about it. I just realized I only gave this three stars while giving the last couple of Crumley books I read four stars. I liked this about as much as the Crumley novels though, but I don't feel like messing with the sanctity of the original star ratings. Actually, there is a lot I like about this book more than the Crumley books. I just keep comparing them in my head because they are both prominently about folks we might off-handely call rednecks, although in both cases I think that the designation is a little weak. I think that in Woodrell's case there is something markedly different from what one would consider a redneck and what an Ozark hillbilly is. Or maybe not markedly, but different in any case. One thing I like more about this book than the Crumley novels is that this isn't about a detective. It's a crime novel, about people committing crimes. Specifically it's about an obscure writer who goes to try to talk his criminal older brother into turning himself in to the law and instead decides to join him in a scheme to harvest some marijuana and make some dough. What is great about the 'crime' going on is how small time the crime is but who serious and deadly the execution of it is. Not that I ever experienced anyone dying in the small time pot-dealers I knew in my younger days, but the whole atmosphere caught the feeling of white-trash involved in dealing with pot. It's not a high glamor heist or big score going on, but it's worth enough money that to people who are pretty fucking poor it's a pretty big deal. I would have liked the novel to be grittier. Instead the focus kept falling back on the main character and his lukewarm writing career, which makes sense; I'm fairly sure that the narrator is in some way supposed to be Woodrell. There could have been more given about some of the other characters involved in the pot growing operation. Woodrell did a great job in creating a nineteen year old nymphette who could have easily degraded into a mere object for the author to play out his fantasies of having sex with a young virgin with but instead he created in her a pretty interesting character who dreams of escaping from the hillbilly world she was born into but with dreams for a Hollywood world that she doesn't even realize no longer exists. It reminded me of people I knew growing up in the pre-internet days whose view of the world outside of the almost middle of nowhere town they lived in was a mess of stories, picked up bits of facts, rumors and hearsay that they created a livid but probably unrealistic world out of. I wanted more from this novel than I was given, but I haven't given up on Woodrell and I will be trying at least another book or two before I give up hope on him.
