It isn’t very often that a book truly surprises me, particularly one that deals with a well-worn plot line, like time travel. This is a time travel book unlike most of the others I have read. It is full of delicious descriptions that are so accurate and detailed that they make you feel you have literally stepped into the world of 1882. Since Finney was able to take me to 1882 so easily, I had no reason to doubt that his character, Simon Morley, could get there as well. Si is transported to 1882 through a government program. He is meant to be an observer, but I doubt it would be a surprise or a spoiler to admit that he becomes a bit more than that. The evolution of the story is so natural and unforced that I found myself thinking “if we could time travel, this would be the way”. Just as important, and even more surprising, I was taken off-guard by the ending. I did not expect it. I did not figure out any of the major twists. Another unique and wonderful element of this book is revealed in its subtitle, An illustrated novel . Indeed, the book is sprinkled with old photographs and sketches that depict New York City as it was in the 1800s. A major element of the story circles around The Dakota, a beautiful old Victorian building that still stands in New York, dwarfed by the sky-scrappers and reminding us that architecture was once a wonderful blend of spires, curlicues and multi-leveled roofs. Even a modern photograph of it conjures up the world of Edith Wharton or Herman Melville (who gets a passing reference in the book that made me smile). The illustrations add another sweet element that perfectly compliments the narration. What I loved the most about this book, however, was just how much fun it was. I smiled repeatedly, I held my breath the way I used to do on rollercoasters, I read when I should have done other things, because I needed to know what was going to happen next, I never wanted to put it down. What more could you want from a novel? Well, perhaps this, that in the end it had something worthwhile to say...and this one did. One more thing I cannot resist sharing is a quote I absolutely loved, and I'm betting most of my GR friends will appreciate, just as I did. "I even envy you this day. Have you ever given someone a book you enjoyed enormously, with a feeling of envy because they were about to read it for the first time, an experience you could never have again?" Yes, yes I have.
