I’m conflicted about this book. On the one hard, it’s absolutely brilliant. It really is. It’s slow to start, but after the first chapter I was pulled in and just kept turning page after page. I was desperate to know what happened next. The character voices sang to me – sang to me through the pages. On the other hand, the subject matter. I’m not one to mark a book down purely because of the subject matter. This deals with teenager runaways, teenage junkies, spoilt bitches who get everything they ever wanted… What worries me is that there’s not really enough of an impact. Not enough goes wrong. There’s not enough to dissuade young impressionable minds from using drugs, from dipping in, from experimenting with needles and tablets and powder. Now, I’m not an impressionable teenage mind. I’ve never done drugs, never smoked, and I only drink alcohol once in a blue moon. I’m 24 years old. But, in light of recent events to deal with my personal situation, I have contemplated self-harm. I thought about cutting myself when I was so deep into stress, anxiety, and depression. And I only thought about it because from everything I’ve read, it’s not actually that bad. It helps with release. It helps make you feel better. Sure, you scar up afterwards, but I was looking for something to help me deal with my situation (which, in case you’re wondering, is this: I’m Australian, and I’m as good as trapped in shitty-town England for the foreseeable future. Which is not fun. There’s a lot of other factors contributing but that’s the main one.) I didn’t do it. By complete chance I accidentally opened a vein in my leg and bled all over my bathroom. My fiancée kept me calm and we eventually managed to close the vein. But the sight of all that blood scared me off thinking of cutting myself anymore. By the way, if you’re reading this? Don’t cut yourself. I am being completely honest when I say there are better ways of dealing with things. You don’t have to harm yourself to feel better. You don’t have to starve yourself or get drunk or shoot up. Talk to someone you trust and they will help you through whatever shit it is that you’re going through. But I was reading the book I was appalled, because here are a bunch of strong-voiced characters telling us how easy it is to get into drugs, how good it makes you feel, how easy it is to quit and pick you life back up. No one dies from an OD. No one fucks up their life beyond repair . The kids run away from home – one from an abusive family and the other because she’s a bratty spoiled little bitch who only wants her own way – and at the end of the book they manage to pick up the pieces of their lives and live on as if they never touched the stuff . That’s what bothers me. What if someone younger and more impressionable than I picks up this book, sees how apparently easy it is to dabble in drugs, and decides to experiment themselves? What if they fuck it up – because it’s just not as simple as the book makes it seem. I suppose that’s why this book was challenged and talked about going on the banned list for a while. Because of the message it sends. But it also won a Carnegie Medal, so what the fuck do I know? I only know that I wouldn’t want my children to read this. I’d only want other adults, adults who know who they are and what they want out of life to read it. Adults who have decided whether or not they’re into drugs, alcohol, self-harm. Adults who won’t be swayed by such a sweet message. And I doubt that was the message, to be honest. The book’s not advocating drug use. It’s supposed to be some sort of warning. It’s supposed to turn kids off wanting to do drugs. I only know that if I had read it when I was younger, maybe I wouldn’t have had the strength to say no when something was offered to me. And truth be told, it really is an amazing book. Each character has such a distinct voice – and we jump around rather a lot. From a purely technical point of view, I don’t like how many different characters we jump into the POV from. Some of them seem completely irrelevant, telling a piece of the story that could have easily been told by someone else and therefore reduced the cast of characters. But then, I realised that each and every character has something important to say. Whether it’s a junkie trying to come down off a high or a lonely shopkeeper who visits prostitutes. It reflects the real world – Burgess even says so himself in a foreword: This is based on real stories, real events, and real people. People admit things in this book that they’d try to keep hidden from the other characters. Weakness. Shame. Regret. I had to put it down about half way through. I was fully expecting the appearance of the heroin, but I wasn’t expecting the teenage prostitution and pregnancy. Now, don’t call me a hypocrite. I do some pretty awful things to my own characters. But those awful things happen in a high fantasy setting: it’s always a bit distant from a story set in the real world, based on real damn events. Characters are never given an introduction. They just randomly show up. At one point, I was wondering who the fuck one character was and it turns out it was one girl’s baby . Time jumps forward in increments from a few minutes to a few months. I could never keep in my head how old they were. Those are the technical issues I had with the book, but I don’t think it’s enough to reduce a star. Eventually you could figure everything out. I suppose when it comes down to it, I didn’t even really like the characters, either. Gemma’s a selfish bitch. Tar’s weak. The other characters dance around the edges giving us their point of view when all I really want to do is read more about how Gem and Tar are fucking up their lives. I suppose I take one star off a five star rating because that promise never came to be. I was disappointed. But still, I loved this book so much and I think it is important that it be read – and yeah, maybe even teenagers SHOULD read it, so long as it’s with a guided discussion about it as well so they can dissect what happens in the book and come to the conclusion that is Don’t Do Drugs. And I know I’m probably not in the best place to be reviewing such a hard-hitting book because of this situational depression I’m in, but I want to hug it to my chest and the same time burst into tears.
