Opinion unchanged on re-reading. :) The only thought to add concerns Lydia. Proof that GH CAN write teenage characters who are young, unexperienced, and yet endearing (or at least highly entertaining). My recent encounter with the horrible Horry in The Convenient Marriage has shaken my faith a little in GH, so I really needed to reread this book to redress the balance. --------------------------------- Original Review: Before I picked up this book, I was in a MOOD and a certain state of mind. It is when I know I should be reading something very-very specifically suited to my needs, but have no idea what these are. Yeah, I hate it, for I know that unless I find A BOOK to fit said mood/mindset, I would go on like this and like this But then I read Emilia 's absolutely awesome review of A Civil Contract and just knew that I have to try it, even though books by Georgette Heyer had not previously transported me to places of pure literary delight (well, apart from The Grand Sophy , but that is a different story altogether - yet to be written), only to mild entertainment. But obviously, I have reached the point in my reading history where this is to change and I will give books by Heyer (new and already read) another chance and we begin our relationship anew. But before I go on, I still need to pay hommage to Emilia and to her aforementioned review. I agree with her in all the points she raised and also find it hard to write a review of my own without copyright infringement. But I will try. If you read both reviews and find I did steal: it is owing to her strong influence. :) I read my first Heyer books in 2019 ( Venetia , Frederica , The Grand Sophy ) and I did not fall in love with any of them. It must have been due to some false expectations (although in Venetia's case also some personal disgust with Damerel). For some reason I kept searching for romance and chemistry, which I did not find. I should have known better and now I do. After I reread Sophy for the 2nd time, I came to love Heyer's characterisation, the dynamics between her creations and humour and found the absence of "romantic" love very refreshing. It was the same for A Civil Contract . The relationship between the main couple (heroine-hero are just not fitting titles for them) was so good: REAL, RELATABLE and UNROMANTIC and it was just what I needed. It was also with this book that I realised just how accurate Heyer's grasp was on the Regency era whether it was military history, manners, fashion, housekeeping and what have you. Since then I have read her biography ( Georgette Heyer: Biography of a Bestseller by Jennifer Kloester , so I know that yes, she did a great amount of research with her books that can easily be called academic, so As one of my pet peeves in historical romance books is the annoying as heck sad fact that most authors haven't got the slightest clue about the eras they choose to write about or think it necessary that they should, I appreciate the effort Heyer put into her books as well as the fact that they DO manage to transport me back to a kind of Regency that feels authentic. Quoting from Jennifer Kloester 's GH biography (Chapter 33): "Since first writing about the Regency in 1935, Georgette had built up a personal library of some 2000 volumes with many general reference books and dictionaries of biography, phrase, slang, dialect, place names, Latin, French, Spanish and English. She had collected a range of history books , texts about specific subjects such as snuffboxes, coaching inns, the military, London, etiquette and clothing. Fore details of life in the period and it slanguage she favoured primary sources over secondary and owned works by most of the 18th and early 19th century diarists. Other contemporary books about Regency life included The English Spy, The Hermit in London , memoirs of the Court of England during the Regency, Harriet Wilson's autobiography and Georgette's own particular favourite: Pierce Eagan's Life in London, a treasure trove of Regency argot and etiquette. ... Jane Austen was a vital source and Georgette regularly sought inspiration, vocabulary and phrases from her favourite author's letters and novels. Georgette's extensive knowledge of Regency Fashion cam mainly from studying contemporary magazines including "La Belle Assembly", "The Ladies Monthly Museum", The Gentelmen's Magazine" .... She also read contemporary books about hunting, sports, postal system, household management and expenditure. She kept all the useful details in reference notebooks, compiled alphabetical lists of slang terms and popular expressions, gathered colloquial phrases. I also loved that the book itself gives a bow, or at least a polite and kind nod to Sense and Sensibility . And it is not in copying the plot point blank, but by highlighting Austen's ideas and "messages" and proving how universal and true to life they are. We are shown how by indulging in exaggerated sensibilities people can do harm both to themselves and to others and how phony and tiresome this behaviour may be even in the eyes of one's loved ones. It also advocates the "simple joys of life" as opposed to grand passion, but not in any didactic and spoonfeeding way. Through the character of Lady Julia (the embodiment of these sensibilities), Heyer manages to make her point quite brilliantly. I was super impressed with the way we are introduced to Julia through Adam's lovelorn eyes and then how by degrees we are led to realise what is behind the beautiful and beguiling facade (nothing very dreadful, just realistic :). It is extremely well done. Koestler writes in her biography that Heyer “had hopes of writing a new kind of novel, but was unsure about it. She thought the book would be neither farcical, nor adventurous and would depend on success whether I can make the hero ‘as charming as I believe he was. And also, of course, if I can make a quiet story interesting.’ She wanted “A Civil Contract” to be quite different from previous books and planned to set the story in 1814 to 1815 with the culminating point the financial panic in London over Waterloo. For me, she managed to make the story interesting and intriguing and the "hero" of the story Adam, besides having personal charm, also has integrity, honesty and is quite considerate of the feeling of others even if he does not like them. The story starts when Adam, an officer under the Duke of Wellington in the Peninsula Wars, has to return to England after his father's death. The old chap has left the family in financial ruin. Adam -now a Viscount- is determined to clear his name and his father's debts and is even willing to sell his inheritance (his seat in the country). He also has to realise that these are not the only sacrifices he has to make: he also has to give up his dreams of marrying the love of his life, the beautiful, sylph-like Lady Julia. Julia's family is on the most friendly terms with Adam, but her father tells him that there is no way he can consent to their marriage. However, to help Adam out of his financial difficulties, he sends Mr Jonathan Chawleigh, an honest, but vulgar and fabulously wealthy businessman from the City to him. Mr Chawleigh has an offer to make: Adam marries his plain, but well educated daughter, Jenny and makes her a viscountess. In return, Mr Chawleigh will take care of his financial problems. Adam is both repulsed and entertained by the offer and is determined to refuse, but in the end the marriage comes through and a new life awaits both of them full of pitfalls. I do not mean to spoiler how it all goes, but GH builds up the relationship dynamics between all the characters beautifully. It is fascinating to watch the characters interact with each other and see how they are navigating the waters. But whether they are determined to change (Jenny) or reluctant (Adam) or unaware that they are changing (Mr Chawleigh), change they do, if not in character, but certainly in awareness and reevaluating ideas and principles as they go along. All characters -main and supporting- are superbly done, but GH was right in fearing that Mr Chawleigh would outshine them all ( ‘he continually tried to steal the whole book and had to be firmly pushed off the stage’ ). They way he and Adam interact is as fascinating to watch as Adam's relationship is evolving in certain directions both with Julia and Jenny. Adam's sister, Lydia is another awesome character and I loved her storyline. The plot of what happens before and after Waterloo is very exciting and made the whole Regency-feel more authentic. I loved the book from start to finish and will reread it soon. I have listened to the audiobook narrated very well by Dominic Thorburn.
