Some great relationship advice along with some important eternal spiritual principles: "The roots of the problems we face in the world, in our national life and in our family and personal lives, are spiritual. The symptomatic manifestations (branches) of these problems are social, economic, and political, but the roots are moral and spiritual. And they lie first within each individual and then within the family (p 1)." "Vision--An Eternal Perspective (p 3)" "By obedience to the principles and ordinances of the eternal gospel of Jesus Christ, men and women will gradually become 'partakers of the divine nature' and will feel comfort and confidence in the presence of the Eternal Father... This is the purpose of life (p 5)." "Eternal life is essentially the quality of character and personal integrity achieved through Christlike service and lifetime obedience to the principles of the gospel, which through the grace and power of the Savior enable us to be so changed--gradually and almost imperceptibly--in our very nature (p 6)." "What is judgment? It is the divine process of God revealing us to ourselves (p 6)." "Through continued faithfulness, sin gradually loses its pull and attractiveness (p 7)." "We must learn to listen. Listening involves patience, openness, and the desire to understand. And when we are really open, we run the risk that we may be influenced and changed (p 12)." "There are times to verbally teach and times not to teach. When your relationships are strained and the air is charged with emotion, an attempt to verbally teach is often perceived as a form of judgment and rejection (p 13)." "Can I truly love and gossip also (p 18)?" "Conquering or overcoming temptation often seems to be a prelude to becoming or developing oneself and to understanding others and their temptations, problems, and feelings (p 21)." "The Savior would not subject himself to the tauntings and directions of Satan. His spirit ruled his flesh, and his spirit was subject to every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God, his Father (p 22)." "I know very well the effect of overeating on the spirit... when I overindulge, I lose sensitivity to the needs of others (p 23)." "What a difference if you organize and arrange your affairs at night in order to get to bed at a reasonable time (p 24)." "If our definition or concept of ourselves comes from what others think of us, we will find ourselves gearing our lives to their wants and their expectations; and the more we live in terms of what others expect of us, the more insecure we will become (p 25)." "If people go on long enough playing roles or pretending, giving in to their vanity and to their pride, they will gradually deceive themselves (p 26)." "We need to concern ourselves only with the truth about ourselves from the Lord's point of view (p 27)." "Consecrated people have given or dedicated all they have or ever will have to the Lord's purposes. They look on their time, talents, and possessions as stewardships... Nothing is their own... They are agents--the Lord is their principal--and they seek only to serve God's purposes (p 27)." "These three temptations of the Savior are also the same temptations that come to us (p 29)!" "Unless we acquire control of our appetites, our flesh, our bodies, we will not be able to control our passions and our emotions and place them in subjection to our spirit (p 30)." "The real key to growth is to learn to make promises and to keep them. In the ordinances of the gospel, the Lord has provided magnificent opportunities for promises or covenants (p 35)." "Get up.. have a program of daily exercise... practice moderation in diet and fasting (p 37)." "When you and I learn to conquer the evil one and his temptations, whether open and blatant or insidious and subtle, then I believe that God's sweet spirit will also come to us and minister to us. Our characters will grow in power, and from this increased strength will emerge the power to resist future temptations and to work more righteousness (p 37)." "All relationships are interwoven with each other (p 38)." "The same principles that govern communication between people also apply in communication with the Lord... there must be a desire to understand and to be understood... must be two way... A regard (reverence) for the other person's worth and dignity must be felt (p 39)." "The other test of the quality of relationship is found in the little things of daily life, little courtesies, little acts of kindness, the give and take in little moments (p 40)." "Our greatest role in relationships is to be a light, not a judge (p 43)." "Inherent within our souls is a longing to return to our Creator, the Father of us all, and also the propensity to believe in and obey the laws that blessed reward is predicated upon (p 44)." "A breakdown or split within the individual translates itself into every relationship and becomes clearly evident in times of storm (p 45)." "Prejudice means prejudgment... Understanding requires openness, sincere listening, and empathy (p 45)." "Accepting Christ and his atoning sacrifice is the root solution to self-alienation or personal insecurity, to estranged relationships with others, in addition to reconciliation between God and man (p 46)." "To receive the gift of the Atonement, we must first place our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ instead of on the 'arm of flesh' (p 46)." "Having mastered our bodies and minds and placed them in subjection to our spirits, we then place our spirits in subjection to and harmony with God's spirit (p 47)." "Christ literally is the healer, the unifier, the Savior of the soul. He was the only one so appointed. There is no other way (p 47)." "To properly fulfill the divine purpose of marriage, which is to bring spirits into the world and rear them in the nurture of the Lord, will require the utmost in self-discipline, self-sacrifice, courage, love, humility, and integrity (self-unity) (p 48)." "To improve your relationships, don't look to others to change and don't look to easy, step-by-step shortcuts or sunshine formulas that do not strike at the roots. Look to yourself. Be honest with yourself first (p 48)." "Divine knowledge is a function of humility and obedience to the laws of God (p 55)." "Few things will inspire self-honesty and humility more than a genuine, listening, two-way prayer. It brings us into living contact with the light and Spirit of Christ (p 57)." "I encourage a daily, earnest, prayerful study of the scriptures--which contain the feeling and thinking of the Lord--with the express purposes of finding him (p 58)." "Deep desire and persistent work are demanded of us (p 73)." "Immersion in the gospel teachings, in the scriptures, and in daily prayer provides magnificent opportunity for the Lord to bestow on us a divine sense of who we really are and a testimony of his gospel (p 79)." "Occasionally immerse yourself... in nature (p 81)." "Church activity and service are supremely important (p 82)." "Parents should practice and teach their children to do more than the minimum expected (p 83)." "The Lord spent the majority of his ministry with a few key people, his apostles. He established a strong, deep, unforgettable relationship with them. He loved them, taught them, served them. To develop a close and open communication with those key people in your life is a rich and profound source of intrinsic security (p 84)." "A life of pretense is a tortuous task. To live a life congruent and harmonious with Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, is the highest source of intrinsic security (p 84)." "'Look inside. Any hypocrisy there? pride? impurity (p 91)?" "'When we partake worthily, it actually does satisfy our souls and improve our living. Also, we become witnesses for Christ' (p 92)." "Sometimes we train our children not to open up to us with their problems (p 96)." "When we take the time to understand and stay with that effort until the other feels that we do understand, we have communicated many things: we care, we want to understand, we respect the person's expression, we give dignity and an individual sense of worth (p 96)." "'To have friends you must be a friend' (p 98)." "People are very tender, very sensitive inside (p 101)." "Realize and use the power of little acts of kindness and courtesy--when consistently given (p 102)." "Develop empathy (p 108)." "In any endeavor in any organization... people are the most important thing in this world (p 109)." "The test of obedience becomes one of sacrifice (p 112)." "Until we are our own masters and lead ourselves, we cannot lead others (p 113)." "'I learned, when I was tempted to say the unkind, thoughtless thing, to put my tongue way back in my mouth and clamp my teeth down on it; and each time I did that, it was easier the next time not to say the unkind, hurtful thing' (David O. McKay, p 113)." "Study the prayer relationship to discover a beautiful insight into the process of rebuilding relationships (p 114)." "When we pray from our hearts, not from our lips, we discover a beautiful and vibrant inner power, and then with a prepared frame of mind, we can go about rebuilding our relationships (p 114)." "Be patient. Relationships take time to rebuild (p 117)." "Why should one love the unlovable? Because of the intrinsic worth of each individual soul as a child of God! Because of our faith in their innate, Godlike potential! To treat people in terms of this potential is to help them to fulfill it (p 119)." "Very few people have ever really experienced the feeling of being completely understood (p 120)." "The principle of stewardship is the principle of focusing on our own responsibilities, on our own assignments, whatever they might be. We so focus on our duty as to magnify it... to do more than is normally expected (p 123)." "What happens inside you when a leader confides in you about one of your fellow workers in a critical way, or when you see a leader behind the scenes making arbitrary decisions--manipulating the lives of others--and then in public expressing sincere interest in their views and feelings (p 127)?" "What happens inside you when this teacher or leader refuses to gossip, label, stereotype, or slander another--when you see someone freed of the need of sarcasm, or cutting humor, of cynicism? Aren't you more willing to trust that person, to open up, to seek help with your problem (p 128)?" "I suggest two principles that can be highly effective in developing motivation and a sense of responsibility: involvement and trust (p 129)." "Only when people are sincerely and meaningfully involved, are they willing to commit the best that is within them (p 130)." "Trust is the highest form of human motivation (p 134)." "True communication is a two-way process (p 137)." "Seeking to know the Lord's will is essential to two-way communication and to mutual understanding (p 138)." "If we have higher levels of faith, we become just that much better--willing, obedient servants, ones with whom he can work and whom he can use to serve his divine purposes (p 138)." "Communication is not so much a matter of words as it is of relationships (p 139)." "Trust is born by having had experiences with each other that are trustworthy or honorable (p 139)." "President David O. McKay has called meditation the language of the soul (p 141)." "Fasting subdues the spirit and makes an individual humble, open, teachable, and aware of deep spiritual need (p 142)." "We begin our communication by thanking the Lord from our hearts for his blessings (p 142)." "A person may want to be delivered from hard work, maybe from suffering, but perhaps the growth or need of his character demands exactly these things (p 143)." "I sometimes think we attempt to make what is simple and natural into something that is complex, mystical, and mysterious (p 148)." "Making commitments is central to the entire gospel plan (p 151)." "With the Lord, nothing is impossible: if the thing we request is right (p 157)." "People were not doubting the Church--they were doubting themselves (p 161)!" "'What are the roots, and how can we stir them deeply within us?' (p 163)" "We were repenting--we were deeply changing--and the communication naturally became a peaceful one (p 166)." "Jesus Christ is the way. If people try to take any other way but through him and his holy gospel, they become thieves and robbers of their own souls (p 169)." "Learn in a daily way to stir yourself spiritually (p 170)." "Human relationships and experiences are the predicate for divine relationships and experiences (p 178)." "There is no shortcut to this process of character development (p 187)." "'Our homes radiate what we are, and that radiation comes from what we say and how we act in the home' (David O. McKay, p 190)." "Every person needs someone else to whom he can speak freely without fear of censor, embarrassment, or ridicule of any kind. People need to feel understood, and that comes from being genuinely listened to (p 192)." "Many of our children know what they should do, but their minds are not made up to do it (p 194)." "Alma, the father, continued to love his son and to pray for him in faith, believing that the Lord would somehow get through to his son (p 197)." "The highest form of influence is God himself (p 198)." "The prayer of faith consists largely of a kind of testimony of the Lord's goodness and power and wisdom, a total commitment that his will be done, and expressed willingness to obey that will and to be used in any way the Lord desires, and the believing attitude that if it be right, the Lord will grant the requested blessing (p 199)." "The Lord loves all of his children (p 199)." "Prayer is a privilege, not just a duty (p 201)." "Seek the Spirit (p 203)." "He never does for them what they can and should do for themselves. If he were to do so, he would rob them of growth (p 214)." "If parents and teachers do not fill the void, who will (p 221)?" "The highest principle of the gospel is love of God and people, not the love of the principles. If you love people, the principles will become fused with strength and purpose (p 227)." "The purpose of teaching is learning... Knowledge is more than information--it is conversion. Saturate your heart and your thinking with this lofty eternal aim, and you'll discover it will constantly shape your preparations and teachings (p 231)." "Unless the learner is involved and dynamically participates in the learning process, very little, if any, learning (changed behavior) will result (p 232)." "Teachers should never underestimate the power of sincere testimony (p 234)." "To know God, one must experience his Spirit, which comes from searching, prayer, study, worthiness--not from human reasoning (p 235)." "The Lord's process in making us equal to our callings--that of faith and works (p 239)." "The power of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Lord, will purify our motives and empower us to be equal to spiritual demands of our callings (p 239)." "The purpose of all Church programs is to help in the perfecting of the Saints (p 240)." "How much do you really care for your people? How much do you feel this deep inside, this sincere caring for each of the individuals... your assignment is with (p 242)?" "To become a shepherd, follow the true Shepherd (p 243)." "Good leaders must be humble enough to admit that they can't perform all these leadership functions by themselves and that they need others to help them initiate and support ideas, make decisions, and carry out those decisions (p 244)." "Leaders must concern themselves with people's feelings and with relationships, because they really care--not just because they're supposed to (p 244)." "'To be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved' (James McDonald, p 247)." "Learn to know their sheep and their sheep's voices... give opportunity for the sheep to know their shepherds and their shepherd's voices (p 248)." "Good leaders use their intelligence. They think and reflect. They read the feedback and strive for understanding. They learn to listen. They adapt to differing situations by using different patterns of leadership.. they give clear instruction (p 249)." "Leaders, stand back. Take a long look at the problems you face... Work on the roots (p 251)." "Take fresh courage (p 251)." "Communication is simply mutual understanding (p 253)." "More important than the techniques of communication is the attitude of communication: the willingness and desire to listen for understanding (p 253)." "Cultivate a follow-through philosophy (p 254)." "Planning, communicating, and following through are interwoven with each other (p 255)." "The natural reaction to situations in which responsibilities exceed abilities is either fight or flight (escape). The gospel's answer: faith plus works (p 255)." "You will exercise your faith in God if you believe in his children and their limitless potential... You must learn to listen and to empathize... This involves accepting people as they are, appreciating their every effort, recognizing work well done, and affirming their right to be individuals, to feel and think differently (p 256)." "Assume good faith on the part of others (p 256)." "Earnestly seek the Lord. Ask him to reveal to you your weaknesses (p 257)." "With deep spirituality will flow a power from within to love your people, to have faith in them, to involve them, to appreciate and understand them (p 258)." "The teachers' underlying fundamental attitude of love and regard of a human soul makes their knowledge and skills really effective (p 261)." "If people will actually experience the things of God and the Spirit of God, then they will trust this experience (p 265)." "If you listen to others with real respect, empathy, and caring, they will come to believe God will also listen (p 267)." "The root cause of all human problems is estrangement from the Father (p 269)." "Patience is the heart of faith. Faith is born of obedience and perfected by works. Faith in the unseen powers comes from contact and experience with these divine powers (p 273)." "The Sabbath is truly the key day in maintaining a depth of consistent spirituality, and each of the other six days will be richer and more productive because of honoring the Lord's day (p 295)." "Don't settle for mediocrity. Don't lose your vision of your great potential (p 301)." "To trust the Lord means to follow true principles and to leave the outcome in his hands (p 303)." "Take time daily to reflect, to think, to meditate, to plan, to study God's word (p 309)."
