This is my third attempt at a Beryl Bainbridge novel and I still can’t quite get my head around the humor; nonetheless, I think it’s me and not her. I think it’s a case of a different sense of humor whereas where many find subtle British humor, I only find things vaguely amusing that you need to blow dust off. (I had a similar problem with Kingsley Amis, if that’s any clue.) The story centers on Stella, a sexually innocent 16-year-old girl (sexually innocent in ways that no 16-year-old would be now and I have my doubts if any ever were!) who lives in Liverpool with her aunt and uncle but dreams of being on the stage. Through her uncle, she becomes a part of a repertory theater company, primarily backstage, although she has a speaking part in a play about Cleopatra. This culminates in her role as Tinkerbelle (or the flashlight, if you know anything about the play.) She has her sights set on the company manager who shows absolutely no interest in her although we, the readers, can only guess why. In any case, rather than charming and cute, I found her callous and almost completely dislikeable – a typical Bainbridge protagonist in a typical black comedy. The fact that she was only interested in people who could serve her own purposes ended up making her less interesting than some of the other stereotypical theater company personalities / situations: alcoholics, past romances and relationships, old rivalries and aging actors. There were a lot of characters for such a short book, too many for me with too many intertwining back stories and I found myself mentally dozing off at times; rather than try to remember how each related to the other, it became, “yeah, whatever…”, mainly because I didn’t find them particularly interesting. At the end, it was worthwhile, mildly amusing and somewhat touching but the clues were all there so the reveals were not all that surprising. (e.g. Stella lives with her aunt and uncle – who are her parents? When she speaks to her mother, the mother has no dialogue but just “answers in the usual way”. Additionally, the stage manager not only shows no interest in Stella but it’s clearly not for her age as he shows no interest in any of the female characters; hmm, there’s a lot of “those” in show business, they say… And there are hints of why his real interests lie…) This is possibly my last attempt at Beryl Bainbridge as all have been through illegal downloads. Arrest me if you will but since I no longer have access to cheap printing facilities, I promise not to download any more of hers – even if I wanted to. So, unless I come across something in swap, the divorce is final!
