Would that he had some faults! Would that he had! Would that he had! How could she, full of faults as she knew herself to be,-how could she hope to make happy a man perfect as he was! Now, there is a problem most of us would love to have, but not Alice Vavasor, who finds embracing perfection much harder than it should be. In fact, she runs from love, directly into the arms of trouble, and we know that is where she is headed almost as soon as the story begins. Anthony Trollope has no fear of exploring the difficulties of Victorian marriages, where being an heiress might be a drawback to finding a love match, where loving the wrong man might leave you in ruin, and where women’s options might be so narrow as to hardly exist. What a remarkable author Trollope is. He writes novels that are literally heavy, this one weighing in at 850 pages, that fly by you as if they are on wings. I would not have cut a single page, and that is remarkable when some of those pages were descriptions of the political intrigues of the time. He has a great sense of humor that finds its way onto the pages at regular intervals in a very droll way. People often say that marriage is an important thing, and should be much thought of in advance, and marrying people are cautioned that there are many who marry in haste and repent at leisure. I am not sure, however, that marriage may not be pondered over too much; nor do I feel certain that the leisurely repentance does not as often follow the leisurely marriages as it does the rapid ones. Trollope is also smart enough to include, among his serious characters, a group of humorous ones, in this case Mr. Cheeseacre, Mrs. Greenow, and Captain Belfield. "Charlie Fairstairs, indeed! I wouldn't pick her out of a gutter with a pair of tongs. She ain't good enough for my bailiff, let alone me." There was the widow's cap, generally so hideous, so well known to the eyes of all men, so odious to womanhood. Let us hope that such headgear may have some assuaging effect on the departed spirits of husbands. He gives us the delightful character of Glencora Palliser, a spunky rebel in many ways, and just a beleaguered woman in others. "She's a nasty old cat," said Lady Glencora, as soon as the door was closed; and she said these words with so droll a voice, with such a childlike shaking of her head, with so much comedy in her grimace, that Alice could not but laugh. "She is," said Lady Glencora. "I know her, and you'll have to know her, too, before you've done with her. It won't at all do for you to run away when she spits at you. You must hold your ground, and show your claws,-and make her know that if she spits, you can scratch." "But I don't want to be a cat myself." "She'll find I'm of the genus, but of the tiger kind, if she persecutes me. He surely understands human nature; don’t all of us know someone like Alice, as he describes her here? Poor Alice! I hope that she may be forgiven. It was her special fault, that when at Rome she longed for Tibur, and when at Tibur she regretted Rome. There were moments throughout when I wanted to scream at some of these characters, shake them, slap them, or beg them to reconsider the paths they were on. That I cared for what happened to most of them was an accomplishment to be applauded. I was sad to come to the end of the Barsetshire novels and hoped that the Palliser series would be half as good. No need to have feared at all–this novel is of the same quality and I cannot wait to get to the next in the series. Isn’t it wonderful that Mr. Trollope was so prolific!
