On completion of this thick book you know everything that happened in Chekhov's life. It is thorough. It is detailed. His life is told through letters and diary entries written by Chekhov himself and his friends, acquaintances, work associates, siblings, parents, aunts, uncles, spouses.... There exist numerous letters and diary entries. This is how people communicated at the end of the 1800s. Chekhov was born in 1860 and died in 1904 of TB. Much of these entries read as today's telephone conversations. Sometimes hearing the grumbles and mundane thoughts of what one ate for breakfast and how much the train ticket to Moscow cost and how cold it was and how a new maid had been employed and how the last one got pregnant and had to leave and how the crane died in the kitchen and ...... You get details, LOTS of details. These details give the reader a real understanding of life in Moscow and St. Petersburg and the Ukraine too. He was constantly traveling between these cities or to his country house. There he became a farmer. Later he bought a house in the Crimea. These letters and diary entries and the resulting events are presented in chronological order. Each chapter often covers only two months! You hear what he does just about every day of those two months. Rarely are months skimmed, except maybe the beginning years of his life. They are covered but not in such detail. You learn exactly when each of his stories and plays were written. How he took one play and altered it to become another. You learn how what happened in his life is retold in these stories and plays. I have the feeling not one is missed. But there is little analysis. What Chekhov wanted to say is described by what he did and what happened. The whys are left up to the reader to figure out from Chekhov’s actions. Chekhov himself did not did not give many explanations. History is mentioned briefly - Czar Alexander II, Czar Alexander III died, Nicholas the II came to power. Literature was censored and his too, but there is no discussion of why or how the government used censorship. There is no discussion of historical events. This is not a book of history but you do get a good look at Russian life. Health or rather illness is a huge part of the book. So many died. This is not a "fun" read. By the time Chekhov reached some success he was sick, very sick. Watching how his TB, the “White Plague”, as it was then called, gets worse and worse is not easy reading. And he saw his friends die of the very illness he was suffering from. How does that feel? I must have gotten emotionally attached to him because his dearth at the end was horrible. Chekhov first became a doctor, then only later a writer....and he writes about what he saw and experienced, i.e. Russian life. At the end he was supporting both emotionally and economically his whole family and so many others too. He was no angel. Choose one woman; now that was not his style. He did finally get married, but what happened then?! And he had things to do - doctoring or writing or farming - and as he saw it that came first! In his defense, people depended on him. You will learn about how he traveled to Sakhalin to document prisoners and their existence in Siberia. To write about this he had to know about it. He fought cholera, he set up schools, he…... He was a very busy and a very sick man. His life is extremely interesting. One word about the narration by Fred Williams. He reads it slowly and steadily. The French pronunciation is laughable, but there isn't much French. It bugged me that dates are read in the following fashion: May 2, 1891 is read as "May two, rather than "May second".. Remember there are tons of dates! June 6-8 is read "June six slash eight", no not dash! This is rather petty of me...... I am very glad I read this book. It is not JUST about his books! I have one misgiving. I should have stopped and read each story and play as it is mentioned in the book. Had I done that I think perhaps I would have given the book more stars. I kick myself in that I didn't think of doing this until the very end. I also believe the more you know about Chekhov before you read this book the more you will appreciate it. If you are writing a paper for school, here is the book. I was just reading for fun, and honestly it did get a bit tedious at times.
