I read A Wizard of Earthsea more than a decade ago, and admired the writing and anthropologically-informed worldbuilding, while not feeling any personal resonance with the story or characters. Returning to Earthsea much later, with a different book and with more maturity as a reader, was far more rewarding, though I have some doubts that are perhaps more in the vein of literary criticism than typical review material (and concentrated around the end, so will be discussed beneath the spoiler alert at the end of this review). This is an excellent novel, which although alternately classified as children’s or YA, was published in 1970, when those categories were not as firm as they are now. So it truly does work for adult readers and has elements that would seem out-of-place in books aimed at kids today. Le Guin is an exceptional prose stylist, and the book uses a somewhat distant, quasi-mythological tone that lends appropriate gravitas to the story. She’s also an excellent worldbuilder, and the setting feels truly real and textured in a way few fantasy worlds do. (While neither is prominent here, the presence of endemic diseases such as smallpox, and the existence of multiple languages, are indicative of her commitment to realism in creating a historically-based setting, while most fantasy features a bizarrely monolingual world curiously lacking in disease.) Her discussion in the afterword of using fantasy as a way to reflect and reflect upon our world, rather than for simple wish-fulfillment and escapism, is one that resonates with me (though wish-fulfillment is nice sometimes too!). However, I also found this book to present a compelling story, and read it in a single day. It focuses on a girl named Tenar, believed to be the reincarnation of an important priestess, who is taken from her family as a child and raised to honor the dark spirits of the mysterious Tombs. A major theme is how Tenar uses her power—her special status as Chosen One and the role of authority this grants her from a young age—and it isn’t always pretty: being a child, she sometimes abuses it, and some of the religious expectations placed upon her are quite grim. Her experiences are well-developed, with subtle depiction of emotion. It’s certainly a darker book than I expected, though in a quiet way, with a setting devoid of warmth and joy. But things change for Tenar when a wizard appears to steal treasure from the Tombs, and she must decide how to respond and what moral code to follow. And despite all this high-minded talk, I also found the plot compelling: as the book is short, it moves quickly, especially in the second half, with real tension and drama. All that said, my thoughts on the book are ultimately complicated, and can’t be discussed without ENDING SPOILERS BELOW Upon a first reading, and looking back now, part of me feels that this book should have ended at the end of Chapter 10: “The two paused a moment, then passed over the crest of the hill, out of sight of the Place of the Tombs, and were gone.” But it doesn’t: there’s another two full chapters to follow. What’s going on here? Well, Le Guin is writing a larger story, not just about surviving the Labyrinth but about one’s place in the world afterwards. And there’s a keen sense of letdown about it. Tenar seems more juvenile the moment she steps off temple grounds. She is—while the word isn’t used—leaving her country as a refugee, immigrating to a place where she does not know anyone, speak the language, nor have the education to succeed. She’s only 16, of course, she can make up for lost time. But she’ll never again have the power and exalted place in the world that she held back home. On some level, the book clearly realizes this: pointing out the deficits in Tenar’s language skills and education, for instance. On the other hand, it seems to celebrate her freedom in a way that doesn’t seem entirely commensurate with her powerless situation. Here’s the actual ending: “ ‘Come!’ he said smiling, and she rose, and came. Gravely she walked beside him up the white streets of Havnor, holding his hand, like a child coming home.” It’s a callback to the first sentence, in which four-year-old Tenar’s mother calls her home, and seems to imply she’s come full circle. But by doing so it emphasizes Tenar’s place as a child , which she isn’t: 16 isn’t exactly childhood in our world and it certainly isn’t in hers, where she is considered an adult at 14. She’s come of age, yes—she’s made grown-up decisions about who she is going to be and what direction her life will take—but she’s also regressed. Which is shown most starkly through her key relationships. Back home at the Tombs, she has Manan, her childhood guardian. By the time she reaches her teenage years, Tenar dominates Manan, ordering him around and substituting her judgment for his. But as her relationship with Ged progresses, he comes to dominate her and substitute his judgment for hers, and her arc ends with her acquiescence to this. I read this book directly after All Systems Red , and the endings of the two books are a fascinating contrast (spoilers for that one too, obviously). Both protagonists move from a situation of bondage to freedom, with the help of a new friend whose life they have saved. Both new friends now claim the authority to direct the protagonists’ next steps. But to this, Murderbot says no, while Tenar says yes. What to make of this difference? Does this reflect Le Guin’s insistence on depicting the world as it is, rather than as we might wish it to be, while Wells succumbed to the current cultural distaste for “saviorism” even though someone new to freedom actually does need support and guidance? Or is it about gender—that Le Guin, writing in 1969, believed a young woman needed a male protector, as she implies in the afterword, while the male-coded Murderbot is seen as having less need of protection, especially from a female friend? Or are they too dissimilar to meaningfully compare (after all, Murderbot has some experience of the outside world, and its legal status is in jeopardy, neither of which is true for Tenar)? Whatever you think about that comparison, it’s clear that by exercising her power, Tenar has relinquished it, and ends the novel as a passive figure. Reminiscent of the bride who has the right to choose her husband, for the law to make him her lord and master ever after. And that’s the crux of my discomfort with the ending. In her own country, Tenar has power. She’s the Chosen One, the First Priestess. The presumed death of her nemesis, Kossil, would leave Tenar the undisputed leader of her religious community. She’s learned that the spirits of the Tombs are malignant, and the destruction of the Labyrinth creates a void, an opportunity for a new, healthier form of religion to arise in its place. And who is better situated to lead the community in this direction than Tenar, with her newfound knowledge and moral compass? And yet, she flees, leaving her community rudderless and her country without the crucial information she’s learned that might guide it to a brighter future. In that light, when Tenar leaves with Ged, she’s turning her back on her destiny—and she’s doing it because he insists that she has only two choices, to kill him and stay or save him and run. And she accepts his judgment. At this point you may be thinking that we don’t know for sure that Kossil is dead, and that reforming a religion would take leadership skills and ingenuity that we aren’t sure Tenar has, and that she would likely be pitting herself against entrenched interests that would prefer to keep the status quo, and that she’s incurred the wrath of some spirits that might just be able to reach beyond the Labyrinth, and anyway she’s just a teenager, doesn’t she have the right to go live her own life rather than being a martyr for her benighted countrymen? To which I say, welcome to fantasy. Every teenage hero faces such seemingly insurmountable odds. And it would be one thing if Le Guin acknowledged them, and had Tenar explicitly Refuse the Call, choosing individualism rather than self-sacrifice. That would be a statement . But she doesn’t. From a modern viewpoint it looks uncomfortably like the idea of Tenar rising to true leadership never crossed Le Guin’s mind, that this fell in the category of feminist wish-fulfillment that she found too inauthentic to consider even long enough for Tenar to decide against it. The last factor in all this is religion itself, of course. The worship of the spirits of the Tombs is explicitly an Evil Religion. And it’s fascinating to see how it works, how Tenar interprets the world with that religion as her foundation, and then deconstructs from it. I wasn’t entirely satisfied with this element, though, and the crux of it is in this exchange between Tenar and Ged: “ ‘What have they [your gods] ever given you, Tenar?’ ‘Nothing,’ she whispered.” Well that’s an awfully simplistic summary of a whole life, isn’t it? And it isn’t just that Tenar is a teenager who has just changed her mind and therefore done so violently. We were there, and her life so far has had basically nothing to offer: no warmth, no joy, no true friendship. I should pause here and say that I recently read and admired a memoir of a woman who deconstructed from a real-life Evil Religion , and what I admired most was its nuance: her ability to hold in mind the joy and fellowship she found there, the pain of leaving almost everyone she had ever loved, and at the same time the realization that the sect was poison and she had to leave no matter what. It’s fair to say most real-life experiences get simplified in fiction, and more so in fantasy, and that despite that Tenar’s personal evolution rings true. But then take Empire of Sand , another fantasy novel featuring a heroine conscripted into an Evil Religion: that book still makes a point of showing fun and fellowship among the adherents, and how joining the community is actually an improvement for most of them. On the other hand, Suri takes the simplistic approach of putting a mustache-twirling villain at the top, while Le Guin’s portrayal is naturalistic; perhaps she felt she couldn’t afford to bring warmth to the Place of the Tombs, or it would defeat the evil? Because it does feel like a very negative portrayal in the end, not only of religion but of communities of women. It’s striking that the only person there with whom Tenar shares some closeness is her eunuch servant, while the women are shown as wasting their lives and energies. But does it need to be that bad? Convents may not be most people’s ideal life choice, after all, but then neither is marrying a peasant farmer in a world without birth control, women’s rights or any social safety net to ensure the poor don’t starve in a famine. So I can’t help wondering—and I say this is a firmly non-religious person myself—whether Le Guin might have taken a wider view of Tenar’s choices had her vision of the religious life not been so relentlessly negative. All that said, if you haven’t read this book you may as well try it and see for yourself! It’s very accomplished and very short, so almost certainly worth your time.
