3.5 stars rounded up Another of Briggs' early sword and sorcery with a side of romance novels. This is only loosely related to the first Sianim book and can be read as a standalone. An interesting study in how the human mind works to shield us from intolerable situations (slavery/rape) and find a way to accept our existence in ways we never expected. Not as much action as I normally like in these types of stories, but the hero was a great guy (Briggs knows how to write a hero you'd want IRL and fantasy). The moral ambiguity of certain characters was appreciated as well. In a society where slavery was legal, there are going to be those who don't question the morality of the status quo. Rialla's best friend and former slaveholder turned mercenary admits that if it hadn't been for his life away from his homeland and friendship with Rialla he wouldn't have been bothered by the question of legal slavery in his country. Another good example is the villain's son. He was villainous in his own right. He has the heroine brought to his chamber for sex because she's a slave and that's his "right" He's not violent and she doesn't fight, but it is still rape. Despite that, he did have a set of morals and was not the sadistic, conscienceless murderer his father was. He's very misguided and his power makes for a dangerous situation, but he wasn't without redeeming qualities which is always disturbing in a 'makes you think' sort of way. Also interesting that neither character was a warrior, although they could certainly take care of themselves. 3.5 stars because of the lack of development in the romance department. If Briggs had written this today, I have a feeling she'd have gotten at least two books out of it and the romance would not have been consummated until book 2. She was building a career at this point and probably didn't have the luxury of pacing the story as she would have wished. The heroine was too scarred by her 7 years spent as a slave. She had no interest in sex or romance and she had some understandable fear of men. I am certain Briggs knew the abrupt HEA at the end was premature and therefore let it fade to black, leaving the reader to decide if it was consummated. I don't doubt the two would end up happy together, but Rialla would have had issues with physical intimacy that would have taken longer to overcome. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
