Please don’t judge this book by its cover. Just. Don’t. Since Drake is basing these novels on real life events and actual military engagements the minutiae are critically important. Politics, equipment, local conditions, strategies and tactics used, nothing gets neglected, in order to preserve the historic context. As such, it’s an immersive experience, of which the rewards aren’t immediately obvious (some would argue that the books have a slow build up – I would argue that they simmer with barely contained menace until all hell breaks loose). And then you have the character dynamics , especially of the two primary protagonists (namely Lieutenant Daniel Leary and Signals Officer Adele Mundy), echoing the relationship of Commander Jack Aubrey and Doctor Stephen Maturin in Patrick O'Brian ’s Master and Commander series. This is really another aspect of the book that needs to be underlined: Drake is purposely focusing on character development here, and not just on the action and technology. (It might be worth noting that O’Brian also often based his naval engagements on real life battles, and that his novels are also known for their attention to detail.) So, if it isn’t glaringly obvious by now, this is a pastiche to naval literature, and in particular the Aubrey-Maturin series. And I mean that in the best possible way. It isn’t always easy to extrapolate and translate historical warfare into a Science Fiction setting, but Drake seems to have it down pat. With The Lightnings is the first book in the Royal Cinnabar Navy (RCN) series, also called the Lieutenant Leary series. It does expend some time setting up the universe: characters are introduced and scenes are set, etcetera. Speaking of characters: the Sissies are a delightfully colourful bunch of stone cold killers. Despite the somewhat measured first half, once the violence does start happening, it does so spectacularly. I don’t care what anybody says, Drake knows his stuff when it comes to writing military action. There certainly is no glossing over the ugly parts. So why not just 5-stars and be done? These books are deceptively dense, and may not read as quickly as you expect. Also, since Drake is working within an historical and conceptual framework, albeit self-imposed, the books never quite take off into that delirious realm of high concept mind-frack and gosh-wow that would make them truly perfect (for me, that is, and possibly unpalatably implausible for everybody else). Oh, and before I forget, this is one of those human vs human universes, with nary a dangerous alien in sight, with the two main factions being the Republic Of Cinnabar (the good guys) and the Alliance Of Free Stars (the bad guys). If read in context, there is no reason not to enjoy With The Lightnings , and even its sequels. That is, if you enjoy Military Science Fiction with a strong focus on characterisation. The characters are fun (as already mentioned), there is some welcome humour at times, and the action is extremely deftly portrayed. Daniel Leary is a charismatic leader and a brilliant strategist, often underestimated because of his age, while Adele Mundy is an intelligence genius and a crack shot. What’s not to like? Often faced by overwhelming odds, the Sissies regularly have to rely on superior tactics and brains-over-brawn to outsmart the enemy, as opposed to an all guns blazing approach. That’s not to say that the latter does not occur on occasion, and if you follow the series you will read anything from pitched infantry battles to ridiculously thrilling space battles. Recommended .
