The Dragon is the sixth book by Schoell I have read and he has yet to disappoint! While this started off a little slow, and was plagued by some pacing issues throughout, once things started happening it really took off. Our main protagonist, Eddie Drake, earns his daily bread as a photographer and calls NYC home. About six months prior to when the story started, Eddie lost his wife in a nasty robbery on the way home from a party. Still grieving, Eddie has spend the months just moping around and hanging out at a local pub with a group of fellow widowers. One day an old friend of his, Lawrence, who works as an independent archeologist, calls up Eddie and makes him an offer. It seems there might be an underground city located in a remote New Mexico mesa that Lawrence was tipped off on. Further, he already did an initial dig and it looks very promising. How would Eddie like to tag along and be the official photographer for the dig? Get you out of NYC and away from memories of your dead wife? In the end, Eddie agrees and shortly thereafter, they and the rest of the team fly out to New Mexico. Well, they do find some fascinating stuff for sure! The only opening to the 'city' rests on top of a mile high mesa and can only be reached by helicopter. Lawrence 'recruited' some locals for the back breaking labor of digging out the site and they find wonder after wonder-- awesome 'cave paintings' dating back 12,000 years! All kinds of nifty artifacts! The team quickly runs into many problems as well, with strange plagues of stinging insects and the entire crew of laborers comes down with a violent stomach illness... No more on the plotting-- this book needs to be experienced fresh and without spoilers! Schoell tends to populate his books with many subplots, which here, included some romance (is Lawrence really screwing one of his female assistants? That is why his wife decides to come on the dig), the lives of some of the townies who live close to the mesa, and so forth, which constitutes one reason for the pacing issues. Nonetheless, The Dragon does what Schoell claimed to want to do in the afterword-- entertain-- and it does that in spades. Some lovely, strange foo here and Schoell took it much further than most authors would dare. His imagination continues to amaze. Recommended for vintage horror fans and this would make a great beach read! 4 Dragons!!
