A beautiful, introspective, and at times sobering piece, Our Land Was A Forest: An Ainu Memoir offers a stark look into history and culture of the Ainu as well as the impact of encroachment and forced assimilation by the Japanese. By the time Kayano Shigaru was born in the Nibutani village on Ainu Mosir (currently known as the island of Hokkaido) in 1926, Japanese colonization was already underway, having begun centuries ago in the fifteenth century and intensified during the Meiji era when the Yamato Japanese were encouraged into settlements on the already inhabited island. While not a straightforward history, Kayano’s descriptions of his childhood, listening to the uwepekere of his grandmother, fishing and hunting with his father, provide the reader with a look into the cultural and spiritual practices of the Ainu. So to do the troubles; the author is unflinching in describing the account of his grandfather and other Ainu who were forced into labor for the shamo (Japanese) retainer-landowners under threat of violence. Provided with no lodgings and forced to make their own after being walked miles to the work-site, men, women, and children (Kayano’s grandfather, Totkaram was twelve, while his grandmother and Totkaram’s future wife, Tekatte was only eight) were beaten awake “when the morning stars still glimmered” and forced to work until “they could no longer see the ground at night.” Work-related deaths, sickness, and pure and simple malnutrition as the workers were provided with a single meal bowl or rice or watered down rice porridge for a day’s work led to a decimation of the Ainu’s population at the time. As the years go on, continued discrimination and efforts by the Japanese government affected Kayano’s life, particularly poverty as they work to barely be able to care for their families, forced off ancestral lands onto the fringes for the sake of Japanese agriculture, and, in one moment that particularly highlights the inequality present, Kayano’s father is arrested and jailed for fishing salmon, a key part of the Ainu diet and culture. Despite the fact that indiscriminate methods of salmon fishing by the Japanese did far greater harm to salmon populations than the Ainu practices, which followed the laws of nature and only took that which could provide for the day, Kayano felt that the shamo were blaming the Ainu for the problems they themselves created. It is clear, in retrospect, that this moment was key in helping the author recognize the role and injustice of Japanese imperialism on the Ainu. To ban the Ainu from fishing salmon was essentially telling them to die. So too was the banning of bear and deer hunting, to force the Ainu to farm on inferior land “provided” by the Japanese, and to steal and plunder the mountains and forests. Even to one such as Kayano, who acknowledges that he does not know the “usual methods by which strong countries invade weaker ones,” the Japanese had invaded Ainu Mosir, “a peaceful land for humans.” Kayano, particularly in his adolescence as he becomes more responsible for the care of his family and becomes dedicated to becoming a forester to provide for them, became detached from his heritage. The final third of Our Land Was a Forest recounts how Kayano Shigaru found it again, in part out of frustration and distrust with shamo scholars who took folk tools, ancestral bones, and even blood from the Ainu in the name of research only meager compensation. It was this, as well as the reckoning with the question of what would happen to the Ainu people and their culture should things continue, that lead to Kayano’s own pursuit of collecting Ainu folk utensils, artifacts, and stories. This would eventually lead to greater focus on the preservation and education of Ainu culture with Kayano not only at the forefront, but with a focus on the continuation of the culture’s preservation, the betterment of the people, and particularly the continued teaching of the Ainu language to new generations. Kayano Shigaru’s prose flows as if one is not reading off a page, but sitting in an audience with the man. Even through the potential awkwardness of translation, the emotion of Kayano Shigaru’s memoir rings clear- the love of his home, the deeply earned resentment and frustration with the Japanese government and companies which were eager to reap the benefits of Ainu land, but hemmed and hawed over when asked to donate some of that ill-gotten wealth for the creation of the Nibutani Museum of Ainu Cultural Resources (now part of the Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum), and the grief over that which couldn’t be saved. It is a beautiful memoir, and one which I find resonates with similar stories of the indigenous peoples of Turtle Island. Again and again, it is impossible for one educated and with a good conscience to ignore the parallels between indigenous peoples affected by imperialism all over the world, a fact that Kayano recognized himself in his work. “Inevitability” is something that needs to be avoided when discussing history, but it’s difficult to imagine that without Kayano Shigaru’s efforts, though the Ainu are still in a precarious social and legal position and the language is currently considered critically endangered, things would be far worse. Ultimately, while Our Land Was a Forest: An Ainu Memoir is not an all-encompassing work (and does not claim itself to be), I feel that it is a fine starting point for anyone wishing to learn more about the Ainu and their plight.
