Review of Kindle edition Publication date: December 24, 2008 Publisher: Berkley Language: English ASIN: B001ODEP8U 436 pages This is a novel which hammers at the frightening fact that monsters are very real. Real and much more terrifying than any creatures of legend or fiction. Vampires, werewolves, creatures of the Cthulu mythos pale in comparison to those monsters who live among us everyday, usually completely indistinguishable from everyone else until they strike. When I first read this I was moving into what I suppose could be called my more advanced law enforcement career in which I was beginning to understand just what kind of world we live in. The serious reflections which came with reading this book and discussing it with more experienced law enforcement personnel altered my habits. No longer would I make a quick trip to the corner store without my weapon. I also insisted that my wife begin to always go armed. Thank goodness I did. Just a few years later there was a serial killer operating near her hometown. On a visit to her parents she had an encounter with a man who met the description and profile of that monster. The encounter ended with her displaying her handgun and the man's rapid retreat. As more information was developed and a more accurate profile drawn, I realized that my wife fit the profile of his preferred victims. Not long after this the killer committed one of his most brutal and heinous atacks. This was one of the most chilling incidents in our lives. Thinking of it still has the power to make my blood run cold. Since that time my wife and I both have prevented potential violence on several occasions just by displaying weapons. The monsters who live among us are not deterred by holy water, garlic, silver or any of the trappings of fiction. However, guns frequently work. Mr. Harris writes realistically and accurately of two of these monsters. If you don't find this novel disturbing I can only guess that you have little imagination nor any inclination to understand the real world.
