This 3-star score I’m giving to Blackwood Farm is by far the hardest rating I’ve ever given , and I feel I should explain all my thoughts. Warning: this will be long! This is a 9th book in a series, so the review is mainly targeted at people at least somewhat familiar with the Vampire Chronicles . Still, I’m keeping it spoiler-free. While reading this book, my opinion was constantly jumping between 1 and 5 stars . In spite of all its flaws, Blackwood Farm is a much better book than many books out there, and at the same time, it’s so much worse. First, a quick background – I started the Vampire Chronicles quite late, when the first 11 books were already out and waiting for me to binge read them. And I nearly did! From page one, I fell into a deep hole of obsession. Seeing the world through the eyes of Rice’s vampires is pure magic – everything is new, enticing, beautiful, alluring! I flew through the first eight books at neck-breaking speed. While a few things did piss me off (e.g. David’s creepiness in Merrick , the portrayal of Eastern Europe in Interview with the Vampire , etc), I mostly loved every bit of it. And then, I got to Blackwood Farm . I started reading, abandoned the book for a few months, started again, and abandoned again. At the third go, I finally fully got into it and managed to find much of the beauty I’ve seen in the earlier books. Let’s start with the plot. A young vampire, Tarquin "Quinn" Blackwood, has a problem. He’s had a ghost companion, Goblin, even since his birth. Unfortunately, now that Quinn is a vampire, Goblin has become violent and dangerous, and Quinn decides to seek Lestat’s help in destroying him. And, because this is Anne Rice, this “seeking help” involves Quinn retelling the entire history of his family, up to his great great ancestors, in maddening detail. And the history of his servants’ families. And his tutors’ families. And the families of random people he meets on the street. And, because this is Anne Rice, it still somehow works. The good: - So atmospheric! Just like all other books in the series, it makes me want to visit New Orleans! - Things really start to pick up after Rebecca’s ghost appears. I haven’t read many ghost stories and wasn’t sure if it’s my thing, but now I’m ready for more! - Petronia and her companions. I wish we had seen more of them. I’m always fascinated by ancient immortals who’ve lived through different times. - Revealing Manfred’s and the family’s epic past bit by bit. It had this air of nostalgia and sorrow hanging all over it. Beautiful writing. The bad: - I think it was a mistake to make this book a part of the Vampire Chronicles . Lestat is a framing device, just standing there, listening, and inexplicably fawning over Quinn. He isn’t acting like himself or contributing anything, and it feels like he’s there only to lure in old readers. Don’t get me wrong, I love my golden-haired brat prince, but I really think this book would have fared better without him. Any connection with the rest of the Vampire Chronicles is so negligible, and the novel could easily stand on its own. - Everybody loves Quinn for reasons I don’t entirely understand. The few who refuse to fall in love with him are presented as horrible people. That’s one of the defining traits of a Gary Stu, isn’t it? Which brings me to... - The treatment of Patsy. She suffers a terrible tragedy when she is young, yet no one has any sympathy for her mostly because she seems to be the only person in the world not completely fawning over Quinn. She’s presented as a terrible being for wanting to use family money to invest in her music career. At the same time, Quinn uses obscene amounts of family money on excessive trips or rebuilding an island in the middle of a swamp, and no one criticizes him. And no one calls him out on what he does to Patsy at the end. - Oh, and one of the main reasons everyone hates Patsy is because she chooses to pursue a career in music in the first place instead of staying home and being a proper debutante. Debutante, really? Is that still a thing? And that is why people dislike her?? - The Rebecca storyline led nowhere. She kept asking for a death for her death, and both people who wronged her are still alive / undead. They would have been perfect targets for her revenge, then at the end she doesn’t get it and doesn’t even try. Or is she satisfied with the innocent blood spilled (trying to avoid spoilers here)? - The Goblin reveal wasn’t really a surprise. - Most of the other newly made vamps are presented as trash that Lestat has no trouble destroying by the thousands. Suddenly, Quinn comes along and for some reason gets special treatment. Fine, he deserves the benefit of the doubt, but it’s hard for me to believe no one else does. Also, it takes Lestat centuries and Akasha’s blood to gain control over all the advanced abilities – the Fire Gift, the Cloud Gift, etc, and suddenly brand new Quinn possesses everything just because his Maker was ancient. It felt like a cheap shortcut. - Quinn sees 15-year-old Mona for the first time and runs to her to propose marriage. Overall, their romance was more creepy than sweet. - Quinn went on and on about how he’s never going to turn Mona and bring her into his darkness. He even makes the promise to Julien’s ghost. And then... yeah. - There’s this weird idea of aristocracy and of people coming from “good” families being inherently “better.” Terry Sue has many children, and the one fathered by a rich guy is magically interested in art, while none of his brothers and sisters are, even though they’ve been raised the same way. Then Quinn treats Terry Sue in a very patronizing way, choosing a house for her and hiring servants to supervise her, without asking her if she wants any of those things. - What Merrick does at the end (I’m trying to avoid spoilers, but if you’ve read the book, you know what I’m, talking about) . It went against everything she fought for in Merrick , and, while it’s completely possible that her mind changed, not that much time has passed, so it would have been good to see her motivation. Or is this explained somewhere in Lives of the Mayfair Witches ? I haven’t read it yet. - Okay, I understand style is important to Aunt Queen and I respect that, but, but, BUT! A woman in her 80s doing a Europe tour in stilettos? And then complaining she’s not in perfect health anymore?! No matter how used one might be to stilettos, the feet will start hurting after walking for a sufficient amount of time, and traveling and going to museums is a very walking-intense activity! - CAMEOS! Fine, I can accept that there is a person in the world completely obsessed with cameos. I can even accept there are ten such people. But having all of them in the same room at the same time for unrelated reasons? How likely is it that everyone in this book will end up independently cameo-obsessed? I thought at least the cameo storyline would lead to something big, but it went nowhere. Final verdict: I think it’s Quinn that broke it for me. I don’t mind flawed protagonists at all (my own book has one!) But if a protagonist is flawed, they should be aware of it or they should be called out on it. Here, Quinn is a spoiled brat, and the text presents him as the most intelligent, interesting, amazing creature deserving of all the love. Take a look at previous narrators in the series – Louis, Lestat, Armand, Marius, David. All of them are far far away from being perfect people, but they are aware of their flaws and their friends never shy away from criticizing them. And it works really well! I know this book made some readers break up with the Vampire Chronicles for good, but that’s not the case with me. While not perfect, Blackwood Farm has some of the beautiful, atmospheric writing of previous books in the series. I’ll read the following books. I’m even excited about them! But I first need a long break and read something else. My binge-read ends here.
