"Do you love your father more than anything else in all the whole world? I love mine more than all the world ten times over." [Sara] I watched the movie version of A Little Princess as a kid and I was always very fond of it, so I decided to read the book, trying to find out which version I will love more. I ended up loving both. A Little Princess follows Sara Crewe, a child that was brought from India to England by her father, Captain Crewe, to a school for girls to start her education. I'm relieved that the book version of Sara is the same as the movie version. Both have beautifully wonderful souls, full of an incredible imagination, a kind-hearted heart, cleverness and friendliness as I remembered. Call me boring if you wish, but I love the purely good, kind-hearted characters so much. They never fail to bring back the feeling of hope for humanity, showing that, despite all the bad things happening around the world, there are good people out there who will give you a friendly smile and a helping hand. "If Sara had been a boy and lived a few centuries ago," her father used to say, "she would have gone about the country with her sword drawn, rescuing and defending everyone in distress. She always wants to fight when she sees people in trouble." Sara is one of the good ones. If angels were around us, she would certainly be one of them. She is a rich girl, which means she never starved, never had to wander looking for a warm place to stay, never felt afraid for her life, never felt fear in general, receiving everything no matter if she asked about them or not. She had a life without any problems, feeling happy with her beloved rich father, but she never bragged about her high status. She isn't a narcissist, she isn't egoistical, bad mannered, full of herself, making fun of the ones who were lacking. On the contrary, she is more happy giving than receiving. She is generous, sharing all her things with others, offering them a friendly smile and a helping hand if they need it. She called herself a little princess, and she was one, but she was also a little heroine. It was such a breath of fresh air after reading about all the women thinking they are badasses if they were mean to everybody around them. "Are you learning me by heart, little Sara?" he said, stroking her hair. "No," she answered. "I know you by heart. You are inside my heart." As much as I love Sara's relationship with all her friends, what is most precious to me is her relationship with her father. There are stories where the main characters love their parents, yes, but usually there are family issues that build the background and the inner conflict of the characters. It's not what happened here, and I'm so glad for it. Captain Crewe is a single father, trying his best for his only child and loving her with all his might. And Sara loves him with all her might in return. This big love is a constant thing flowing through the whole story, even after the loss of the Captain. It's as touching as it's painful, but this is how life is. It gives you something, and takes it away, just to give you something in return. So when Sara loses her beloved father, and thinks that she lost everything, after many hardships, she gains new friends that she can rely on and that can rely on her, at any time. "There isn't any banquet left, Emily," she said. "And there isn't any princess. There is nothing left but the prisoners in the Bastille." [Sara] The movie made me cry hard whenever I watched it as a child, and I worried if I would feel the same, as an adult, while reading the book. I shouldn't have to worry, because I felt the exact same emotional weight I have felt before. Sara's character felt as precious to my soul as she felt before, and observing all of her hardships hurt my heart, despite knowing that her story will have a happy ending. She's so strong. Mentally, I mean. So many people, even adults, would crumble down after losing everything, but she faced her hardships with her head held high. She never wavered, never failed, always offering a kind smile and thinking of others first before her own needs, even when she was starving and felt faint. So when she finally had a breakdown, it was especially impactful. I bawled my eyes out, for Sara, for her father, for Becky, and for everybody who should be happy and safe, but had to suffer instead. "I am afraid," said Miss Minchin, with a slightly sour smile, "that you have been a very spoiled little girl and always imagine that things are done because you like them." Miss Minchin's character was designed for you to hate her, and that's exactly how I felt. As the head of the school, she should be the maternal figure for the students, but she never cared for the girls, she cared for the money that their families provided for the school. She was incredibly judgemental and full of herself, thinking that only her opinions had any value, completely ignoring everybody else's, even her own sister's. She didn't like Sara from the very beginning, but showed her off to everybody, because her father was rich. The moment she found out about him being gone, her respect for Sara was also gone. She was infuriating whenever she showed up on pages, I just wanted her to face consequences for all the mean things she had done to the girls, not only Sara, but also Becky, who were only children, but were treated like robots. Overall, A Little Princess was such a delightful story. I enjoyed reading it so much, it was everything I thought it would be. I was brought back to my childhood, in a way, which I'm incredibly grateful for, and I am sure that I will come back to this book very often. Sara just found her place in the list of my favorite characters, and her story is definitely one of my favorites. I need to see the movie again very soon! ☺️ P.S. You all, beloved bookworms, can so very easily relate to Sara who loves books just as much as she loves her father. She would happily spend her life with her nose buried in the books and with her beloved father at her side. Also, her imagination is as endless, as the universe, and I love it so much about her.
