My oldest son picked out this book to listen to each week on his way to drum lessons. If I’ve read a Box-Car Children book, it’s been long enough that I didn’t remember the premise. Basically, there’s a few kids that lived in a train box car, but they got adopted by a nice old guy who brought their box car to his house so they’d feel comfortable. Now they solve mysteries and the box car has nothing to do with it? I think that’s pretty much it. With that backdrop, one of the kids, (a girl named Jessie) joins a new girls hockey team coached by local legend returned home Kevin Reynolds. The way the book describes Reynolds, he’s a Mario Lemieux like figure (not the greatest player of all time, but in the conversation for the runner up). Besides coaching the hockey team (which has his daughter on it), Reynolds is also building a new state of the art hockey rink for the kids to play on. The drama (or Hockey Mystery , if you will) centers on somebody trying to thwart Kevin Reynolds from building his hockey rink. Somebody steals Reynolds’ skating practice cones, then they spill ink on the one of kind blueprints of the rink, and finally some of Reynolds’ hockey memorabilia starts to go missing. There are a bunch of suspects, including a figure skating coach who hates hockey, the manager of the current ice rink, some parents who are worried about increased traffic near their house, and even Reynolds’ own daughter. There are apparently three other Box-Car children, but none of them really matter in this story. This is Jessie’s story, with about half of the book dealing with the mystery and the other half is Jessie getting used to playing hockey. As a young hockey player, my kid really enjoyed this book. He was convinced the thief was the figure skating coach almost from the beginning. When the actual thief was revealed, I think he’d forgotten there were even other suspects. The audiobook performance was decent; it really did well with Jessie and the girls on the hockey team, but I cringed a bit when the little brother or any of the adults talked. When it was over, my son was satisfied but wasn’t exactly calling out for more Box-Car Children books.
