Another one of those books that I have yet I don't know why exactly. I am a huge fan of X-Files. I used to watch it like crazy when Netflix decided to put up all the episodes on Instant. This book read exactly like an episode of the show. I got to say that this book was written full of coincidences. Bad guys look for heroes, they find them by interfering their cellphone frequency. Not only that but they interfere and hear the most crucial plan of their secret plan. Mulder and Scully pursuit one lead and suddenly something happens that is even more important and crucial to their investigation. They're just full of luck, aren't they? Another example is when a character gets shot and it comes off as just inconvenient since we know they survive due to their already mentioned ability to heal themselves. I was just reading and thinking "He'll heal" every time another character was sad/nervous about a person in front of them getting hurt. Bunch of other questions: How did the dog survive what happened towards the end? How does the dog know where to find his family? How is it not possible the bad nano did not escape into nature considering the person who had it was constantly leaking/melting? Why did they put the kid in a survivalist camp? He does not like people there much so wasn't there a way to find some relatives that would want to adopt Jody? I have a lot more questions but maybe I am looking into this book way too much. Also, and this is a minor annoyance on my part, I keep thinking the boy is a girl because his name is Jody. It kept messing with my mind for some reason. Honestly, the book read like a script for one of the episodes. The chapters are very short and I could have read it in a day or so if I wanted to. The story itself is alright but it does not really bring anything new to the table. Bunch of coincidences and cliches mixed with a mystery where Mulder and Scully ask bunch of questions and follow leads that are just laid out in front of them while the bad guys follow their steps and answer to the man hidden in shadows.
