As a Black American from the South, I am proud of my family’s story of survival. With roots in Louisiana, Arkansas, and Florida, I can relate to different accounts by people a few generations from slavery. The things that our people endured back then don’t always feel real. It wasn’t until my time at Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana that I found myself surrounded by people from families such as Lalita Tademy’s in Cane River . This book has been on my to-be-read shelf for a decade and after reading it, it should be a contemporary American classic, especially of Southern Literature. Cane River is about four women; Elisabeth, Suzette, Philomene, and Emily who spent much of their lives surviving and creating a world for their offspring. These are all formidable women throughout Lalita Tademy’s family history and each part of the book details their trials and tribulations on a small plantation during the back end of slavery and the era of reconstruction until Emily died in 1936. It is a family saga filled with reverence and an honest portrayal of what many “Creole” or mixed-race Black people went through during this time. Early in the book, a white man raped Suzette, and by the end of this book, Suzette’s granddaughter Emily is fighting for her children’s inheritance after the death of her beloved, a white man who is the father of her children. It details the complexities of what “Black” and “white” is and the relationship between Black and mixed-race women with white men as lovers and enslavers. Because interracial relationships were illegal, white men might love their children but they could not inherit. As I mentioned, there is a rape that occurs early in this book that was disturbing to read but unfortunately, that was the reality for Black enslaved girls of the time. What holds this book together is the enduring spirit of these women. It is a family saga based on hundreds of documents of research and word of mouth. I was jealous that something like this doesn’t exist in my family. I don’t want to detail the entire book in this review because it is a family epic with so much happening. What I can say is that the writing is strong and engaging. These are real people but since they lived in a different time, they could have been caricatures but they don’t feel like that. My only complaint is that it was a little hard to follow at times. Early in the book, there was a year listed but as it continues, there’s nothing that tells us what year it is besides some documents here and there. I would have liked to be able to follow the story along better. I realize that because of the lack of documentation on Black families, a lot of it is guesswork so I don’t want to focus too much on that complaint. Another complaint is the fact that this is marked as historical fiction but it’s not as literary as I would have hoped. It is more like a family history or memoir which is also not a huge complaint, just something that made me question publishers. There is a lot of recounting in this book but it does not flow like a more literary historical fiction. All in all, this was an excellent read that will stick with me for a long time. I am a big fan of stories like this, particularly in Louisiana which is a state filled with so much haunting, magic, pain, festivity, and complexities.
