This was a fun, quick book. A woman clairvoyant, Mary, routinely helps the police with investigations due to her visions she receives of murders that are about to happen. She is stuck on a certain case because she can't see the killer's face for unknown reasons. It also seems tied back to some trauma she encountered when she was six years old that she has blocked from her memories. Mary has some conflict in her life with her husband Max, who is 10 years older than her, and her brother, Alan, who does not trust Max. They do not get along. Even though there are really only three main characters, there isn't too much involved in getting into their characters. I feel like more time was spent on describing what everyone ate at each meal, rather than the motivations behind the characters. Mary did struggle with wanting to be stronger than she felt, and she depended on her husband for strength in many ways, even though by the end of it, she knew she needed to depend on herself. Earlier on in the novel though, Koontz wrote this: She must have gone pale, for he said, “Calm down. It’s over.” He looked good. Marvelous. So big and reliable. She did calm down somewhat, merely because he told her she should. NO woman, actually, I don't think any PERSON wants to be told to calm down. It never makes anyone calm down. That did not sit well with me and I was hoping that she would argue about his statement, but she never does, which is disappointing. She does take care of herself in the end when she has to, but I was hoping for a bit more of a stronger character. The plot itself is interesting and fast-paced. It all keeps moving along. I totally fell for some red herrings that were thrown in, even though I knew they couldn't be right, I still couldn't see another way for it to end. The explanation for the ending was a bit ridiculous. I think more breadcrumbs throughout the book could have paid off the explanation better, but it still didn't make me enjoy the book any less. This is what I feel would be a perfect book to pick up in the airport and read quickly on a flight.
