Plot The story is set maybe eighteen or nineteen years after the end of Full Circle . Morgan is a widow with a child and is set to become the new high priestess in the upcoming year. After many years of peace, weird things are happening around Morgan and her coven, leading her to believe that someone is out to get them. Her and others must find a solution. Simple plot but unbelievable long, in comparison to the rest of the books. The plot itself isn’t exactly bad, but it’s not very interesting or unique. It’s basically the same song and dance Morgan has been doing previously. This time with the added bonus of her daughter. There is a myriad of reasons why the plot in this story just wasn’t good. I think a big reason is because it’s so lackluster. Morgan has been over this plot again and again, just with different antagonists and different problems. Underneath it all, they’re all the same. The plot of the last book in this series was a watered-down fizzle instead of a bang. Writing Night’s Child isn’t in first person POV, yay! That’s about the only positive thing I can really say about the writing. Things were extremely predictable and the writing continued to embody the wrongs of “show, don’t tell”. I can admit that the writing isn’t all that terrible. We’re never sucked into any long soliloquies or anything boring like that. There is a lot of time Morgan spends on thinking about things, but it never gets too dull. The writing is alright. You get used to it quickly but it’s nothing overly good. Characters Moira, Morgan’s daughter, is our new qausi-protagonist, and yet she is not really her own character. She’s Morgan 1.2. She’s not even a new version; she is literally Morgan, but updated…sort of. Every moronic thing Morgan has done, the naïveté Morgan had, all of that is in Moira. I didn’t like Morgan as a teenager, why exactly would I like the exact same version of her? Hint: I don’t. There was nothing redeeming about Moira because she wasn’t even really a character to me. Morgan I actually liked a little bit, now that she’s apparently grown out of her stupidity. She’s much smarter than her teenage counterpart, but in a way that shows that she’s gained the common sense she should have had in the previous books. She’s fierce and relentless, and I absolutely loved it. Still, after spending fourteen books with her as a teenager, I’m afraid her character can’t really be redeemed for me after spending only one book with her as a badass. Who really cared about the rest of the characters? I was happy to see Sky but she’s never really been center-stage in the books. I couldn’t have cared less about what happened to Hunter. Ian was a mix of Cal and Hunter, and the villains were just your run of the mill, petty villains. Very boring. Things I Liked I didn’t really like anything in Night’s Child or the series as a whole. It was too long and boring for me to enjoy anything that I might have actually liked. Things I Didn't Like A big problem I had with Night’s Child was, even though it’s a little less than double the size of the first fourteen books in the series, it’s so crammed full of stuff. Moira basically goes through all the things Morgan experienced—if you remove the books focusing only on Hunter and Alisa—in about two-thousand total pages. In the span of around three hundred pages. The book was overstuffed. Sure, it was about concepts that the reader has been learning about for fourteen books, but Night’s Child totally reset where the story took place, in a totally different year, with different characters, etc. Maybe as a standalone book Night’s Child would have gotten a higher rating, but as it stands, it’s a book that’s too cramped. Another thing I didn’t like with this book, and the series as a whole, was how predictable everything was. The only thing that ever surprised me, in all fifteen books, was in Reckoning with what as actually causing all of the disturbances in Alisa’s grandmother’s house. That was literally it in a fifteen book series. Things were just so formulaic that it was easy to see what would happen. I could see for miles when certain characters were introduced what role they could play. I knew instantly, for example that both Charlie and Ian were going to be love interests. The series as so straight-laced that there was no fun in figuring things out. I’ve got a whole bunch of other gripes, but one of my main problems with the series was how magick was handled. Neither the reader, nor Morgan for that matter, are given any knowledge to the limits of magick, like what it can and can’t do, what exactly is it, how far can magick be depleted from a person, etc. For a book about Wicca and magick, we are honestly given very little information about all of it. I’d say that a good chunk of the books revolved more around Morgan’s and her friends’ drama than magick and Wicca. Also, quick note, I am so mad that I had to suffer through a bunch of teenage romance drama when a lot of characters are barely mentioned and their relationships didn’t work out in the end. There was a lot of fluff in the series that revolved around certain things, like Robbie and Bree’s romance, and you’re telling me they don’t even end up together?! Why did I have to suffer through all of their drama then? Diversity In Night’s Child there is only the barest mention of any same-gender relationships. Two witches in the new Belwicket are partner’s and Sky’s had some short relationships with men and women, though none of them have stuck (why did she not end up with Raven, that’s what I want to know). That’s literally all the diversity in this book. The series as a whole has very little diversity as well. Morgan has a few scenes with her Aunt Eileen and her partner Paula, who I should mention is Jewish. There’s mention of a gay boy way back in the first book. Alisa is the only other confirmed non-white person in the entire series, and she played no role after Reckoning , which makes me wonder why she even had a book to herself if the most that Tiernan did with her in Night’s Child was mention her name maybe twice in total. The diversity in this book has been so poor it’s laughable. It’s majority white and, even though there are a few characters who were are in same-gender relationships, very heteronormative. Might as well say there’s no diversity in the grand scheme of things. Overall The Sweep series is way too long to be enjoyable. Maybe I would have liked it more if it was a trilogy or, at the max, six books long. The first fourteen books encompassed only a few months and the final book spanned a week and was double the size of all of the previous books! The characters were very unlikable. At the very best I felt neutral towards them. I only liked Sky Eventide and she didn’t have much of a presence, sadly. There is very little diversity. The plot was alright, but it was stretched way too thin. The majority of the books are in first person POV, but the writing wasn’t exactly terrible . Nothing to write home about, though. I didn’t like the series, I’m glad I don’t have to spell magic with a “k” anymore, it was a giant waste of my time, but I thank Cate Tiernan for allowing me into her world of witches and Wicca. Here is a link to my notes.
