I’ll give Arenas credit: I made it halfway through before growing tired of the ridiculousness of it all. That’s more than I can say for almost any work I’ve read of magic realism, which is without question my least favorite genre. As I’ve mentioned before, it combines the worst qualities of realism (a reliance on topical subjects that can make it seem dated – at best – and practically irrelevant to any reader outside the target audience – at worst) and fantasy (a reliance on the absurd and fantastical not to propel the narrative forward or open new worlds to the reader, but rather as a crutch or gimmick to avoid narrative cohesion or a tight plot structure). Realism and fantasy don’t always do this. In fact, the best of those styles avoid these pitfalls entirely. But magic realism? It wallows entirely in both to the point where I have trouble finishing them. Arenas had me hooked at first with a Rabelaisian tale of a priest who is imprisoned and banished from Mexico to Europe and then back again, and the switching of narrative voice was clever. But I soon lost interest as the comical scenes piled up. I understand that the point is to portray totalitarianism as absurd and nightmarish. But when fiction delves so deeply into showing us this, it practically becomes what it critiques. Arenas begins by writing in the prologue that he tries to avoid things like “the historical,” “precise dates,” or “fact,” and that he doesn’t really mind if his work has plot holes or countless inconsistencies, since this was the point. Well, great. Those are a couple traits your novel shares with totalitarian regimes. But seriously: if art functions to drown the reader in the same morass, then is the artist pulling back the curtain on the absurdity, or merely partaking in it? “But we can’t adequately describe the horrors of modernity in any other way!” Except others can and have. Imagine if I open an art gallery and advertise an exhibition, and when each visitor walks in, I hit them over the head with a frying fan. “You see,” I shout to them as they collapse to the floor, “life is violent and chaotic … and so is my ‘art’!” But people don’t need to be hit over the head with a frying pan to know it hurts. At that point, what is the difference between my art and the very suffering it is supposedly attempting to communicate? As much as I love fiction and believe it can communicate universal truths, I feel like Arenas' own life story would make an immensely more powerful literary commentary on suffering through political strife than this fanciful work. For this reason, I look forward to reading his memoir, Before Night Falls , with the hope that he will cast aside the tired gimmicks of magic realism and just relate a simple and powerful human story of struggle.
