I don't even know where to start. A Civil Contract was hard and tedius to read to from the get go, mostly because of the language and partly because of the unnecessary information thrown at us. I had to skim a lot just get through the chapters. So why did I decide to keep reading? Mostly for that ending. You know, where Adam would realise how lucky he was to have Jenny. Sure, Jenny was stout, plump, and not pretty at all. Sure, he was forced to marry her because he needed her money. Sure he "fancied" himself in love with Julie - pretty, slim and basically the complete opposite of Jenny. But in the end he'd have that ah hah moment and see just how fortunate he was. So, I kept reading. Even when Adam was revolted (yes, that exact word) with Jenny and her appearance. I keep reading, even when Adam was mooning over Julia, basically every time he saw her, even after the birth of his son (Adam wasn't very pleased at the knowledge that Jenny was pregnant). I kept reading until I finally got that moment. That moment was squeezed into the last ten pages of the book. OK, whatever as long as I got that triumphant ending. I waited with bated breath for when Adam would realise how imperfect Julia really was. And he did. But it was so anticlimactic. Nothing at all dramatic. And the ending? That triumphant moment where the guy realises that the plain girl is actually the best match for him and how much he loves her? Yeah, that moment never really happened. Sure Adam tells Jenny that he's over Julia (after, like, a year and half of marriage and - let's not forget - the birth of his son) and that he loves Jenny but Jenny is left with the bittersweet realisation that Adam will never love her like he did Julia and how she'll never measure up to Julia but that she should be content with the knowledge that Adam loves her, in a way but not the way she wanted. The End. I'm serious. Can you believe it? Well I couldn't. I had to re-read the ending twice to believe that the author would just leave it like that. After everything, all we get is that crappy, depressing ending - basically telling women everywhere that no matter what you do for your husband, be the perfect wife, don't nag him, give him free reign to have as many affairs he wants (though in Adam's defence he didn't but still), giving birth to his son, you have to be pretty and beautiful for him to truly love you. Maybe if you're lucky (like in Jenny's case) your guy will come to (at the most) appreciate you. In a year or two, at the very least.
