The inimitable Mrs. Pollifax returns here for her fourth adventure, this time finding herself at a ritzy convalescent hotel in Switzerland, on the hunt for some stolen plutonium. While searching for this dangerous contraband, she also befriends a charming young British man with a mysterious past and a young Arab boy who is apparently terrified of his companions. As is so often the case with Mrs. Pollifax, the friends she makes along the way to reaching her objective prove to be useful allies, and some of their stories end up being more than a little germane to the central conspiracy she winds up confronting... Although I would not describe A Palm for Mrs. Pollifax as being quite the equal of its three predecessors - The Unexpected Mrs. Pollifax , The Amazing Mrs. Pollifax and The Elusive Mrs. Pollifax - in terms of either hilarity or narrative excitement, it had more than enough of both to make it an engaging entry in the series. I enjoyed Robin Burke-Jones' character, and his amusing exchanges with Mrs. Pollifax, as they both learnt that the other was not what or whom they had thought, were quite humorous. The adventure with Hafez at the castle was also most engrossing, and the climb down the medieval latrine was entertaining. This was written in 1973, as terrorism in the Middle East was just beginning to become more religious, rather than nationalist in nature, so the conclusion, in which the villain, a Muslim zealot intent on creating a worldwide theocracy , escapes, presumably to carry on with his scheming, was also fascinating. I finished the book, written so many decades ago, thinking of how Islamist terror has since become one of the gravest troubles facing our world, and wondering what Gilman (who died in 2012) made of it all. Did she think of this story at all, after 9/11? Did she see any parallels between her villain and figures like Osama bin Laden? I certainly did. Leaving such musings aside, this was an entertaining addition to the series, even if it has never been one of my personal favorites, and I recommend it to anyone who has read and enjoyed the first three Mrs. Pollifax books.
