OVERVIEW The problem I had with this book was it seemed to lack focus. It was filled with interesting set ups for new narratives such as the introduction of a new breed of elves that practices necromancy, A To-Gai girl named Brynn Dharielle that will become a new ranger, and Marcalo De’Unnero splitting from the church at form a new religious sect. These stores while interesting never really go anywhere they just seem to set the stage for future novels. Instead the narrative is focused on the politics between church and kingdom, and while more interesting than the previous book I found it to still lack intrigue, mostly due to the fact that the monks kind of blend together and seem to change there views of the church and its direction regularly, the kingdom on the other hand isn't well represented as there are only a few notable characters and we see none of them through there own point of view. More importantly than the lackluster politics the story also follows the spreading of the Rosey Plague, which was done very well in my opinion, and you can really feel the mounting fear in the people of Corona. In the end I was disappointed in this book it started off well like many books in this series then kind of began to meander dragging its feet the whole way. This book seems to exist purely to fill in the gapes between the first trilogy and the second but can't stand on its own two legs. NEGATIVE - Many of the monks blend together and there is not enough personality in the masses to create memorable characters apart from a few. - Large time jumps mess with the pacing and in the end about 10 or so years have passed many times jumping ahead years at a time with out a word from characters. - Roger Lockless falling in love with dainsy felt like it existed purely for convenience to help drive the plot forward and kind of came out of nowhere. - The ending was incredibly obvious from the first mention that the stones couldn't heal the plague and I felt it took way to long to get there. POSITIVE + The use of the plague was something you don't see often used in high fantasy and it is to be applauded, even more so knowing that this was written while a friend of R.A. Salvatore's was batting cancer. + All the set ups that were mentioned above as well as a few others where truly the highlight of this novel and helps to expand the world of Corona. + The ending while predictable was enjoyable and help elevate Pony to even higher standing as a hero.
