This book is a sausage made out of roadkill...and glass shards. And forced similes and metaphors strewn about the highway, ugly as a car wreck. So much semen is spurted and wiped on the dashboard instrument panels that I ceased after awhile to wonder or care how our motorists could even read the dials. So many commas and clauses litter the paragraphs like so many slashed half-moon rubber tires lining the interstate that one hopes Ballard did not race past the tollbooths and rob the inventors of commas and clauses of their rightful royalties. Page after page, Ballard serves up the same slices of this tainted roadkill sausage meat, belaboring for another 200 pages all the main points about technology, sexuality and violent death that he had already made by about, oh, page 12, that I kept waiting for the gamey taste to become an acquired one. It didn't happen. Apparently, a lot of you ate this amalgam and declared it delicious. If so, brush your teeth really really hard... Before I get into some particulars, a few points... First, I've never met anyone in my life who got their sexual rocks off from car crashes, and yet, somehow--this book would have you believe--in a little section of London near the airport the neighborhood is crawling with people who do! And they all happen to find each other and hook up! I mean, way before the internet, even. Crash deserves a high place in the pantheon of campy, bad literature. I'm choosing to believe that Ballard wrote this as a big joke, but fear that he didn't. Apart from the fact that I couldn't help laughing as Ballard piled on ever-increasingly disgusting perversities and situations involving bodily fluids within the confines of the auto, I began to think the following passage might be clueing me into the possibility that this was an intentional satire. It describes the tendency of the story's main car-cash fetishist weirdo, Vaughan, to repeat, obsess and raise the (roll)bar of kink on his over-the-top fantasies: "Always he deliberately sidestepped into self-parody." This is the kind of book that spawns tiresome academic dissertations on alienation, sexuality and technology in the modern/postmodern world and the evolutionary merger of the biological and the inorganic and such, and no doubt causes the Ballard cultists to circle the wagons; so me pointing out its ludicrousness probably steps on some sacred cows and brands me a Philistine. So be it. Let's be like Vaughan and race white-knuckle fashion into the weird world of this book. I promise you, like Ballard's tome, it will not be pretty... Yes, I understand about fetishes. I understand that this is a book about them in general and about one fairly inscrutable one in particular. And I understand that in looking at this world of fetishes and fetishists this book examines and pores over and builds-upon itself with the dedication of a fetishist. I understand about the sexualizing of the auto in our culture and our pseudo-sexual relations to it, etc. etc. I get all that. I also get that, since I do not share this particular fetish, this book will find its most enthusiastic admirers among those who do share it. Since I do not share it, I have to grit my teeth and bear it as the proceedings grow ever more outlandishly vile. There's something hard and staccato and inelegant about the way Ballard writes. I sometimes find his segues of thought confusing; sometimes find myself a little off balance or disoriented by his descriptive style that confuses details of place and action; the storytelling often takes a back seat (pun intended) to his eagerness to repeat minute graphic perverse details. The constant use of sentences that contain "like" similes gets annoying. I always feel there's a better way to write comparisons. Ballard's relentless attempts to equate gore and sexuality are as often as not crude and honed by a sledgehammer, as if by mentioning both in the same sentence that somehow their merger makes sense. For instance, he writes of two young nurses rendering care..."their burgeoning sexualities presiding over the most terrifying facial and genital injuries." I mean, talk about forcing the issue... Reading this book, though, I couldn't decide if the hamfisted similes, tortured metaphors and illogical comparisons were meant to reflect the irrational mind of fetishists who manage to twist the ordinary into their skewed fantasies, or if it reflected Ballard's inability to write good metaphors. I've never encountered a novel that makes pretty much the same points, only in slight variations at best, over and over on practically every page. Ballard's admirers call this a strength, as though he is some precise jeweler examining and reexamining every angle and cut of a large diamond, or a clinician dispassionately examining something disturbing. If the latter is true then I'd like to nominate the Chilton's Auto Manual and my doctor's clinical diagnosis of my peripheral neuropathy for Nobel Prizes. In actuality the effect of this constant repetition is not one of a sense of clinical precision, but one of unwieldiness and largesse. It seemed like the thematic impact of this material, with its razor-thin narrative, might have been stronger in short story form. As it is, I think this is a great short story pumped up like an airbag into one big nasty ready-to-explode testicle. (Hey, we can all write shitty metaphors, JG)... The book is a catalog of sick ruminations on every possible way human body parts and fluids can interact with cars. Sometimes it feels like listening to a little boy who insists on burping and farting well after his friends' laughs have subsided. The shock value is long gone, replaced by nausea and annoyance. A prude I am not, but I do have an aversion to an apparent revelling in blood and guts and feces and brain matter and semen that goes well beyond the amount required to make the thematic point. Suffice it to say, it's not my cup of motor oil, but I suppose it had to be done. One man's car crash is another man's orgasm, I guess. I struggled with how to rate this. I toyed for awhile with three stars because after a certain point Ballard's over-the-top conceits and constant repetition of disgusting imagery and dichotomies earned a begrudging admiration from me for his commitment, outrageousness and stubbornness for sticking with them. But ultimately I just had to concede it to be fodder for the crusher. May it rest in peace next to the Pontiac Grand Am that I totaled in 2006... (I had written tons more, including a couple of parodies of the book, but as I don't know how to fit them in here, let's just keep things short.) I know it's considered cool to like this writer, but based on this I don't. Crash and burn...
