Wisdom, Faith, Freedom, Harmony, Love, Justice, Glory, Friendship: a list of some of the towns the author and his wife visited on a quest to find America. It was a quest to dispel cynicism and find some beauty on the people of America, and he did in great little vignettes of these towns. He didn’t always find the embodiment of the word in the town: there is no justice or triumph in Justice, WV, or Triumph, LA. But he found Americans who in their plainness, simplicity, lives, and loves inspire us all to live our lives now, not tomorrow, not next week, not when we retire. There is a huge gap between this book and what I have always sought on cross country trips; I am entirely about the landscape and the power of the land. I am fortunate enough to daily work with people intimately so I feel like my experiences of people are accomplished in a different way. And I am the furthest from a cynic as imagined, but I understand why people are, and just love when people leave their comfort zone to look at life from a different framework and viewpoint. And I was doubtful he would find the towns represent their names explicitly in a few days, but I imagine if he lived in them a while, there might be more evidence. Overall, a great read, fast, funny, real. “Everything falls into place, irrelevancies relate, dissonance becomes harmony, and nonsense wears a crown of meaning.” John Steinbeck Harmony, CA: “What is harmony? Something more than accord, perhaps a melodious understanding. Is it the same as peace? Absolutely not. Peace can be passive. It seems to imply something thrust upon us rather than achieved, with tension and force as prerequisites. In a continuum with harmony on one end and disharmony on the other, peace is in the middle. Harmony is actively bettering the world; peace is just not making it worse. Harmony is the opposite of war; peace is merely the absence of it. Certainly, harmony is easiest to find in manageable quantities of humanity. Harmony among the masses is unimaginable. Harmony against eighteen is not.” The lesson learned here is one of carpe diem: the town owners were trying to sell the town because the husband was diagnosed with cancer and they wanted to travel. It validated the author’s quest but the town was hard to sell and the husband died within 4 months. Inspiration, AZ: “The desert, perhaps more than any other landscape, topples expectations. It is not a place of colorless monotony. Color is visible when light falls upon it, and this is a sun-punished setting…” I can appreciate the novelty of a non-naturalist’s description of landscape sometimes, and I like the imagery of toppling expectation. Funnies: In Yuma, the newscasts broadcasted, “60 humans attending a fiddling contest today,” and “Dozens of humans were on hand to watch a football game,” and “Humans are in for nice weather this week.” They were actually saying “Yumans.” Inspiration is a town built up around a mine, and it was cookie cutter monotony, a type of boom town with no soul. The author was inspired to continue on his quest to seek inspiration, to seek out experiences to balance out his healthy privilege. Hope, MS: This was one of the most powerful and hard to read stories. They never discovered why the town was called Hope, and they felt the nerves of being in the Deep South. I remember feeling the same way when I headed to Panama City, FL for a travel assignment and passed through and got to know many “expats” from Alabama and Mississippi. I was shocked to discover there was a town in Mississippi that had just integrated their prom. In 2009. “Morgan Freeman was disappointed to learn that his local high school in Charleston, Miss., still held separate proms, one for black students, one for white. So he offered to pay for a single prom that both could attend. That was 1997. It took 11 years for the school to take Freeman up on his offer.” The author is travelling in 1996 so they are encountering the area still at the point of deep segregation and hatred. It is still ingrained in the memories and actions of the people there. The story of the 3 Freedom Riders who were killed in the Civil Right fight is highlighted next to an interview of 3 carefree young white girls and a lighted from within African American woman who was a sharecropper’s daughter and experienced the lawless near slavery of that time. It is so hard to understand the deepest hatred of racism: I understand it comes from a deep genetic fear of the other, so mistrust of the other, dislike, avoidance, it is despicable but it can be combated through exposure and education. The irrational hatred and violence and homicidal tendencies chills me to the bone, and I can never comprehend it. The African American woman has never voted, had never heard much about the murders of the freedom riders, which brought her town to national attention, but it turns out her landlord was one of the 19 men arrested and acquitted for their murders. The bodies were buried on his property. It is mind shattering to know these things, and while there is hope that we have our first African American president, I can only hope that this woman was able to vote for the first time in that election. That would be the story of hope from Hope, MS. Love, VA: The author portrays a couple, both in their second marriage, who demonstrate a solid, loving marriage where they find near perfect companionship and desire for simplicity. The wife writes a newsletter of the people of the area where she celebrated the simple milestones and happenings. It is positivity in the press to the absolute. It is, in a way, exactly what the author hoped to do with his book, highlight the best of humans, Yumans, and Americans. I only disagree with his narrow definition of love as between husband and wife; he wrote about it in different forms throughout the book and I think it is many of our generation’s blind spot; the absolute spilling over in abundance of love in relationships we have with our community, our coworkers, our clients/patients, our families, our friends, our pets, our homes, our land. Open your heart as well as your mind! Joy, IL: “Thirty years earlier, as he wandered Utah’s Canyonlands preparing to compile his thoughts in Desert Solitaire, Edward Abbey wondering if joy had any evolutionary value. “I suspect that it does,” he wrote. “I suspect that the morose and fearful are doomed to quick extinction. Where there is no joy there can be no courage; and without courage all other virtues are useless.””
