Driving is such a pain in the ass. I always imagine myself crashing the car, colliding with a truck full of chickens, or running over a demented pedestrian whenever I’m holding a steering wheel. Not that I’m a bad driver, actually I’m an excellent driver which really means I drive like a sloth. Also, I don’t really aim sexual fulfillment whenever I get into a car. Unlike most people in this novel, a car, for me, is actually something I use to get somewhere. And as opposed to Ballard’s autoperverts the closest I’ve actually come to getting a boner in the car is when I strap on my seatbelt. Yeah, safety. For me the first time I discovered I could actually die driving was the very first time I sat on the driver’s seat and I turned on the ignition of the car. It felt like a thousand possible deaths pouring from the floodgates of the highway to hell. It ruined that every boy’s dream of being Speed Racer, Knight Rider or OJ Simpson. Well, of course, I never really wanted to be any of these daredevil drivers. Closest car wanker I’ve looked up to and considered a role model is probably Jeremy Clarkson. Despite popular belief he’s actually a pretty skittish driver, albeit he’s a wry comedian, and also a British asshole which gives him a check in my book. Although, he did just get suspended by BBC for being a racist and a cunt, something about socking a producer and racism and being an asshole to PWDs. Speaking of Jeremy Clarkson, I’ve always had this strong suspicion that Top Gear is actually a porno show and a porno magazine for automaniacs like Ballard. My dad always buys the magazine and there’s a good amount of women wearing skimpy outfits doing weird postures. Aside from that there’s an insane quantity of car pictures showing different angles to them. From the rear end of luxury cars to the rack of the wilder trucks, it seems like an autopervert’s wetdream, might as well call it Fifty Shades of Gear. Of course it’s still nothing compared to J.G. Ballard’s Crash. But I still question the morality of people who subscribe to both forms of Top Gear media. Anyway, a porno novel on car boners and women and sodomy must be pretty cool, huh? Well, I dunno. I felt really funny about this one. Know that term auto-fellatio which really means sucking one’s own cock? Well, it kinda sounds like a blowjob for cars, if cars had penises. Which reminds of the internet community called Cars fucking Dragons. That’s right, it is a real thing. Here’s the link: reddit.com/r/carsfuckingdragons . Some people might contemplate on the meaning of life and sexuality in this subreddit. Hey, I don’t judge. Whatever floats your boat, mate. I mean you know Fifty Shades of Grey and all that limp literorgy designed for bibliopervs and so far I’m all respect towards them. Heh. Heh. Foppish bastards. Now uhhh for the uhmmm we come to the err most statutory part of this pseudo-review: Why read this? Or if I may say so, should you even read it? The answer is a resounding: vrovrvrvrooooooommmmmm which I don’t really understand. If you’re looking for sex, better go for the real thing or watch pornography. If you’re looking for cars, better to google “cars”. If you’re looking for a combination of the two, better to buy a car-shaped vibrator. But if you're looking for a rather cheeky way to piss of your Prius this is the answer I guess. But really, why would you?
