I have mixed feelings about this book. It was picked up with the best intentions--American primary education slights poetry, except a note-worthy few authors (Emily Dickinson, Thomas Mallory, Poe)and we are never truly indoctrinated into the power of the well-metered verse. A few years back I recognized my deficiency and sought to remedy it through my own auspices. I loved Donne, gagged through Shelley, recalled a brief charming affair with Milton during my "literature of evil" period, dabbled with the humorous 19th century writers--to wit: Edward Leary, Charles Dodson. There was a brief and powerful interlude with G.M. Hopkins, whose verse never cease to amaze and astound. But for the most part, working my way through this book of the top 100 poems, I spent a lot of time wondering about the relevancy of poetry in today's world. In 21st century America poetry like art appears to have no place unless there's a commercial application for it, like rap. Rap (when I can understand it and when it's not anger-generated and full of offensive stereo-types) has relevancy, and a nicely turned rhyme can be as deeply satisfying as a good cup of coffee. But rap poetry speaks to the urgent now, whereas this (mostly) male and anglo-saxon authorship speaks to a tattered and disgraced past. Amongst such stodgy peers, even Emily Dickinson's scintillating sprung verse appears zestless. This is because the careful rhyming schemes and trite classical references have served their purpose and no longer stun and soothe. Which is not to say there weren't poems I didn't find enjoyable--John Donne still makes my heart lift with questions like, who cleft the devil's hoof? and Walter de la Mare chillingly, "Is anybody there?" said the Traveler, Knocking on the moonlit door. but I did feel that the poetry was still the poetry of the mind, rather than that of a terrified and overwhelmed consciousness. As I worked my way through the pages I looked for people asking questions that I would ask, and Walt Whitman's questions of relevancy in "O Me! O Life!" were what I was questing after. This makes me wonder: what do I most appreciate in poetry, that which I'm already acquainted with? or am I looking for something new? The most pleasure I've had reading poetry in the past few years have been 19/20th century male writers like Whitman, Frost, Lowell, Hopkins and Ginzburg, and 21st century women like Patricia Lockwood, Lisa Pasold, Jane Kenyon and Jane Hirshfield--people who share my rural and rambling New England youth and my urban and questing modern adulthood. Along the way I've discovered C. K. Williams, Stanley Plumly and John O'Donohue. These poets do ask questions that mean something to me. Clearly, Plumly's "The Crows at Three A.M." harks back to earlier poetry (Keats), so there is grounding. Where did my impatience come from? and why did I feel like vaulting over many of these poems in this book? Is it my American desire to have it all and have it right now, right in front of me? This morning in my kitchen where I'm writing this it is icy cold. The day has opened gray and bleak. Right at this very moment a recently married friend is lying in a George Washington hospital bed waiting to hear if she has kidney cancer. Why do poets of the 17th century not write about the cold and the mundane? When they write about death of loved ones why does is sound like they are speaking through the wrong end of a telescope? Why do we still read their romantic twaddle about nymphs and dryads? and why in heaven's name did they invoke a dry and huskless "Jove" with such galling frequency? That's my problem: poetry should reflect a recognizable life. Shouldn't it?
