4 Stars I really enjoyed this horror novel that was brought to life by the amazing setting of the pine forests in good ole New Jersey. This is as much an atmospheric novel as it is a character novel. The twisted pines, the stormy weather, and the swamps and mud all added to the creepiness of this killer thriller. The heroes are typical but I enjoyed them all. Robert Dunbar’s writing style makes the horror work and brings to life the words printed on the page(or e-screen). The images are detailed and vivid. The writing sets a fast pace. “Here, rancid air hangs heavily in a void, its texture thick, liquid, clinging, in a night full of the hot smells of decay. This humid oppression strangely amplifies the dripping, clicking noises: the moldy rasp of dead leaves stirred by tiny animals, the constant murmur of a brook threading the loamy ground, the oozing splash of something that moves heavily through water. There is no moon, and clouds screen the light from the stars. Gradually now, sunk in the still and viscous murk, the trees become vague shapes. Silent. Waiting. The ragged leaves of swamp elms hang motionless as insects in a web.” Athena, Pamela, Matthew, and Dooley are all standout heroes of our story. Pamela our main protagonist has some deep issues. “Her son. For perhaps the thousandth time, she wondered about herself, about why she felt no tenderness when she gazed on this child. She would not pretend to herself. Her mind slid to her late husband: she’d let Wallace down in so many ways. The house. The boy. And the awful thing is I don’t really feel sorry, can’t even feel guilt anymore. Can’t feel anything. Like hot water scalding dead flesh, her thoughts brought only an echo of pain. I’m paralyzed.” The imagery made things work as the story played out and we learn more about the Jersey Devil. “Another cricket called to the first now, softer, subdued, fading. I’m an intelligent adult. Then a third began. It’s irrational to be afraid of the dark.Heading back toward the porch, she tripped over something invisible, almost falling. I will not run. The yellowish light of the doorway seemed faraway.Never make it. The dark began a hollow roaring in her ears; like a swimmer swept out to sea, she foundered, the lighted doorway providing her only lifeline. As she climbed the porch steps, she could feel the darkness sucking at her. Heartbeat a little faster.She slammed the door and leaned against it.Respiration a bit more rapid—that’s all. All around her, the house lay still.” This was a good fast paced read with enough jumps and bumps too make it a lot of fun. The ending is satisfying and the payoff is good. I highly recommend it.
