This, the rollicking fifth in the Pendergast series, featuring spontaneous combustion, assassins, and 18th-century violins, is Preston & Child's best Pendergast thus far, despite some flaws. One overlookable flaw was an unnecessary side plot involving an ex-felon doomsday preacher who improbably sets up a grimy tent city in Central Park and gets hundreds (or maybe it was thousands) of New Yorkers to follow him as if he's a modern Messiah. Um, right. This felt like it was imported from a bad Tom Wolfe novel. A second flaw is the introduction of several high-society characters at the outset, who then are immediately abandoned. A third flaw is the authors' outright theft of Count Fosco, plucked, white mice and all, from Wilkie Collins' The Woman in White . The authors pretend to apologize for this in an afterword, claiming that "today [the novel] is well-nigh forgotten" - ridiculously, of course, because The Woman in White was and is much more widely read than even Preston & Child's biggest selling bestsellers. ( The Woman in White has 105,780 Goodreads ratings, versus 75,080 for P & C's The Relic , and 28,128 for Brimstone .) Fourthly, there is some cringiness in the way Pendergast meets and is instantly smitten by Lady Viola Maskelene, who will appear in subsequent novels. With a character as odd as Pendergast I think you need to write his emotions as awkward and stumbling, not suave. No one wants to read a scene where he takes a woman's hand and time stops and the world suddenly rotates on a different axis. Fifthly, I don't understand how Pendergast's face can "drain of color" when he is albino to begin with. "As D'Agosta watched, Pendergast grew pale." "D'Agosta was startled to see Pendergast go pale as he took the envelope." It's time to find a new way for Pendergast to look startled or frightened, authors! Maybe his nearly-white hair can stand on end. Overall, though, Preston and Child's bulbous wet glistening mounds served them fairly well in this Faust-themed novel. By that, I mean their brains. Even though, regrettably, their bulbous wet glistening mounds could not seem to refrain from constantly referencing police captain Laura Hayward's breasts (as happened in earlier novels as well). These breasts were large, even enormous. Several characters in this book and others referred to them multiple times as a "set of knockers." This is a phrase that emanated from Preston and Child's bulbous wet glistening mounds. As Preston and Child sat at their computers, their penises in their trousers - possibly engorged and erect, ramrod straight - or perhaps lying flaccid, limp and inactive, nestled like new babes in mangers - who knows which? - their bulbous wet glistening mounds constantly reflected on the size of Laura Hayward's mammaries even though this had no bearing on the story. Laura Hayward was not a stripper, an exotic dancer, a model, not a wet nurse. She was a police captain. Her uniform was not revealing of her chest or other body parts. Yet the bulbous wet glistening mounds of the authors, as they sat penis-equipped writing their novels, insisted that Laura Hayward's breasts must be emphasized in every description of Laura Hayward. This flaw I could not overlook.
