Wow! For my first Dragonlance book experience that was great! I commend the authors on doing a stunningly amazing job at creating and developing their characters. Mina was.... Mina was simply amazing. I loved her from the moment she appeared in a blaze of lightning and hailstorm among the great black monoliths. I cheered for Mina as her Knights did, I worried as Galdar did when her footsteps faltered. Everything about her character was amazing in my opinion. I have to say that I am so enamored with her character at this point that I honestly cannot tell whether or not she is a villain or a hero at this point. All I know is that I'm rooting for her. I want to take up her battle cry with her soldiers and I want to follow her story to the very end. She is so... inexorably charismatic and unyielding. She truly does capture the reader. I must say my favorite part concerning her, minus the battle at Sanction, was the way she slipped past the shield. I don't know why but that quote... it gave me shivers. I love how she so calmly, in the name of her One God, found a way around the barrier of Silvanesti much to the awe of her followers and confusion, as well as anger, of the Ogres. Galdar was a very good character as well and I am excited to see where he ends up as. He loves Mina but at the same time he speaks against her when he feels its necessary. He has a mind of his own and frequently voices it, if not aloud than to himself at least. Silvanoshei.... I'm not quite sure what to think about him. While I liked him in the beginning, he quickly became rather moody and tiresome by the end of the book. I admired him in some places, but I am very much on the fence about how I feel about him. I don't know how I feel about his "romance" with Mina either. I do not see Mina as the type to be loved in that way. I don't know. I think that she would realize that such an emotion, at a romantic level, would be counterproductive to her cause. Whatever that cause may be. I'll have to see about this later on. I am very curious to learn about his mother, Alhana Starbreeze, and his father, Porthios. I am hoping that when I back track and read the previous books belonging to Dragonlance that I will be able to see more of them. The same goes for Goldmoon, Jenna,Laurana the Queen Mother and this Dalmar (as well as Raistlin) that I keep hearing about. Gerard... I did not like him one inkling to begin with. He irritated me with his constant brooding attitude and his mistreatment of Tasslehoff. I mean come on. Even after he realized that Tas was the real deal, he was still an ultra dick to him. Racist much? I'm glad that in the end he realized the futility of his anger towards the kender. Ultimately, I have to admit that while I do not like him he does deserve, and command, a grudging respect. And Palin? I wanted to throttle Palin and his angst. Tas was amazing though. He was obviously the comic relief and I quite enjoyed it. However, he did bring up some very insightful outlooks throughout the book. He was a funny character, rather adorable I think. I pitied him a great deal, though. I've got to say, I like his Gnome from the Hedge Maze. Really funny. Overall, it was a great book to start my Dragonlance experience. While I didn't understand all the terms, I quickly began to pick up on everything. The only thing that I fault the authors for is there ocassional habbit of info-dumping. I am not going to complain a great deal about this, though, considering that it was quite useful to me (and probably to other newcomers of the series). I also do not know how much of the information given is common knowledge among the fanbase that has read the previous books either. Once again, awesome book. Sucked me in from the start and I had a very difficult time putting it down. FOR THE LOVE OF MINA!
