I tried to think of a reason to give this book three stars. I really did. It's true it entertained me for two or three hours. I never wanted to put it down; I had to know what would happen. Hughes' writing is certainly engaging. And the premise is so intriguing! But... there are so many things wrong with it. First of all, there are ten main characters. I can list seven. I can describe none. No one had a distinct personality, even the narrator. For example, Katie knows karate. That is literally the only thing we know about her. At least that I can remember. And apparently three of them had incredibly generic names. Anyway, it was frustrating to read about a bunch of strangers. They all talked the same way. Read a line of dialogue; any one of the characters could have said it and you wouldn't know which. The writing, while intriguing, was just...bad. Maybe I just don't like the style? It just read really weird. It was supposedly in first person but... no teenager talks that way! The premise, while interesting, makes absolutely no sense! Why would the oh so cleverly named Government send teenagers to another planet without basic essentials? Why should they start over at the Stone Age? Isn't that a waste of time? Why would they only test seemingly randomly selected teenagers? Why would they include teenagers who are going to be bitter at the group for ripping them out of the upper class? Why ISN'T Benta more bitter? Why would the original Game include a world actually way happier than the actual planet? Why would they wait so long between sessions? Why would the author SHOW us these boring in between times? All of these are questions that Hughes attempts and fails to answer in the last ten pages. Things that are also never addressed: The group never gets definitive proof that they're no longer in a simulation. Personally, I like to think that they're still lying on gray couches as scientists laugh at the theories they come up with. Both groups have the same number of men and women, and they are all attracted to a unique member of the other team. No one falls in love with anyone on their own team, no one likes the same person, no one would rather be single, no one is homosexual. Twenty people? Really? Twenty? I get that there are other groups else where in the world (why are they separate?), but this is not enough people. Inbreeding will happen. Lisse is pregnant, and all she's got is a ton of sheltered young adults. That birth will not be smooth. Why is NO ONE even a LITTLE BIT upset about being on another planet? Why didn't the government find consensual participants? Surely some people would be willing to escape their poverty? Why do they have to go on the same history cycle as Earth? Stone age, Bronze age, why?? It's so unlikely it will happen the same way. Wouldn't it be more effective to move more people to this planet, so they could move through the phases FASTER, and stop the unemployment back on Earth? I feel like the Government could kill two birds with one stone here. I mean seriously they removed a couple of actual workers to do this. WHY. WHY WHY WHY WHY WHY. You can tell Hughes just wanted to write this and when she got to the end she realized how little sense it made but just didn't care anymore. But at least it's entertaining, right?
