I'm conflicted about this book, and not just because it makes you question how you throw away food when the world is starving, and what real help looks like. It just doesn't do that very well. I kept feeling like I was missing bits that were important, and then I started to think my book must be missing pages. Like a whole chapter right before the very end, for example. One minute Oliver is being himself and Rosie says people don't really change and the next moment, there's continually media attention, it's actually really annoying and stressful and then we're sleeping with O'Rourke and we're done. What did I miss here? I like Rosie as a character, how she is able to take control of the situation in Africa and we see her growth through the awfulness that was Oliver. The cycle of the relationship is awful and real, although I'll be honest I have yet to work out what the heck Oliver really did (was he an actor, or a director or did he produce whatever Soft Focus was? Didn't really matter but whatever) it made sense to have Rosie stuck in the cycle of celebrity and love. Rosie can take control at the refugee camp, travel through warzones, deal with death everyday and yet Oliver still causes her to lose her footing years later. The book did a great job of showing this and how despite the intense struggle for survival, the affairs of the heart are highlighted and made even more sensitive. Except it all fell apart for me once she went back to London and then got really confusing when they returned to Nambula with the celebrities. That just seemed like a bad party/press tour of craziness, and I found myself thinking that yeah she did need longer to organize it all. I'm, again, still confused as to what the program really was, there seemed to be some Shakespeare going on, but it was all kind of Band Aid/Live Aid, Comic Relief and pseudo documentary. The end was just kind of a shambles where everyone wants to adopt the twins, but the mother isn't really dead, and yet the guy on the phone keeps raving about how awesome it is to have a live death on camera and we haven't learned a thing here, but it doesn't matter because food is coming. Oh and the Safila camp is better off than the others going forward, and actually it always kind of was. I feel like I am supposed to take something away from this book, but again, I don't know what. Oh and what happened to the locusts? This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
