The bulk of this novel in verse is made up of translations, sometimes very free, with interpolated commentary and scene-setting, of Apollonius and Euripides. A modern day narrator tells the story as it appears to him in a “dream”. This narrative ploy reminded me of Lessingham in The Worm Ouroboros , though, unlike Eddison’s character, Gardner’s anonymous witness is present throughout the tale and sometimes seems to have a physical presence in the mythical past where the story is set. Gods and goddesses are occasionally present, visible to and sometimes interacting with the narrator, though the human characters in the story are not directly aware of them. Chapter 2 begins: In Corinth, on a winding hillside street, stood an old house, its stone blackened by many rains, great hallways dark with restive shadows of vines, alive though withered, waiting – listening for wind, a sound from the bottom of the sea – climbing crumbling walls, dropping their ancient, silent weight from huge amphoras suspended by chains from the ceiling beams. “The house of the witch,” it was called by children of the neighborhood. They came no nearer than the outer protective wall of darkening brick. They played there, peeking in from the midnight shade of olive trees that by half a century out-aged the oldest crone in Corinth. They spied with rounded eyes through the leaves, whispering, watching the windows for strange lights, alarming themselves to sharp squeals by the flicker of a bat, the moan of an owl, the dusty stare of a humpbacked toad on the ground near where the vines began. I guess that can be considered “free verse”, though there seems to be a skeletal hexameter giving it structure. Gardner sprinkles his text with neologisms, archaic terms, and borrowings from other languages, which, along with the verse itself, gives the novel the feeling of being an artifact of a distant past and alien culture, though there are occasional intentional anachronisms, 20th century terms or references which remind the reader of both the character of the narrator and the reader's own situation. Here’s a section that more-or-less directly translates The Argonautica , albeit treats it as a narration by Jason, from Chapter 9: "But Herakles, son of Zeus, left us to work on the feast by ourselves and set out, alone – attended by unseen ravens, the night’s historians – for the woods, anxious before all else to make himself an oar to replace the one he’d broken. He wandered around till at last he discovered a pine not burdened much with branches, and not full grown – a pine like a slender young polar in height and girth. When he saw it would do, he laid his bow and quiver down, took off his loinskin, and began by loosening the pine’s hold with blows of his bronze-studded club. Then he trusted to his own power. Legs wide apart, one mighty shoulder pressed against the tree, he seized the trunk low down with his hands and, pulling so hard his temples bulged, face dark with blood, he tore up the pine by the roots. It came up clods and all, like a ship’s mast torn from its stays, the wedges and pins coming with it, when sudden fashes break without warning as Orion sets in anger. When he’d rested, he picked it up, along with his bows and arrows, loinskin and club, and started back, balancing the tree on his shoulder. As the Argo voyages in unknown seas, the sailors encounter visions, which seem to be of the future, huge ships following in their wake, vast seas of dead bodies, and perhaps nuclear annihilation. This is a deeply pessimistic book, telling not just of the bitter fate of Jason, but weaving in characters and incidents from Greek epic and tragedy, as well as Gardner’s own enigmatic images of apocalypse, to undermine all confidence in the honor and morality of man and the possibility of his survival. nothing is stable, nothing – nay, not even misery – sure The novel as a whole seems a mixture that does not quite come together: translation and re-telling,prose-like verse, modern sensibilities applied to ancient beliefs. I think the main problem was Gardner's reliance on extensive sections of translated text rather than completely re-working the material to suit his form; we don’t get the muse singing through the author, as with a true epic, but transcriptions at second-hand of the muse-inspired ancients. However, Gardner has tried something unusual, and whatever its failings, his book leaves the impression of a noble attempt at bringing a new level of grandeur and tragedy to the modern novel, aiming high, but falling short, like Icarus, one of the Greek myths not mentioned in Jason and Medeia .
