3.5 stars Since some 50 years ago in Thailand, a horrible Thai word translated from "gunman," that is, มือปืน (meaning a hired killer who uses his handgun/firearm to kill a target victim) has been widely appeared in news reports and informal conversations. When I first read its synopsis, I didn't want to read this novel because I don't admire those guys as such; however, there are a few exceptions like the two great American gunfighters like Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday who famously defended themselves and subdued those outlaws in the name of justice and security of suffering people. Ironically, the title itself and the story are a bit different because its readers would not find any gun for sale anywhere. I think Mr Greene has decided on something illegally mysterious and deadly regarding the title; moreover, "A Gunman for Hire" won't do, it's obviously explicit; interestingly, the US title "This Gun For Hire" was first used in June 1936 followed by the UK title "A Gun For Sale" in July 1936 [ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Gun_f... ]. One of the reasons is that the story involves a man called Raven hired by Cholmondeley (miraculously pronounced Chumley, only two from its obvious four syllables!) who has been employed by the Jewish steel tycoon, Sir Marcus, to kill an old War Minister by an automatic. Eventually, he knows he is betrayed since Cholmondeley (Mr Davis) has paid him only two hundred phoney pounds while "It was worth more than half a million to him" (p. 161). Enraged by being double-crossed, he has no choice but be on the run from the police including police detective Mather, Anne's fiance and Saunders, his protege colleague. So Raven has become the hunter, having Anne as the shield in the midst of fragile friendship, who finally takes his revenge on Mr Davis and Sir Marcus; he himself is gunned down by Saunders. Interestingly, I wonder why Raven keeps saying "I'm educated" [p. 11 (2), 42 (1), p. 44 (1), 93 (1), 116 (1), 117 (1)] or indirectly - he was educated [p. 85 (2), 87 (1)] totaling ten times while talking to people or being narrated, probably due to his want of formal education I think it is his habitual way in comforting or encouraging himself due to his seemingly obvious inferiority. As a thriller, we would still find some humorous scenes, for example: ... He put his arm tentatively round Ruby's waist and squeeze her, then loosened hastily as an electrician came along. 'You're a clever girl, ' Mr Davis said, 'you ought to have a part. I bet you've got a good voice.' 'Me a voice? I've got as much voice as a peahen.' 'Give me a little kiss.' 'Of course I will.' They kissed rather wetly. 'What do I call you?' Ruby asked. ... (p. 152) This extracted paragraph is perfect since it denotes someone whose innocent appearance is worth suspecting: The High Street was curiously empty except that there were more police about than usual; he had quite forgotten the gas practice. No one attempted to interfere with Mr Davis, his face was well known to all the force, though none of them could have said what Mr Davis's occupation was. ... Up the street from the Tanneries a medical student in a gas-mask was approaching. (p. 153) We keep reading around four pages till we reach this part: ... Mr Davis shivered slightly and turned on his electric fire. The man in the gas-mask spoke and again the muffled coarse voice pricked at Mr Davis's memory. 'Are you scared of something?' 'There's madman loose in the town,' Mr Davis said. ... (p. 157) Out of the blue, the name of the killer is exposed as we can see from the following. ... He (Mr Davis) was no longer in a hurry, he wasn't busy anymore. he wanted companionship. He said, 'You aren't in any hurry. take that thing off, it must be stuffy, and have a glass of port.' ... The muffled voice said, 'The money ...' ... 'Come away from there,' Raven said. 'You've locked the door.' ... (p. 158) My point is that from the context, the killer still wears the gas-mask and he hasn't taken it off; therefore, it's illogically to reveal his name. There is one more thing I think such a word wouldn't do when I read this paragraph: 'You're mad,' Sir Marcus whispered. He was too old to be frightened; the revolver represented no greater danger to him than a false step in getting into his chair, a slip in his bath. ... (p. 161) One of the reasons is that, after rereading before and after this cited page, the words mentioned as the weapon used by Raven I've found are 'automatic,' 'gun' and 'pistol', in other words, no revolver is mentioned or found as a revolver anywhere so it might have been a slip of the pen. In brief, this novel is worth spending our time provided that we take Raven as a fictive character, an unexemplary assassin whose dangerous ideas and deeds should be taken into account with care and wisdom, in other words, justice will finally conquer.
