There are many negative reviews of this book, which primarily claim some form of purple prose, pretentiousness, or simple absurdity - that Greil Marcus is stretching to connect these points of culture and American history to the songs of Bob Dylan's The Basement Tapes . Yet, while people often have a tendency to crudely narrativise history, it isn't really applicable here. Of course, the historical and social currents of the past inform (or shape) future art. And this is especially prescient with someone like Bob Dylan, who was at the cutting edge, and is now regarded as one of the most influential artists of all time. Admittedly, Marcus' style of writing is perhaps not to everyone's taste (even if I personally find it engaging) - and in some places might suggest it is something it is not. But, this is not an arbitrary, retroactive mythologising of American history funneled into some omniscient intentionality on the part of Bob Dylan, pontificated on like a theologian deciphering the act of a deity, as these responses would suggest, reminiscent of the classic atheistic 'fairy-tale' retort. Art cannot exist in isolation, and a release as compelling and enigmatic as The Basement Tapes begs for an exploration into the deeper, clashing, sometimes darker history on which Dylan builds. And this function of the book is dense and certainly engaging: incorporating Clarence Ashley, who, "[as he sang,] paid in full every claim Dylan would make about traditional music," Dock Boggs, "ashamed to admit he ended up in the wrong place because his money didn't run out before the booze did," Sister Rosetta Tharpe, Geeshie Wiley, and so on, illustrating the traditions and the way in which they develop before Dylan's own subsequent contribution. Not only this, but in looking at Harry Smith's 1952 Anthology of American Folk Music , Marcus acknowledges the effect of prior categorisations of those elements of a certain history, acting as a filter to contemporary public consciousness (ironically, in relation to those negative responses, this is antithetical to any sort of dogmatism). The result is a richer understanding of what one is properly listening to in The Basement Tapes - factoring in this new knowledge leaves the listener with a more (or perhaps just differently) meaningful experience as well as a better grasp of where Dylan (and the members of 'The Band', formed afterwards, which cannot be ignored, but sometimes are) was truly innovative. I feel as though any Bob Dylan fan should make time to read this.
