Excellent book! Https://amzn.to/2WtQzdS I started reading this book because it was one of many books that I received from a relative who died. Most of the books I gave away because I had no interest in the subject. This book was in the pile to read and then give away. After reading it, I won’t be giving it away for a while. I wanted to read the book because I love to study the Bible and I wanted to learn how to better study the Bible. Furthermore, I was familiar with the author, Tim LaHaye. I read all of his Left Behind series, and enjoyed them. I wanted to know what he had to say about studying the Bible. I read the beginning of the book and thought that I wouldn’t get much out of it because the author was talking about beginners, meaning someone who may never have read a word of the Bible. As soon as you are saved and become a Christian, Bible reading becomes important in order for you to grow. Usually new believers don’t have a clue how to study the Bible, so they don’t read it at all. The author suggests making it a habit to read at least 15 minutes every day. Pick a time of day and be consistent. The author gives an outline of how to read and study the Bible in three years. It is important to read the New Testament first, specifically First John. This book assures believers of their salvation. Read all five chapters every day for seven days. Repetition is very important. Reading a chapter over and over helps the person to understand the meaning of the chapter and to remember what the the theme of the chapter. I really like this concept. I know I get a lot more out of reading the same chapter repetitively for a week. I used to follow a Bible reading schedule to read the Bible through in a year. I would read the suggested reading every day, but soon forget what I read after I was done. Another great suggestion is to read one chapter in Proverbs every day, starting with the first day of the month. Proverbs has 31 chapters. If you read a chapter a day, corresponding to the day of the month, you will read the entire Proverbs in one month. Repeat that every month. It doesn’t take long to read one chapter. Studying the Bible requires lots of reading. Reading big chunks of it at a time to get the big picture before analyzing each verse is beneficial. Books that cannot be read in one sitting can be divided up. For example a book with 28 chapters can be divided by seven. Read the first seven chapters every day for a week. Then the second week do the same with the next seven chapters. Within four weeks you will be done with the book, and will know it well. Tim LaHaye also gives details on taking notes every day when reading and to anticipate the Spirit of God to reveal something to you every day. It may or may not happen, but be ready. There are several ways to study the Bible. The book outlines different types of study, such as by book, by chapter, by topic, and a few others. This book really helps you get to know the Bible, and consequently maturing in the gospel. Memorization is another way to really get to know the Bible. Tim LaHaye has this to say about the benefits of memorizing verses in the Bible: “Most of the sins that ‘so easily beset us’ don’t really overpower us, but just ease us over the line between temptation and obedience. The red line of the Word of God flashing in our mind when temptation rears its ugly head is often enough to stop us in our tracks. Each time you heed the Word and reject the inclination to sin, you strengthen your spiritual life and make it easier to refuse sin the next time. Victory over sin is a gradual process, and memorizing the Word speeds up that process.” I found this to be true with just reading the Bible and getting closer to God. When I read God’s Word, I notice little things in my life that God reveals to me that I should or should not be doing. However, when I stop reading His Word, those little sins creep back into my life. I don’t think of it as sin anymore. The Bible brings to light the sins in my life. I really enjoyed this book and will be following the suggestions outlined in the book. This is a very good book; I will be keeping it.
