With every mission, he was more convinced that his Padawan would become extraordinary, even among the Jedi. What he taught would live on. That was legacy enough for him. One corner of Qui-Gon's mouth shifted in a half smile. "You are sometimes a bit too fond of the rules, Obi-Wan. Things change. A mission is not always clear cut. And sometimes the direct road is not the one to take." This book takes place immediately where its predecessor leaves off, with Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan heading to Gala to help with the upcoming election. This is the first time a ruler is being elected, rather than being naturally selected by royal descent, and there is much unrest throughout the major cities. It is up to the Jedi to bring about a peaceful election, prevent civil war, and navigate through the royal world of treachery and deceit. This book was great for a variety of reasons. First of all, it was nice to see this arc which began in the last book, finally wrapped up. As the last one ended, I was very curious as to how the election would go and if the Jedi would in fact be able to make the negotiations peaceful despite all the animosity that was snaking its tendrils around the government and its people. I think that being a diplomat and peacekeeper is such a fascinating aspect of being a Jedi, even more so than being a guardian and fighting in battles, in my opinion. Which is probably why I would be a Consular Jedi. But, I digress. :P Another aspect of this story that I really liked was how we got to see the bond between Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan grow even stronger. They had to learn to work together, adapt to each others ways of thinking, and ultimately grow more comfortable with each other. It's fun to watch this develop! And not only that, but there were moments in this book where Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon split up and were acting independently of each other. Despite being separated from his master, Obi-Wan handled the situation superbly and with all the intelligence and integrity that you would expect from a Jedi. You can really see him growing as a character, which is great to see.
