What a saga, hundreds of refugees from the French and Indian War bundled into ships without regard to keeping families together, not even allowed to bury their dead and "dumped off at random" at points along the Atlantic seaboard and beyond, nearly always without permission of that state or territory, without any arrangements made for their lives. Maillet begins her heroine in Georgia, a bit of coastal history I never knew, as a determined Pelagie saves up to buy a cart and ox team for 15 years and heads north, picking up other stranded Acadians along the way, following the cry "Come on back!" Maillet covers a lot of ground, indeed nearly every Acadian experience is mentioned here - there is even a character symbolizing the Africans who made the trip north to Acadia in the 18th century. Pelagie's countrymen have no country any more - there is a ship without a flag, captained by a historical figure - but though they work hard, they are desperately poor. They pull into Philadelphia as bells are ringing everywhere for the victory of the American Revolution, but the Acadians hear it as bells tolling death: "The remains of a people wandering through plain and valley nibbling the last rotting roots and shreds of plants clinging by hazard in the clefts of the rocks. A tattered, foundering people sowing the land of America with young children and exhausted elders." There are almost no records of what became of these travelers; some historians have pieced information together only by the family names they left along the way. Translator Stratford renders "Le Grand Derangement" as the Great Disruption, for its wholesale clearcutting of family trees, leaving children orphaned, family heirlooms and livelihoods lost to them. In spite of this desperation, Maillet includes, and Stratford conveys, a great spirit, humor, and preservation of culture and song here. Pelagie is astonished to marry off her daughter with an internal monologue typical of Maillet: "her eyes misted over even before they turned to rest on her daughter. Already? Why, sure, Pelagie! She was born in the hold of the Nightingale, not long into the year 1756. Twenty years, count them. At that age, Pelagie, you'd already brought all your children into the world, remember that." The original version of this book apparently includes some original French terms of 18th century Acadia; the translation includes a few choices that maybe convey that, like "to scrimshank". Pelagie at the end, learning of the fate of the hometown she has sought for all these years, puts her Grand Pre into her apron to carry with her: "into her apron pocket, she also stuffed a stock of words, ancient words sprung naked from her grandsires' gullets, words she wouldn't leave as a heritage for foreign throats; and in it, she stuffed all those legends and tales, marvelous, terrifying or prankish, that her line had been passing on since the beginning of time; and in it, she stuffed beliefs and customs hung round her neck like a family jewel, which she in turn would leave her heirs; and in it, she put the history of her people, begun two centuries before, then whirled around by the four winds and left for dead in the gutter…" A beautiful testimony to the strength of the children of the cart.
