4.5 STARS. Kenneth Oppel is a great author, no doubt about it. He creates characters that feel real, whether they be humans or bats, and weaves a world around them that you feel you inhabit while you read about it. His action sequences are among the best I've read yet he manages to instill such thoughtfulness and heartfelt emotions in his characters that the stories always have a depth that still manages to surprise and impress me even though I've read half a dozen of his books so far. I wavered between four and five stars for this final book in the Silverwing trilogy. It's told through three main perspectives: that of Shade, the hero bat protagonist of the last two books; his son, Griffin, who gets sucked into the underworld through a fissure in the earth and whom Shade must go to save; and Goth, the evil cannibal bat and Shade's nemesis from the first two books who, though dead, continues to torment Shade and Griffin in the underworld he now inhabits. I must say on one hand it's a pretty genius stroke to kill the villain in one book only to have him stay a villain in his ghost-form in another because the protagonists are in the underworld; but, on the other hand, I also felt a little bit cheated since I had expected an adventure with more new characters. This is a very unusual story and one I am not sure all readers will enjoy or appreciate. Especially the young readers who are, I assume, the target audience. Death and what happens after death are key components, as is a theme of guilt as young Griffin accidentally caused the death of one of his best friends. The book calls into question ideas about "religion" as what the bats where always taught to be true about the afterlife does not seem to be true at first, and even in the afterlife they must have faith that what Nocturna created for them is true and good and that the lord of the dark underworld, Cama Zotz, did not create the ultimate empty existence for eternity. As you may imagine, this is no lighthearted adventurous romp and yet it wasn't quite as dismal as I'd expected it to be. Some of the new supporting characters add a real charm to the story and I think I am satisfied with the ending. And, wow, the book really packs an emotional zing; I never would have thought I'd be tearing up for a middle grade novel about a bunch of bats but Oppel is, as I said, a master! We also have some father/son themes here, such as the worry-wart Griffin feeling that he needs to live up to his heroic father's image and not being certain how he will do it. And Shade, on the other hand, loving his son for who he is and willing to do anything to save him. This could have easily been a five star book, but ultimately am uncertain how I felt about a few aspects of the journey that I wavered between four and five stars; I think it was all clear in Oppel's mind and he delivers a solid story but I was left with lingering questions--which may have been his intention but I usually like to feel more certain of how I should feel at the end of a book. Also, at times I had to really stop and pay special attention to whether the chapter was starting with Shade or Griffin's perspectives as at times their voices seemed a bit too similar but, again, perhaps that was just my fault as the reader and not Oppel's as the writer. Finally, though the underworld created in this book is fascinating and feels very "real" I'm not sure it was my favorite place to spend 300+ pages so my personal enjoyment diminished a little though, again, this is just personal taste. All in all, I recommend this series (including this final book) to those who appreciate high-quality middle grade fiction (whether they typically like "animal books" or not) and especially those books that do not pander to young people instead treating children with respect, trusting them with the intellectual and emotional intelligence to give a story that will help them question and form views of the world. That said, I do caution that sensitive young readers may find these books too scary and sad at times and may wish to hold off for reading at a later time.
