I really enjoyed this one despite some serious qualms. It will never be a top 5 favourite from the Heyer catalogue but it's certainly higher up the list than I expected. It's the story of twins who have a real emotional connection and a deep sense of loyalty. The youngest son Kit returns unexpectedly from his Diplomatic post in Vienna and is persuaded by his mother to impersonate his elder brother Evelyn (who has inexplicably disappeared), at a meeting with his prospective fiancee and her family. The shenanigans which then ensue form the meat of this funny, and entertaining confection. It is really beautifully done. We discover that Amabel, the youthful mother is deep in debt (about 1.5 million pounds in today's' money), and Evelyn is about to embark on a marriage to Cressy, so as to demonstrate his stability to his Uncle and thereby release his trust fund so he can pay off his mother's debts. Quite frankly I found Amabel to be a truly selfish woman. I find it really difficult to accept the "look at me I'm so silly I cannot understand anything" excuse for being unable to avoid debt. Amabel was in so much debt and apparently unable to stop spending money she didn't have. I got that she was married off to a man 15 years older than her who promptly tried to eliminate everything that he had found so attractive in her but she appeared to have no desire to change or even try to improve things. Perhaps I am being hard on her, but that's perhaps because I found it even more despicable that she was prepared to let her young son embark on a marriage of convenience simply to settle her debts. However, Heyer was also able to illustrate her more charming side during the course of the book so I almost understood why the twins were so loyal to her. Grandmama's appreciation of her flaws was truly priceless!! I felt the earlier part of the book had some padding (the scene between Fimber and Kit which was filled with so much cant as to be indecipherable simply annoyed me). However, it was so well written, I ignored my qualms and simply enjoyed this frothy confection. Kit and Cressy's developing romance was beautifully done and I loved them both. I would have liked to see a little more of Cressy and Kit together so we could see a litttle more of the developing romance, but nonetheless their relationship was really engaging. The range of characters who populated the story was well drawn. Fimber, Grandmama, and others all played a crucial role in this imbroglio All the pieces moved like clockwork to play their role and resolve the stories. Evelyn, when he finally reappeared, seemed less likable than his brother and I could not understand why he was so against Sir Bonamy Ripple. I loved Bonamy - he is one of Heyer's best creations. A self-involved hedonist to be sure, but his inherent kindness came across so many times in the book - not least when he told Kit he had given himself away by opening his snuff-box the wrong way. It was implied that he had been very good to the women he had had under his protection and his ability to survive as a crony of the Prince of Wales suggests he was pretty street-wise. All the difficulties were resolved and happy endings were of course in place all round. I ended up with a smile on my face. Georgett Heyer remains the queen of story telling in my opinion. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
