The Crusader is Michael Alexander Eisner's first work of fiction. It is indicated as historical-fiction, set in the mid to late 1200s and ranging from the Iberian Peninsula to the Holy Land and back. This book was marketed as an, "action-packed medieval adventure of Christian warriors and Muslim infidels in the Holy Land." It was far from that for me, and I can't blame the author for the actions of his marketing team. To me this book was all about the human condition. Of course you could say that about many books, but this one addressed many topics throughout the story and came across as the focus for me. I'm going to try to generally address this as I don't want to have to hide this review for spoilers. Brother Lucas is an orphan, who believes his father was a nobleman who had him out of wedlock and left him with the church, specifically Santes Creus where he becomes a favorite of Abbot Pedro. Throughout the story, Lucas struggles with doing what is right, which often is opposed to what he needs to do to rise in the ranks of the church in order to gain status. He does advance through the ranks and is given a major test. His success will give the church a large financial reward and he will become a Bishop. His task is to exorcise the demons of Francisco de Montcada without any physical harm coming to Francisco. Francisco's father is the wealthiest land-owner in the region and he has offered the church 1/3 of his estate in exchange for his son being exorcised in a manner that does not kill him. Francisco's demons potentially come from many sources. His brother committed to the Cross to fight in the Crusades, but his ship sunk as it departed the harbor drowning all on board. Francisco spent time at Santes Creus where he first met Lucas and later joined the Crusades himself in the hope of redeeming his brother so he could enter Heaven and not be trapped in Purgatory. His time in the Levant was spent with his cousin Andres, who was also at Santes Creus with him. The two engage in two battles and are imprisoned by the infidels for a period of time. The story is told by both Brother Lucas and Francisco. Brother Lucas includes his own commentary, but also writes the confession of Francisco as he attempts to draw out the demons in him by having him retell his story and listening to scripture. He does this over a period of more than five months. Throughout the story the characters deal with contradictions, conflict - both internal and physical, and while Francisco questions and challenges what he believes to be right, Lucas tries to support the church despite the atrocities it commits in the name of God. The reader finds that the actions of the Crusaders and the Infidels are not different from one another and each justifies its actions in the name of God. Possibly the most poignant period addressing the human condition comes in the prison. Initially, a lawless, ruthless world comprised of groups of countrymen who bond together to protect one another and attack weaker groups for food and anything of value, the entrance of new prisoners tip the scales heavily in favor of one group who imposes rule and taxes the other groups. They create an economy for survival. All of this as well as their means of being ransomed questions many aspects of the human condition. Two other major characters are Isabel, Andres sister, and Don Fernando, an utterly immoral noble from the same region and who is in the Crusade with Francisco and Andres.l While Fernando is immoral and constantly plotting and planning to ensure he one day becomes King, Isabel is a kind and empathetic character who is a key part to the early and later parts of the story. I really liked the way Eisner focused on these aspects and created a story that made the reader think, instead of simply turning the page and jumping from one action scene to another. If there was a half star I'd give this 3.5 stars, but couldn't get give it a 4 as I think the ending could have been stronger. It wasn't bad, just not great.
