I reread this book alongside Percival Everett's James and they each enhanced the other. Mark Twain's descriptions of the Missouri river are what I loved the most here—he must have spent time on that river. But it has to be said that he created a very lovable character in Huck Finn as well. However, the Tom Sawyer section at the end was hard work but this little dialogue made up for the slog a little: "“What do we want of a saw?” “What do we want of it? Hain’t we got to saw the leg of Jim’s bed off, so as to get the chain loose?” “Why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain off.” “Well, if that ain’t just like you, Huck Finn. You can get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing. Why, hain’t you ever read any books at all?—Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny , nor Henri IV., nor none of them heroes? Who ever heard of getting a prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that? No; the way all the best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can’t be found, and put some dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can’t see no sign of it’s being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound. Then, the night you’re ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip off your chain, and there you are. Nothing to do but hitch your rope ladder [made from torn sheets] to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat—because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know—and there’s your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native Langudoc, or Navarre, or wherever it is. It’s gaudy, Huck. I wish there was a moat to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the escape, we’ll dig one..."" I smiled at this exchange because I've read Benvenuto Cellini's memoirs and he did escape from a prison in Rome using a rope ladder made from sheets—which turned out to be too short so he broke his leg in the fall but still managed to make his escape!
