Inspector Battle Begins A review of the Diamond Books Kindle eBook (October 19, 2024) of The Bodley Head hardcover original (June 1925). This is part of my ongoing binge of the early Agatha Christie books. Separate from the early Hercule Poirots, I had never read the Inspector Battles so I took the opportunity to grab a few of the cheap public domain edition eBooks in order to fill that gap. We are definitely more in serial adventure territory here with mysterious dashing heroes, spunky damsels holding their own, Crown Princes and revolutionary conspiracies and assassins, cryptic messages, hidden treasure and of course murder! As opposed to the active interviews and deductions of Hercule Poirot, Inspector Battle plays a much more reserved role. The adventurer Anthony Cade does most of the legwork while still periodically checking in with the authorities. The front cover of The Bodley Head (1925) original edition. Image sourced from Wikipedia . The setting is the Chimneys estate of Lord Caterham and his daughter Lady Eileen Brent (known as Bundle). Foreign Office magnate George Lomax has asked Caterham to invite select guests to stay at Chimneys in order to promote financial dealings with the (fictitious) Balkan country of Herzoslovakia. Meanwhile, adventurer Anthony Cade is on a mission to deliver the secret memoirs of a Herzoslovakian minister to publishers in England along with a batch of love letters purportedly written by a Virginia Revel. Blackmail and murder soon follow and all are in place at Chimneys when Inspector Battle arrives to investigate. The coincidences and cliffhangers pile up and build a mountain of unbelievability, but it is all in good fun and of course in the end there is a (possibly not unexpected) surprise reveal. The Secret of Chimneys (1925) was Agatha Christie's final book in her 6-book deal with The Bodley Head which she had agreed to before securing a literary agent. A better advance and royalties deal was signed with William Collins & Sons leading to her huge breakthrough novel The Murder of Roger Ackroyd (Hercule Poirot #4 - 1926) the following year. Christie returned to the setting of the Chimneys estate along with several of the same characters in The Seven Dials Mystery (Inspector Battle #2 - 1929). Trivia and Links The Secret of Chimneys is in the public domain in the USA and can be read at various online sources such as Standard eBooks , Wikisource and Project Gutenberg . Poster for the TV adaptation. Image sourced from IMDb. The Secret of Chimneys was adapted as a feature length episode for the TV series Agatha Christie's Marple. Despite being an Inspector Battle book, it was adapted for Miss Marple as Season 5's Episode 2 in 2010. Julie McKenzie plays the role of Miss Marple. The adaptation makes considerable changes to the plot, although several of the character names are the same.
