I read the Bhagavad Gita with the same mixture of moral unease and as it were anthropological delight that all great religious books excite in me. I find it so fascinating to gain these direct insights into how our species has, for millennia, grappled with the same questions of existential purpose and ethic responsibility; but the answers put forward by most pre-modern societies were, though beautiful, astounding and imaginative, also often cruel and inflexible and governed by values that now seem completely alien. Most of all, of course, they are fundamentally authoritarian (and if the word ‘fascistic’ were not so inflammatory I might use that). Culturally, religious texts really benefit from their longevity. Much as I object to a lot of Biblical content, the cadences of Tyndale and the Authorized Version are a part of my linguistic DNA; Bible translations are prime among the literary masterpieces of the language I've inherited. If you speak an Indic language then the same may be true for you of the Bhagavad Gita, in which case I can only apologise for the crass analysis that is about to follow, which is based on my completely uninformed encounter with Juan Mascaró's 1962 translation. So the thing is: on the face of it, the story of the Bhagavad Gita is really quite unpleasant. We join the action in medias res (the poem is just one small part of the vast Mahabharata ), and Prince Arjuna is surveying the battlefield ahead of what promises to be a bloody clash against an enemy force made up of his own family members and beloved friends. He asks advice from the god Krishna, and over several philosophical verses the two of them have what amounts to the following conversation: ARJUNA: I really don't want to do this. KRISHNA: You must. ARJUNA: But if we go ahead with this battle, loads of people will die on both sides. It all just seems so pointless. These men are my friends, my teachers, my relatives. Wouldn't it be better if we just called it all off? KRISHNA: Don't be so selfish. It is your duty to kill them whether you feel happy about it or not. ARJUNA: It just…it feels really wrong… KRISHNA: Look at it this way: all these people are going to die anyway. ‘I am all-powerful Time which destroys all things, and I have come here to slay these men. Even if thou dost not fight, all the warriors facing thee shall die.’ So it might as well be now; what's another twenty or thirty years to a god? ARJUNA: Well, nothing, probably, but I expect it means quite a lot to them… KRISHNA: The highest moral precept of all is to do your duty. So: do it. ARJUNA: Oh my god…this is horrible… * kills everyone * Now, this is presented primarily as a handbook for overcoming internal tensions – a lesson on how to deal with crippling doubt and indecision. And much of it is indeed quite moving and thought-provoking; but I just found the context chilling. I was completely on Arjuna's side, I didn't want him to be won over by Krishna's arguments, and part of me kept fantasising about a humanist rewrite where Arjuna told Krishna to get stuffed and the Kurukshetra War never happened. Setting the plot aside, of course, there is a huge amount of rewarding meditation here on how people should think and behave in order to achieve some measure of calm in their lives, especially when they know they have to go through with something unpleasant. A lot of this can still be read with profit now – and this focus on how to deal with things mentally seems very unusual to me. After all, every religion stresses the importance of submission to a deity, but I can't think of comparable passages from other faiths which offer so much guidance on (for want of a better term) the mental-health implications of this for believers. So it really is a very interesting text, despite how off-putting I found the initial set-up. There is also a lot of quite beautiful poetry here, which makes me very curious to read some other parts of the Mahabharata. I particularly loved Krishna's long riff on his own glory and omnipresence, which runs through flora, fauna, vocabulary, geography and much more besides… I am the cleverness in the gambler's dice. I am the beauty in all things beautiful. I am the victory and the struggle for victory. I am the goodness of those who are good. Yes, but unfortunately also – as with all religions – the badness of those who are bad.
