Somewhere in the cold climate of the northern United States, lived a poor little boy....constant hunger dominates his existence , freezing winds in the winter, flakes of snow falling down on his parent's shamble of a structure, the home they live in, on the outskirts of a large city, with his hard- pressed father and mother , four grandparents in a bed the ancients never leave , their small residence ready to collapse , cannot keep the weather out, Charlie dreams...food to eat not cabbage soup the only thing they can afford, the endless, bleak atmosphere; his shrinking body gets weaker and life is just one big pain... However a flicker of hope for the child Charlie Bucket, the chocolate factory he passes twice a day going to school and coming back home, owned by the most successful candy maker in the world , marvelous Willy Wonka, is having a contest for children. Five Golden Tickets wrapped in his scrumptious chocolate bars will get them a tour of the fabulous building , secrets inside never revealed to the public and a lifetime supply. Chocolates ... delicious , tasty , mouthwatering flavor, finger licking , the smell alone causes the imagination to flow , a heavenly treat...that will forever be, just stretch your hand and grab another ...Ten cents, where can he get that to buy the candy, but his birthday is soon and the family every year gives him this for a present, they have saved a few coins. Silly idea, all the millions of rich kids on the planet buying and buying tremendous amounts of chocolate bars and he...has no chance to win, once in a blue moon, the saying goes . Still somebody does and miracles happen to the unlikely, sometimes. .. As he is walking home in the low temperatures from school. His stomach empty, his body shivering and the wonderful aroma permeating from Willy Wonka's factory, the dejected boy sees something sticking out of the snow. A dollar bill...he picks it up , goes to the nearest store...and no luck, thinks maybe he will try again...happiness underneath the candy bar...a Golden Ticket. Later Charlie's adventures with his Grandfather Joe, so thrilled he rises from his bed after so many years, and does a dance when his grandson wins... Inside the strange Mr. Wonka's unbelievable , humongous building, mostly hidden underground. The secrets amaze little Charlie, the four others, all spoiled children, too, with their permissive , timid parents... Remarkable new candies, "almost ready " for the public, a chocolate river, the splendid boat on it, a glass elevator not going just up and down but sideways also, numerous rooms with closed, locked doors... Mysterious noises heard from inside, what's happening ? The greatest discovery though are the Oompa-Loompas, tiny, intelligent people, the diligent workers here, who love to sing delightful songs just made- up, as they toil and stroll, making fun of the weird, stunned visitors. Only technicolor could adequately show the beauty of this gloriously enchanted place...
