500 page narrative poems aren’t usually my go-to reads, but I’m a fan of both Greek myth and John Gardner so I was willing to give it a go and I’m glad I did. That said this was obviously something of a long labour for me, though I think ultimately a labour of love. I certainly don't consider myself a trained critic of poetry but I have dabbled and I at least know what I like, and while I wouldn’t rank this amongst my absolute favourites I would say it had some moments of greatness and was overall an impressive achievement. There aren’t many 20th century writers that could get away with writing an epic poem of this size on classical (or any) themes, but I think Gardner acquitted himself well. The story is no doubt well known to afficionados of Greek myth and covers the tale of (obviously) Jason and Medeia: the archaic hero who voyaged with the famous Argonauts and gained not only the fabled Golden Fleece, but also Medeia herself as a prize. Of course, it’s a Greek myth so nothing goes well in the end. As with Grendel, Gardner uses the ancient past as a canvas on which to portray and comment upon the myriad foibles and philosophies of post-modern man. This is aided by the inclusion by Gardner of a modern viewer/narrator who regularly appears in the poem alongside the mythic figures of Ancient Greek legend. I am not quite sure if I’d say that Gardner is presenting Jason as the modern rational hero, though sometimes it felt like it to me, and I’d have to definitely re-read the poem to try and get a better sense of Gardner’s ultimate meaning, but I can say that it doesn’t present a rosy outlook on life and seems to land more on the side of pessimism and uncertainty in the face of human nature and the trials of life. Whether there is ultimately any meaning to what we face is left as an open question. As an aside, I’d also note that Gardner’s love of language, and fundamentally of words themselves, is on full display as he scatters more arcane, archaic, and exotic words than even Gene Wolfe would dare. An exhaustive dictionary is your friend while reading this poem. Definitely worth girding your loins to undertake, but it will likely be as much work as pleasure.
