“Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.” No one comes out and says those words in Tess Gerritsen’s The Sinner . This is the third suspense novel in her Rizzoli and Isles series, and I confess, it’s a practically a sin that I haven’t gotten around to reading this book until now. It’s been three years since I read The Apprentice , and as many avid thriller mystery readers know, there are so many amazing books out there just waiting to be read that it’s hard to get to even a small percentage of them. Now that I’ve returned to Gerritsen’s series, I won’t be waiting another three years to read the next one. The first two books focused primarily on Detective Jane Rizzoli. This time around, we get to know Medical Examiner Dr. Maura Isles a lot better. Called "the Queen of the Dead" by medical students and some of the staff, Maura is a dedicated pathologist who believes that she has a duty to the deceased. She is calm in the face of the most gruesome crime scenes, a controlled, efficient professional. Rizzoli, on the other hand, is testy these days. She’s tired, cranky, and not feeling like herself. It’s days before Christmas, and the winter weather and holiday stress is getting to her. Must be the flu, she says. When they are called to a crime scene at an abbey for a contemplative order of nuns, Rizzoli and Isles face challenges different from any they have faced before. These are women who do not venture out into the world except on rare occasions. Who would want to harm any of them, much less kill them? These are women of faith. Dr. Isles is a person of science. Detective Rizzoli, too, wants answers the sisters cannot give because their faith simply does not let them imagine the possibilities. Can there be a middle ground? As a medical examiner in the Boston area, Dr. Isles has more than one case, naturally. What are the chances that she would have another death related to the murder at the convent? Little by little, Tess Gerritsen weaves her story. Along the way, she reveals some secrets. I was feeling proud of myself for figuring things out as I went along. I was putting two and two together and getting four. So far, so good. As for the main piece of the puzzle, however, I was waiting for that one big aha moment when I would have at least an inkling. I did, actually, and it was a good hunch, but I was slightly off the mark. Only slightly. Do we find out what was bugging Jane Rizzoli those days leading up to Christmas? Read the book. And better yet, to find out if there is any passion and joy under that “Queen of the Dead” mask that Maura Isles wears, read the book. Who killed Sister Camille – and why? Read the book. I’m glad I did, and I look forward to continuing this series very soon! 5 stars
