It is 1138 and a kinder, gentler time than we have now, not only because Brother Cadfael peoples Ellis Peters' world. As in all books in this series – this is the third – there is a mysterious death, generally a murder, at the book's heart. Cadfael came late to his vocation, after a time soldiering in the Crusades. He left his heart with several women along the way. In this book, Gervase Bonel has left his manor to the abbey, making some hearts envious and others excited: He had not been an evil man, only a child of his time and place (Kindle 2383). Bonel was given a special portion of a plump partridge for his dinner; unfortunately, it was poisoned with herbs from Cadfael's herbal stores. Perhaps more unfortunately, Bonel's wife was Cadfael's first love and the person accused of killing him is Mistress Bonel's son from her first marriage. The events that unfold have an innocence to them that one doesn't regularly find in our world: 14-year-olds tusseling with each other, fooling adults, being mistaken for each other, and running away in a temper. Cadfael, as per usual, moves quietly and observantly through this world, drawing the conclusions that are obvious after we see them, but which we readily missed. In the course of these interactions, we discover more about this world: a world where four-year-olds followed their uncle's plow with a sack of stones to scare the birds from the newly-laid seed in order to earn their keep; where men could lose their freedom because their fathers and brothers had worked as villeins, although free; and where if born in Wales, one was son, but in England, bastard. Maybe not so gentle a world. Yet, Cadfael approached his world with tranquillity of mind, prepared to be tolerant even towards the dull, pedestrian reading of Brother Francis, and long-winded legal haverings of Brother Benedict the sacristan. Men were variable, fallible, and to be humoured (Kindle 24). And, when Cadfael approached his world in this way, he left more comfort and less uneasiness in his wake, even for the murderer, who he gives the penance, "Live, amend, in your dealings with sinners remember your own frailty, and in your dealings with the innocent, respect and use your own strength in their service" (Kindle 2995). In our world, people are judged by their crimes rather their character, their intent, or their ability to be rehabilitated, the last a goal that is given only lip service in our world. Cadfael reminds us that there are other ways of meting out justice. Peters' mysteries are as much interesting for their interactions between characters – between Cadfael and the novice, Brother Mark; between the accused murderer and his nephew; and Cadfael and his best friend Hugh Berengar, the sheriff's deputy. In this exchange, Hugh and Cadfael are attempting to make sense of some strange events that happened after the apprehension of the murderer: “I hear you lost a horse while you were up on the borders,” said Beringar. “Mea culpa!” owned Cadfael. “I left the stable unlocked.” “About the same time as the Llansilin court lost a man,” observed Hugh. “Well, you’re surely not blaming me for that. I found him for them, and then they couldn’t keep their hold on him.” “I suppose they’ll have the price of the horse out of you, one way or the other?” “No doubt it will come up at chapter tomorrow. No matter,” said Brother Cadfael placidly, “as long as no one here can dun me for the price of the man.”.... “I’ve been saving a piece of news for you, Cadfael, my friend. Every few days a new wonder out of Wales! Only yesterday I got word from Chester that a rider who gave no name came into one of the granges of the monastery of Beddgelert, and left there his horse, asking that the brothers would give it stable-room until it could be returned to the Benedictine brothers at the sheepfolds of Rhydycroesau, whence it had been borrowed. (Kindle 3134) This is a world that I need to visit regularly. I'm thankful that Peters wrote 20 books in this series. By the time I finish them, I can start again. Maybe I'll do them in order this time.
