I recommend this book to those of you who like American Realism - "a style in art, music and literature that depicted contemporary social realities and the lives and everyday activities of ordinary people. The movement began in literature in the mid-19th century." (Wikipedia) This book was published in 1885. Mark Twain, Henry James, Theodore Dreiser, Jack London, Frank Norris, Upton Sinclair and Edith Wharton are authors of this school of writing and authors you most probably recognize. William Dean Howells saw the value of the ordinary in everyday life. He sought a shift from the romanticism and idealism characterizing earlier literature. This is not to say that love and romance is absent from this book. Nor is this to say that morality is not a central theme. There is a love affair and morality is in fact its central theme. Morality in business and morality in love. What makes this a book of American Realism is how the story is drawn. Characters are not drawn in black or white but rather each character is splotched with black and white and gray. Each character is good and bad, makes mistakes, sometimes learns from a mistake and sometimes doesn't. I like this and the lives described felt very real too me. There is humor. Tell me, how many times have you had to go to a party you did not want to go to?! The hassle of the proper clothes to wear, the talk at the party and falling into the trap of too much alcohol. The time setting of this book is in the 1870s, but not that much has changed since then! Still today, many tie themselves in knots to be accepted into the right social group. That is another theme of this book. The setup is a family that has become successful in the sale of a unique kind of paint and they have moved themselves from Vermont to Boston. What happens then? The plot has not just one but several elements that all tie together - business deals, a triangle love affair, disputes within marriages and a fire. It is the plot, how the different parts fit together and how the sum of the parts are so realistically drawn that is the attraction of this book. When I closed the book, I marveled at its realism, but I must also acknowledge that I never became all that engaged in any of the characters' private dilemmas. I observed from the outside. Each character may have been well drawn, but in my heart, I felt for none of them. The audiobook is narrated by Grover Gardner. What can I say? He always gives a very good performance. He reads clearly and with feeling but doesn't over-dramatize.
