Another excellent novel from Hilari Bell, although uncharacteristically this one is (fairly typical, even) science fiction, as opposed to YA fantasy. For that reason, it surprised me that this was one of her first novels to be published, but I still possess the opinion that it is her best. This is one of those stories that has a lot of things going on in it, not just plot-wise but thematically. I do adore fantasy and sci-fi that not only entertains but encourages us to think deeply, and this book definitely did that for me, regardless of whether this was fully intended by the author. The book can be roughly broken into two parts: a detective story and a heist story. I cannot fully explain the second without lots of spoilers, but both are very entertaining, and use the conventions of both genres to great effect but with a unique spin. I think the story's greatest strength, however, lies in the cultural analysis present therein. At its core this is a book about social contracts, about the economics of ideas. Fundamentally, all economics are about ideas, and the book does a good job of understanding this abstraction. The idea of how the T'Chin culture perpetuates despite conquest is not a unique one (I saw it addressed much more recently, briefly, and shallowly in an episode of Doctor Who, for instance), but it is nonetheless a fascinating one. The book catalyzes a new understanding of colonialism and cultural mixing that I think proves very useful, although admittedly it is not necessarily attempting to approach "realism" on that point. Of course, I can't close out this review without mentioning the book's feminist ideas, as well. There's nothing particularly revolutionary there, but it's a nice addition that goes well with the reflective thoughtfulness of the rest of the book, if handled at times a bit ham-handedly. If you like typical pulp sci-fi, if you love a good detective or heist story, or if you're a feminist interested in economics and colonialism, you'll like this book. Others may not, but that's ok. Not every book is for everybody. As for me, it has remained a favourite through years of changing tastes and multiple rereadings.
