A grand adventure and Ambrose’s narrative invites the reader to join in. As we turn the pages we become part of Lewis and Clark’s journey into the unknown. What will the next turn of the river bring: violently cascading waters, pensive Indians eyeing their first white man, a foreboding mountain, a snarling beast. This book was fun because the reader, at least this reader, did not know what to expect any more than they did. That these were brave, confident and resourceful men one has no doubt. As they approached the Rocky Mountains they had no idea of the difficulty they were facing and in many ways were fortunate. They took many risks which could have been disastrous: Traveling treacherous trails where their horses fell tumbling with their riders down the sides of steep mountains, canoeing down rapids so dangerous that they are off the charts in today’s rating system, leading small contingents in the country of the notoriously violent Blackfeet Indians and then confronting them. This and much more they survived. Providence was on their side and that was something they all clearly felt. Beyond the adventure, we are fortunate today to have their descriptions of an unspoiled American West: the verdant plains stretching as far as the eye could see with ten thousand buffalo in a single herd, the ferocious grizzly bears probing and attacking, the remarkably diverse Indian tribes from hospitable to hostile. Sadly this world would not last. The Louisiana territory soon fell prey to greedy land grabbers and fur traders. The Indians traditional way of life was threatened leading them to war and their demise. Forests and plains teeming with wildlife were depleted of their bounty. Lewis himself was a tragic figure, a consummate woodsman and expedition leader, who self-destructed upon return to civilization. His fate was a symbol of the fate of the territory and people he discovered. He could prosper in the wild but not survive out of it. Recommended as an adventure story, a look into a distant pristine American environment, and the native peoples who lived there before civilization destroyed them.
