Warning: Here be spoilers. This underrated little gem is out of print, but you can probably find it used online--and who knows, with so many long-out-of-print books coming back into print as e-books, perhaps this one has a chance. (You can always cast your vote on Amazon to encourage the publisher to release it on Kindle.) I'd found out about this novel (yes, that's what it is, not nonfiction) from the book Fab Four FAQ, which had a section on notable Beatle books. This is a tongue-in-cheek alternate history of the greatest rock band of all time. (It came out around the time the TV-movie The Rutles did, giving fans two great satires to choose from.) I must warn you...this novel is poignant in a way that the author never intended, being written and published before John's tragic murder. This gives the ending a somewhat painful extra layer. The premise behind the novel is that the author supposedly conducted a lengthy interview with Ringo Starr for a book on the definitive history of The Beatles...and promptly lost the notes. So the author reconstructed the history from his faulty memory. The result is an alternate history that has some points in common with reality. For example, the Beatles DID release that album with the infamous butcher cover...but it was called "Meat: The Beatles." George DID embrace religion...but it was fundamentalist Christianity, not Hinduism/Krishnaism. Sgt. Pepper was now framed as an anti-military screed. A Hard Day's Night was a dreary existential drama with no Beatle music (which flopped so badly they never made another movie). And John and Yoko, in the solo years, made friends with Sonny and Cher for a while, going on tour with them as "The Plastic Bono Band." Only after a falling-out did John drop the "B" and re-christen it "The Plastic Ono Band." In short, the novel is basically the history of The Beatles as seen through a funhouse mirror. In fact, from what I understand, the chapter on their marijuana-fueled meeting with Bob Dylan has been quoted as reality by one Dylan biographer, who didn't know this book was a satire. Therefore, for a while, some fans insisted that the lyrics the Beatles and Bob Dylan slapped together while high as kites actually existed. Not quite. Dylan DID meet with the Fabs, and DID turn them on to marijuana (he reasoned it was more "natural" than the uppers they took to get through shows), but they never wrote a lyric called "Pneumonia Ceilings." Shipper slaps some seriously punny names on some of the fictional supporting characters (Candy Coating, Lee Soption, Ken Percent, Ron Number), which are a bit of a stretch. (They sound a little like the names Bart Simpson makes up in his prank calls to Moe's.) But it does fit in well with the premise of an author who's lost the notes of the real events and has to make up names on the fly to fill in the blanks. But about three-quarters of the way through, this novel goes from "alternate history" to "what-if", and that's when it becomes really interesting--and rather insightful. Languishing in sub-par solo careers (actually, Shipper's a little harder on both John's and Paul's solo work than I would have been...John especially had some great solo numbers), the boys realize that they need to reunite. They finally smooth over their business differences (which, in this version, aren't quite as legally vicious) and get to work on a new album. Before that, though, they spend an afternoon simply reconnecting as friends: "Every time one of them would attempt to bring up the matter of business, it ended up in some form of hilarity. In a sense, this was the real Beatles' Reunion, not the publicly craved for Beatles' Reunion. This was a reunion between four old friends who'd shared the most tumultuous, creative, exhilarating, terrifying, and ultimately gratifying experience of anyone outside their generation. Nobody wanted to bring up business because it was business that drove them apart...Only those who have risen to the level where they are surrounded daily by no one but those who are either afraid of them or in awe of them can know the terrible loneliness and dehumanization of such a life...It's not surprising that they preferred the friendly abuse they were dishing out to each other to the phony, illegitimate praise they'd heard from everyone else in their individual circles for the preceding nine years." So the boys make their new album, Get Back. But there's a problem...the music isn't the same, because they are no longer the same people who created that music. Their own experiences have changed them too much for that. This comes out in another terrific scene between John and Paul, where they bond over the same feeling--the knowledge that now that their dreams of rock stardom have come true, they are no longer driven in the same way. But Paul reassures John that just because they can't make the same kind of music doesn't mean they can't satisfy their creative urges...for themselves alone. The album comes out...and it's a major disappointment to the fans. They go on tour...but they can only get a booking opening for Peter Frampton. And the only response they can get in concert is to their old stuff. (John compares them to Bill Haley, still playing "Rock Around The Clock" nearly thirty years later.) They try to figure out why it is that, after ten years of fans clamoring for them to get back together, the same fans wouldn't support their new material. The answer becomes clear: it was never really the Beatles themselves all those fans wanted back, but the time in their lives the Beatles represented. As John puts it, when they hear "She Loves You", that's three minutes they're back in high school with no responsibilities. (That's rather similar to what the real-life John Lennon said when asked when the Beatles were getting back together: "When you go back to high school.") This brings up an important question for readers: if we had gotten our wish, if the Beatles had reunited when John had been alive (or if he hadn't been killed, and they'd all performed at Live Aid or something)...would the reunion have lived up to our expectations? Or would it have fallen short as it did in Paperback Writer? Of course, we have something of an answer to that question--the recording of "Free as a Bird" and "Real Love" for the Anthology, based on John's unreleased tracks. Both were good songs, but they weren't technically Lennon-McCartney songs. So if the Beatles had become an active band again, would it really have recaptured the magic of old? I like to think that their maturity and their new experience would have made for music that was just as good, even if it wasn't the same as the old days...but one has to wonder. The novel ends on a bittersweet but satisfying note, as the band decides not to perform as a group anymore (as Paul puts it, "you can't live in someone's past and live in their future, too"). But at least they're friends again. And maybe that alone would have been better all along than the kind of reunion we fans always thought we craved.
