This very early novel by Piers Anthony was revised and published in book form in 1977, but the version I read (and am reviewing here) was the original, printed in two installments in the December, 1969 and February, 1970 issues of "Fantastic" magazine (Vol. 19, Nos. 2 and 3). This, of course, required me to track down copies of the magazines, which proved neither difficult nor particularly expensive. I have reached a tipping point with Anthony: despite my love/hate relationship with his writing (favoring his sci-fi leanings and groaning in exasperation over his proclivities for fantasy) I am committed to reading -- eventually -- whatever I can lay my hands on of his. This is primarily because his sci-fi is very, very good. In this case, however, although "Hasan" is planted firmly in the realm of fantasy, I found myself pleasantly surprised and grateful to have tracked down the original source of this tale. The beauty of reading "Hasan" from its original source is that the editor of "Fantastic," Ted White, gives a detailed account of the novel's history and development in the December, 1969 issue. Even better, in that issue, is a reprint of an article Anthony contributed to a fanzine in which he details the history of "The Arabian Nights," which collection of tales serves as the source material for "Hasan." It is this fact (i.e., that Anthony uses "The Arabian Nights" as a jumping-off point), above all, which renders the more colorful and fantastic elements of the story palatable -- at least to this reader. Anthony has fleshed out the original tale considerably and added a few elements of his own devising (detailed in the author's notes in the February, 1970 issue) to produce a reasonably well-constructed novel. Which is not to say that it is a masterpiece, as my rating indicates (although I might award it another half a star, were that possible). No, Anthony's stereotyped characterizations are a little too wooden and two-dimensional, and there is much here that would appeal to an adolescent but fails to convince an adult reader. And despite the story's setting in the ancient Middle East, there is a misogyny which reflects our own culture circa the late 1960s at least as much as it reflects that of the historical setting. There is, however, one point on which this work is quite instructive and (gasp!) valuable from a literary perspective. It is easy for readers, in a post-9/11 world, to fall into the error of imagining that Islam was always portrayed through the paranoid lens of our present-day perspective. "Hasan," written more than three decades before Islamic extremism tarnished the image of Islam more or less permanently, presents its protagonist, a devout Muslim, as anything but an irrational extremist. Hasan is portrayed as sincere in his faith, to be sure, but at no point is his faith depicted as inimical to any other faith (and the novel does touch on Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Hinduism, and Christianity). Quite the contrary, Islam is here made out to be one in a panoply of faiths each of which has their good points and bad points, but each of which should be respected, and none of which should be feared. Even the Zoroastrianism of one of the primary antagonists is not depicted as an evil faith, simply the faith of an evil character. For this reason alone, "Hasan" makes for something just short of an important read in the world of 2017, when we are, all of us, quick to doubt whether that mythical beast "moderate Islam" does, in fact, exist. Show more
