There are specific events in the history of the United States that every American child will learn about in school. In 1803, President Thomas Jefferson purchased the Louisiana Territory from France, doubling the size of the country. He then commissioned Meriwether Lewis to form a party that included William Clark to travel west with the goal of finding the most direct route across the continent to the Pacific Ocean, while collecting data on plants and wildlife. They were to befriend the Native tribes like the Blackfeet and the Sioux and establish a trading partnership with them. We are taught the most basic understanding of this expedition, but Stephen Ambrose proves that this story is well worth a deeper dive, using the men’s journals and communications during their ambitious trek, as well as engaging maps throughout that help to guide the reader through each adventure as they traversed roughly 8,000 miles (12,875 kilometers) from 1804-1806. Some of the highlights for me were learning more about Sacagawea, a teenage girl who undertook this journey with her baby and troublesome husband (a French-Canadian trapper she was sold to prior), providing the crucial role of interpreter and guide for the party. I enjoyed the positive interactions had with the Nez Perce, bittersweet when you know the future fate that befalls these people in less than eighty years time. Then there is the surprising account of the Spanish plot to arrest Lewis and Clark, sending armed expeditions to capture them with the belief that they were trespassing on Spanish claimed territory. Jefferson was hoping to buy the various Native American tribes out of their land because he believed it would be cheaper than going to war, and fur trappers were only three months behind the expedition due to the fur rush and could have easily been the first American settlers to reach the Pacific. There were just too many interesting stories to add. This is an absolute recommendation for anyone interested in frontier stories from early US and Native American history!
