The Prince and the Pauper is a good young adult fiction written by Mark Twain. It is also my introduction to him. The story is set up in the time of King Henry VIII reign and this historical setting was what really induced me to read the book. I'm not well versed with British history, but I have read a fair amount of detail of the reign of Henry Tudor. I was therefore a little familiar with the gruesome laws and the unfair persecutions that were carried out in England at that time period. The story set against this time focuses on Prince Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VI) and a pauper called Tom Canty, who is look alike of the Prince and the same age. When they accidentally meets, the Prince decides to switch their identities, and the rest of the story proceeds with the adventures each faces in their mistaken identities. Through his adventure, the Prince sees the true picture of the lives of his subjects, and learn about the unjust laws that are in force. Also he comes to learn true loyalty through Miles Hendon, the brave hero who protects the Prince throughout his misfortunes. The story is embellished with true account of incidents that have taken place in England thus exposing a dark and violent regime. It really was hard to read about the cruel and outrageous punishments that were carried out which are highly disproportionate to the offence committed. Moreover it was disturbing to read about the religious persecutions and also the false allegation and monstrous punishment of women of witchcraft. It is appalling when you consider these things happened in fifteen hundreds and how uncivilized the law had been nearly five hundred years ago. I'm a little surprised that Mark Twain chose such an unappealing time period to set a story for young adults. The story is a good one; and the setting it up against a true historical backdrop with true historical characters gave the story a realistic face. However, Mark Twain's writing was a bit wordy and that made the read tedious at times. It kind of disturbed the even pace of the story. In any case, it was a good story and I enjoyed it. But I wasn't too enthusiastically drawn in.
