First published in 1954, Katherine is a historical fiction classic, the retelling the affair between John of Gaunt – the Duke of Lancaster, son of Edward III, uncle of Richard II, father of Henry IV, grandfather of Henry V – and his children’s governess, Katherine Swynford. From this union sprung the Beauforts and, ultimately, the Tudor dynasty. This relationship is given a romantic gloss in Anya Seton’s retelling. I was excited to read this, seduced by glowing reviews, the book’s status as a classic of its genre and my newfound interest in John of Gaunt. And yet, from the first pages, there were clear signs I wouldn’t fall in love with this book. But, before I get into my issues, let’s talk a bit about what I liked. On a technical level, I found the writing quite good. I didn’t really mind that Seton went overboard with her descriptions – but then, I love Tolkien and he gets criticised for doing that as well, so clearly I’m not the best judge. Although I expected the text to be quite stuffy, apart from the first 150 or so pages, Katherine wasn’t a struggle to read at all. And this certainly felt like a novel of better quality than, say, the works of Philippa Gregory. I also appreciate that Seton apparently went to a lot of effort to research this period of history thoroughly. There are some inaccuracies I noted, but this was written over fifty years ago and what was ‘known’ has no doubt changed dramatically. Having said that, I wouldn’t be me if I didn’t go into some detail about this. Seton’s physical depictions of Gaunt and his second wife, Constance of Castile, would actually be far more accurate if their descriptions were switched around. Constance’s father and daughter were both described by their contemporaries as pale and blonde, so it is likely she was as well. The only known depiction of Gaunt shows him with dark hair and eyes. Yet Seton’s Gaunt is ‘tawny-haired’ and blue-eyed, and her Constance dark-haired and dark-eyed. Another blow to the accuracy of Seton’s physical descriptions is Richard II, whose skeleton was examined in 1871 and found to show that he was six feet tall. Yet Katherine Swynford towers over him in this novel. Maybe she was the Gwendoline Christie of her day, but Seton never makes a fuss of Katherine’s height so I’m guessing she wasn’t. In fact, coupled with the descriptions of Richard having a “girlish” and “pretty” appearance, a “childish” voice and the comment about his inability to father a child, I really think Seton means this as a slur on Richard’s character and masculinity. So, my main gripes about this book. There is a lot of melodrama, including a completely ridiculous sequence in which Katherine gives birth for the first time, utterly alone in her manor except for her mad mother-in-law who then tries to steal the baby only to be foiled by the dashing John of Gaunt, who turns up for some vague reason and saves the day. Seton also seemed to completely lack the inability to let Katherine’s beauty pass unnoticed. On practically every page when the book starts, we’re told about how staggeringly beautiful she is, how every man stared at her and wanted to have sex with her. Additionally, practically every married man preferring Katherine to his wife got tedious fast and the threat of Katherine being raped was disgusting the first time and ho-hum by what felt like the thousandth time. I got it the first time, she’s gorgeous and desirable. I don’t need it rammed down my throat. Katherine also is a tiny bit annoying in that she has no interior or exterior life apart from Gaunt. Apart from the first two hundred or so pages in which she’s miserably married to her Hugh Swynford, her life completely revolves around Gaunt. Her children are nothing but the equivalent of a handbag to her unless they get to act as antagonists to Katherine’s relationship with Gaunt. Any time we might get the suggestion of her life existing outside him is quickly passed over. For all that Seton wants to depict Katherine as being pure-of-heart, I noted that she and Gaunt are incredibly selfish lovers. For Katherine, who has no interest in anything that’s not directly related to Gaunt and herself, this involves whinging about the fact that he no longer loves her when his life becomes very hectic and he’s dealing with psychological issues. For Gaunt, this comes about when he displays no interest at all in the fate of his actual wife (that no one forced him to marry; it was his idea to marry her) or any of his own children because he’s so worried about Katherine in the aftermath of the 1381 uprising. Seton’s overly dramatic account of Katherine being trapped in the Savoy Palace as it was sacked and burnt down by rebels is entirely invented, but we do know that Gaunt’s eldest son and heir, Henry, was present in the Tower of London when rebels sacked it and was lucky to escape with his life. Yet Henry’s presence in the Tower is unmentioned while Gaunt gives no fucks about anyone but his darling Katherine. Excuse me while I go and puke about how romantic this all is. The historical Gaunt has a relatively poor reputation – even when he was alive, people didn’t like him very much – and Seton does seek to address this. But instead of giving him complexities, she pretty much whitewashes his character, completely flattening him out into a romantic hero and excuses any bad behaviour with what she calls her “‘psychological’ treatment”. She has him so hung up on the rumour that he had been a “changeling” (not changeling as in a fairy child, which might have actually been interesting; but changeling as in “some peasant baby his mother stole after she had a stillbirth and didn’t want the king to know”) that his desperation to prove his royal blood explains his overambitious nature and cruelty. It’s absurd that he would take this rumour seriously. It’s absurd that we’re meant to buy this for an excuse for all his poor behaviour. It’s absurd that someone hasn’t shouted “cool motive, still murder” at this book (…though I don’t think the motive is actually cool or that Gaunt did murder anyone in this book, though he wanted to). And see, there is enough known about Gaunt that you can make him really complex and interesting. I can come to the same conclusions about Katherine Swynford, despite the fact that we know a lot less about her. I can also believe that there was a big love affair between them (I can also believe a more cynical take on their relationship, but that’s beside the point). But Seton’s version is so flat and lifeless and devoid of personality that I can’t care about them at all. And so to my final major gripe. The narrative seems to want to treat Katherine as the only woman worthy of any kind of positive attention. Gaunt’s first wife, Blanche, is beautiful and kindly, but is killed off before she can do anything beyond becoming Katherine’s fairy godmother or before this ~epic love affair can hurt a likeable character. If you’re sensitive about adultery, don’t worry because Seton casts Gaunt’s second wife as utterly repellent – a shrill nag who literally stinks because she’s too religious to bathe or something (again, Gaunt chose to marry her). Joan of Kent, the widowed Princess of Wales and mother of Richard II, was once stunningly beautiful but is now a fattie, much like Katherine’s sister, Philippa, who has the bonus of being a calculating nag that stands in stark contrast to Katherine’s naïve purity. Even Katherine’s daughter Blanchette is in for a poor treatment, jealous of anyone her mother loves that isn’t herself, especially Gaunt. I say the narrative treats women this way, but this is also true of the way the narrative treats men who aren’t Gaunt. Many are just there to remind us that Katherine is an object of beauty and lust. The others are all pretty terrible. Her first husband is an abusive, possessive rapist while Edward III is a feeble old man, utterly mindless and easy prey for his evil mistress and Richard II, as mentioned above, is given a thoroughly unmanly treatment that reeks of homophobia (his sexuality is never stated, but is implied - this is a clear case of a queer-coded villain). And while Gaunt’s son, Henry, is given positive attributes but the text pointedly insists that he’ll never live up to his father. In fact, I got the sense that Seton is laughing behind at her hand at many of these characters. Isn’t it hilarious that the once beautiful Joan is now fat? Isn’t it funny how the great warrior king is now an old man ravaged by illness and old age? In the end, I can only come to the conclusion that Seton is entirely lacking in sympathy for any single character that isn’t Katherine or Gaunt, who she apparently thinks are the single greatest two people who ever boned in the history of medieval England.
