Undaunted Courage by Stephen E. Ambrose As the men paddled the last few miles to St. Louis, Lewis had cause to feel deep satisfaction, and could be forgiven a sense of hubris. He had completed the epic voyage. By itself that was enough to place him and his partner-friend in the pantheon of explorers. (page 404) Lewis had every reason to be proud at this moment. He had formed a company of men to accompany him to explore uncharted areas of the North American continent. He left the Mandan village where he had wintered with a group of men (and 1 woman) who would travel to the Pacific Coast and back without losing anyone. (One member, a Charles Floyd, had died the previous fall prior to reaching the Mandan Village probably by a ruptured appendix.) It is further commendable that Lewis, following the end of the expedition, worked to get his men the just rewards owed to them. Lewis had been groomed by Jefferson for this trip by becoming Jefferson private secretary. While there he spent time learning scientific observation and becoming a better writer. While his journals required an editor and spell-checker, his writing allows us to experience his exploration of “the unexplored Missouri River, Rocky Mountains and Oregon wilderness, and to meet Indian tribes untouched by European influence.” Thomas Jefferson did not want North America to become a continent of small independent countries with the rivalries and wars experienced by Europe. He saw the United States stretching from sea to sea. At the time of the Louisiana Purchase there were designs on this continent by the British, the French, the Spanish and the Russians. An interesting part of this account is that the two Captains, Lewis and Clark, led this expedition jointly with no evidence of any disagreements. On a journey of this magnitude that is extraordinary. All the more so because as Ambrose states: “For Virginians, taught rank-consciousness from birth, sensitive to the slightest slight, concern about rank, status, and position was as much a part of life as breathing.” (Pages 255-256) There were a couple of takeaways for me from this book. One was the way in which these Europeans settlers depleted the land, whether is was over-trapping the beaver, or in over-planting Tobacco in Virginia. Another was the attitude towards anyone not a White European. Whether Africans or Native Americans their indulgent of superiority has destroyed cultures and to this day plagues our country with racism. The book is a very detailed, almost daily, account of their travels. This was quite the adventure and it is understandable that so many men wished to join the expedition, and that others traveled the route subsequently. For me this provided all I wanted about Lewis and the Corps of Discovery.
