“If only we could suffer, she thought. That’s what we lack, any real experience of suffering, because we can escape anything.” These are musings of Joan Hiashi, who is sent on a mission by the American government to teach Zen Buddhism to Chinese businessmen in Cuba, with a view to destabilizing the Communist regime. Or so it seems, for in fact, she is sent there by her government in order to be scanned, unbeknownst to her, by Mr. Lee – a telepath and a member of the Communist nomenclature – for any information she would have on her friend Ray Meritan’s connection with the new sect of Mercerism. Mercerism is a concept PKD fans will know better from his famous novel Do Androids Dreem of Electric Sheep? but its first appearance in the Dick universe is in the story The Little Black Box , which was published in Worlds of Tomorrow inthe summer of 1964. In Androids , Mercerism is a cult tolerated by the state because its focus on empathy and collective suffering is in line with the government’s fights against androids, who can be identified as non-human by their lack of empathy. In the earlier short story, however, Wilbur Mercer and his cult are regarded with suspicion by those in power – and characteristically, their animosity against Mercerism is so inveterate that it even unites Communist and Capitalist governments, whose representatives are willing to team up against a threat they have not fully fathomed yet. Mercerism, with its focus on empathy, on shared suffering, and on emotion as such, would, of course, seem like an absurdity to the Communist mindset with its crude materialism and its utilitarianism that both end up in dehumanization. However, it is also the apparently free, democratic societies that feel menaced by Wilbur Mercer and his seemingly pointless suffering, and why this is so, probably becomes clear when we consider that the preferred religion in these states is obviously a special form of Zen Buddhism, which encourages its believers to dive deep into their own selves in order to contemplate the paradoxes of existence. In other words, we have a cult leading to isolation and fragmentation, which is opposed to the shared feelings of Mercerism. Now, people who are on their own, who see themselves as individuals and who hardly care for their fellow-beings (or at best, only in an abstract way that makes them feel good about themselves without really requiring a lot of personal commitment), are easier to govern, and a fragmented, egocentric society, which turns its citizens into consumers and recipients on government aids, will rarely be overthrown by the masses. That is probably also why, at the beginning of the story, we will find one government official translate the meaning of caritas not as “love” or “charity” – but as “esteem”, qualifying it further by saying it is the kind of esteem good people feel for each other. This sounds like a rather genteel and watered-down concept, one that is based on white picket fences and can be found on golf-courses, for instance. But my review is really leading nowhere, and this is probably because I found it quite hard to grasp the core meaning of this short story, which is full of implications and allusions. Why do the empathy boxes that are distributed in a mysterious way by the followers of Mercer not only allow believers to share the pain Wilbur Mercer feels when walking to his death, but also to contact each other, to establish mental and emotional communion amongst each other? Are these machines really working, or are they based on auto-suggestion, on the feeling of an inner emptiness that torments so many people like Miss Hiashi? After all, they can be built quite easily, as it seems, with the help of everyday articles lying about any person’s house, and isn’t it rather doubtful that a complex gadget could be assembled by any ordinary person? And does it really matter who Wilbur Mercer actually is? Whether he is from Terra or from some other planet, as some of his enemies seem to surmise? What appears clear to me in this story, however, is PKD’s point that some religions may be used by those in power – such as Zen Buddhism here –, especially if they have a potential for isolating human beings, whereas others, probably mainly new ones, do challenge the established order. When I say “new ones”, one should not forget, however, that Mercerism has some similarities to Christianity, which itself managed to rise to a state religion at some point in history – and here we are again in Androids .
