3.5 stars A fun mystery within a mystery story! However, it does take a little while to start to get going and make sense. This one was written in 1925 and is one of her earliest books, so I don't think she'd quite perfected her particular style. Still, for anyone who loves Christie, I'd recommend giving this one a shot. Also. There are, sadly, no chimneys in this book. The main character is a somewhat shady dude named Anthony Cade. You're not really sure if he's a con man, kingpin, or killer, but you're pretty sure he isn't exactly who he says he is. Or is he? Anthony has been entrusted with delivering the supposedly scandalous memoirs of Herzoslovakia's now-dead king to a newspaper. But before he can hand them over, several interested parties attempt to coerce him into giving the papers to them instead. Of course, this is before they are stolen. Virginia Revel is a clever and beautiful society widow who catches the eye of almost every man she meets, including Mr. Cade. She and Anthony team up when the dead body of a man (who was trying to blackmail her with letters that weren't hers) is found in her home.<-- the dead dude is one of the ones who tried to get the memoirs from Anthony, so he gallantly steps in and... Well, helps her hide the body. Superintendent Battle is the kind of detective who stands back and interrogates people with a twitch of his eyebrows. He's there. Quietly working behind the scenes to sniff out not only the murderer but also whatever other secrets people are trying to keep from him. And while this is the first book he appears in, it is not the last. On a somewhat unrelated note, this was apparently made into an episode of Miss Marple. She does not appear in the book, so if you're a fan of the little old lady from St Mary Mead, you will want to look elsewhere for your literary fix. In the end, I'd say this is one that isn't perfect because of the slow/weird beginning. But it still has a lot of charm, so if you can make it through the first bit of the book, you'll probably like the ending. Recommended for fans of Christie. Dreamscape Media, LLC read by Charles Armstrong
