The amazing Mrs. Pollifax returns in this second romp of an espionage thriller, and the results are charming! Just returned home from church one Sunday morning, our elderly heroine is reading a story in the newspaper about the defection of a notorious Communist agent, when Mr. Carstairs rings up, asking her to undertake another mission for him. It turns out that Magda Ferenci-Sabo, about whom Mrs. Pollifax had just been reading, was no Russian spy after all, but one of the CIA's top assets, and that she must be retrieved from Istanbul at all costs. Previous agents having failed due to their high profile, a complete unknown like Mrs. Pollifax is needed. And so our flowered hat-wearing grandmother (who now studies karate!) heads to Turkey, where she soon finds herself involved in a most unexpected high stakes adventure, on the run from both police and assassins, and making all sorts of unlikely friends... I adored these books as an adolescent, reading them again and again, and they have certainly been living up to my memory of them, on this recent reread! The Amazing Mrs. Pollifax is every bit as charming, humorous and exciting as I remembered it being, and I breezed through it in one sitting. Dorothy Gilman certainly manages to pack quite a bit of dramatic incident into a novel that is only 176 pages in length! With spies and assassins, codes dating back to WWII, long-lost and newfound lovers, unexpectedly resourceful allies, and a caravan of gypsies, there's no shortage of fascinating characters and engrossing plot developments. As with the first book, I found the settings quite interesting - the caravan travels through Cappadocia at one point, and the description of the region is such that I have always longed to visit it, a feeling greatly increased by the Turkish children's book, The Secrets of Cappadocia , that I read many years later. The depiction of the gypsies/Romany was romantic, utilizing a number of stereotypes about their supposed mystical abilities, but it was also sympathetic. Highly recommended to anyone who read and enjoyed The Unexpected Mrs. Pollifax .
