I read this at least a couple times back in the 90s and this is the first time since, the first collection of 20th century Japanese short fiction that I ever read and I am pretty sure one of the only available back then. 25 stories by 25 authors many of which are undeniably important, like Mori Ogai's Under Reconstruction and Tanizaki Junichiro's Tattoo. A strength of the collection is the variety and how the stories touch upon every literary strain of the first half of the century in Japan, even if some of those genres ended up being less influential or didn't attract the greatest talents. The flip side of that strength is an inevitable built-in weakness, though: every less worthy author ends up taking up page space that could have been devoted to the greats. Sometimes this weakness is compounded by the story choices in that some of the weakest stories of the collection are also of the longest and most of the greatest writers are represented by some of their shortest stories. After all, it is impossible for a concert of Classical music that includes one short overture by Mozart and one long Symphony by Salieri to match the quality of a concert devoted entirely to Mozart Symphonies (or of Haydn, Beethoven ...), just the way it is. Another weakness is that only two women writers are included, hardly 20 pages. Anyway, my favorites this time around: Nagai Kafu: Hydrangea Kikuchi Kan: On the Conduct of Lord Tadanao Sato Haruo: The House of a Spanish Dog Ibuse Masuji: The Charcoal Bus Sakaguchi Ango: The Idiot Inoue Yasushi: Shotgun Dazai Osamu: The Courtesy Call Akutagawa, Kawabata and Tanizaki, arguably the three greatest writers in the collection, should be favorites but the selected stories are not even in my top ten for those incomparable writers. The Kikuchi story gives me the same kind of pleasure much of Akutagawa does. The Ibuse and the Sakaguchi are two of the best responses to WWII I have read, the first an allegory and the second begins with scathing war time social commentary and ends with a harrowing journey through the horrific fire bombings of Tokyo in which over a hundred thousand civilians perished. The story by Inoue (in my view the most underrated great Japanese author) is the best of the collection. Dazai is famous for his suicidal tendencies but this story is a fabulous example of his witty and sharp edged characterization. Least favorites: Ito Einosuke: Nightingale Niwa Fumio: The Hateful Age Mishima Yukio: The Priest and His Love The Ito is long and formless. The Niwa is simply hateful - just because it succeeds at its purpose all too well doesn't excuse it. And Mishima, less repulsive than usual but still, so overrated.
