"All right, then, I'll GO to hell" -- This is Huck's decision, rather than turn in his friend, Jim. They had been through many things together. Here's the story.... Huck faked his death and ran away from his drunken father. On Jackson’s Island, in the middle of the Mississippi River, Huck encounters Jim, a runaway slave and his friend. Jim fled because he overheard his owner, Miss Watson, planning to sell him to a plantation. Huck and Jim ultimately must escape the island because their campfire is spotted. Later in their adventures Huck reports... I got a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote: ‘Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the reward if you send.’ I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. But I didn't do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking -- thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost and going to hell. And went on thinking. And got to thinking over our trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time: in the day and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing. But somehow I couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the other kind. I'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp, up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how good he always was; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the ONLY one he's got now; and then I happened to look around and see that paper. It was a close place. I took it up, and held it in my hand. I was a-trembling, because I'd got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and I knowed it. I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then says to myself: "All right, then, I'll GO to hell" -- and tore it up.’ Huck's epiphany is that Jim is a human being, no matter what people call him or how they treat him, and Huck is willing to risk his soul to help him. =========== I don't listen to many audiobooks, but if you like them may I suggest the brilliantly narrated version by Elijah Wood. He captures the colloquial speech brilliantly in a way I never got from the written page. https://itunes.apple.com/us/audiobook...
