I borrowed this in December through the KDP Select lending program. It dealt with two interests of mine, genealogy and murder. As the author notes in "A Letter to Readers" this was her first published book from 1994. She states in the book that it was set in 1992 (Kindle location 4253) However internal evidence suggests that the story was actually happening in 1989-- see below. Which brings me to the story. The main character is a widowed convert to Mormonism and a professional genealogist. Not only does she make her living by researching families, she has an obligation to search her own family history and perform temple ordinances for as many deceased persons as possible*. The point is to create an eternal family in the afterlife. A big deal isn't made of this in the book although knowing it might help the reader understand why Alexandra is so desperate to find out about her grandfather and his ancestors. Her parents had destroyed all of the documentation relating to her grandfather Borden after his death. Now she was going to find out the truth from them. But shortly after she arrives at her parents home she gets in a fight with her father and rushes away. Shortly thereafter she is notified that her father is dead. With her co-genealogist, Briggie, and her friend/vague romantic interest Daniel she tries to figure out the mystery of her grandfather's background and how it was connected to her father's death. It's a first book so that is some excuse for the clumsiness of the prose. It improves some as the story progresses. Alexandra is supposed to be 35. "She'd been twenty when they'd sent her off to Paris, now she was thirty-five" (Location 232 on Kindle Fire) She finds a letter she wrote her parents from Paris in 1974. (id. 386) However, she behaves like someone a decade younger, especially when dealing with her parents. A bland sort of mystery that might appeal to the cozy fan. _____________________ *This is controversial because of course no one can asked the deceased if they want to become posthumous members of the Church of LDS. Ordinances have been performed for both Adolph Hitler and Ann Frank. This has resulted in a great many historical family records being digitized and made available to searches which is of great benefit to those of us interested in history, but also other organizations such as the Catholic Church are not allowing digitizing of some records they control because of the use that members of the Mormon Church is putting the information to.
