I see appealing similarities to the works of Mercer Mayer and Ezra Jack Keats in And I Mean It, Stanley , and that's a positive for any children's book. Featuring two narratives occupying the frame at the same time (a girl talking to her unseen friend, and an alley cat stalking an elusive bird), this book is a celebration of hurt feelings mended, lingering bitterness overridden by the unrestrained affection of a good friend. It warms the heart to see. The girl has no interest in making nice with Stanley at first. He's out of sight on the opposite side of the fence, and the girl loudly insists she doesn't want that to change. While she plays on her own in this section of the alley, constructing a work of art she can take pride in, she reminds Stanley over and over that he isn't invited to the party. She can have fun and build something really great without him. But of course the girl doth protest too much; she wants Stanley to see what she's making even if her pride won't let her say so. And Stanley knows that, so it's no wonder he bounds across the fence dividing them once she's finished her sculpture, eager to reconcile with his friend. Who can resist an energetic, winsome companion when he runs happily to greet you and let you know he loves you? Not this girl. No, a little resentment can't turn her against Stanley for long. Feeling estranged from a dear friend isn't fun, and we empathize with the girl's struggle as she orders Stanley to stay away right when she really wants him around. Creating a masterpiece out of trash is less exciting without one's best friend onboard as consultant, but when we're mad at that friend, we don't want to embrace them in spite of our hard feelings, so more often than not we start erecting a wall between us. But true friendship won't let the wall get too high before one half or the other leaps over the divide and reestablishes contact. That's one of the sweetest times of any close friendship: making up after a period of conflict. We realize anew how much we care about each other, that no bone of contention could break our bond irreparably. The celebration of that assuring truth is what I like best about this book. While the main story takes place, a subtle action sequence unfolds in the background. A black cat chases a bird who's smart enough to stay a few steps ahead at every turn, cleverly using the girl and the contraption she's putting together as a shield against its feline pursuer. This is all very Mercer Mayer, and enhances the story's charm. Kids can follow the wordless exploits of the two animals in addition to or instead of the main narrative, widening the book's appeal. Crosby Bonsall is one of the better author-illustrators of easy readers, and I'm definitely giving And I Mean It, Stanley two and a half stars. I put some real thought into rounding that up to three. No matter your age or reading level, you'll enjoy this story.
