Moving at a fast clip from galleries, fembots, bangers, mashers, and bullets, THE LOO SANCTION exposes the dirty side of espionage and will take your breath away... 1990 ended the luxuriously self-indulgent 80s and broke in the new decade with a flock of sequels that celebrated and perhaps defined both its preceding decades. Among the resurrected was EXORCIST III, DIE HARD 2, GREMLINS 2, ROCKY 5, PREDATOR 2 and of course the ill fated and reviled THE GODFATHER Part III. Most famous for Al Pacino's gray buzz cut, Sofia Coppola's bad acting and that ONE line, THE GODFATHER PART III didn't do much for fans or the advancement of cinematic art, perhaps because of the sixteen year gap since number two. Not wasting any such Godly time, Trevanian busted out THE LOO SANCTION within a year of THE EIGER SANCTION, bringing back the quaint American PhD with a nasty streak. The only problem is that he's out and they want to pull him back in. He's the most secret of secret, the most efficient of efficient. The new mission, THE LOO SANCTION, is unconventional, extraordinary--a delicate matter and might require a sportsman or a hunter. The only problem is that he's neither--he's the violent kind. He's a killer. Somewhat like Indiana Jones just without the scar and the dry wit, Dr. Jonathan Hemlock tilts towards art and's got the perfect eye, meaning anyone would try to sneak the fake article past him at their own peril. Fully embracing the persona of University prof, writer, mountain climber and collector of black market paintings, Jon would rather keep his dealings for Uncle Sam in the shadows. After four years of the average Joe transition, the US government likes to remind Jon of the six counter-assassinations aka sanctions under his belt and its ability to smear him with murder charges if things go that route. This of course doesn't fly for an early 70s renaissance man. The vaunted art critic vows to dredge up his skills from a brutal, bloody and distant past to stymie anyone who's looking to impinge on his freedom. Facing adversaries who only deal in violence and terror, Hemlock's aggressive American personality is exactly what's needed; the equity kicker: saving the effective control of British government being auctioned off to the highest evil-doer bidder. Revolving about political blackmail and incriminating film in possession of a bold and brazen foe who detests Britain, THE LOO SANCTION is aptly relevant in today's political climate and the nascent problems the 47th US presidential administration is (still) facing and fighting. Exemplifying the verve and cheek of a James Bond flick, THE LOO SANCTION is an entertaining read with time-capsule phrases like dumpling tarts, sperm blind, and gentle combat smile. Trevanian is a skilled raconteur, delighting with opinion that it's fun to be both beggar & chooser, that it's every man for himself when dealing with MI-5/MI-6 and that nothing is more communicable than bad taste. High honed and aggressive, THE LOO SANCTION is a grass fire of the senses, landing somewhere between STUDIO 54 and EYES WIDE SHUT and a brutal shootout with dumdum ammo that will tear you limb from limb. Moving at a fast clip from galleries, gorgeous babes, bangers, mashers, and bullets, THE LOO SANCTION exposes the dirty side of espionage and will take your breath away.
