This was a bit of a mash-up: part romance with an unpleasantly self-absorbed heroine, part history lesson, meticulously researched and well told. The story opens in Brussels on the eve of the Battle of Waterloo as British and allied European forces prepare to confront a resurgent Napoleon. The Duke of Wellington is in command of the British troops, who are too few and unseasoned. Heyer captures the sense of feverish gaiety that grips this city on the brink of war. Wellington's staff work madly to assemble troops and equipment by day; then dance til dawn at glittering parties. At the Duchess of Richmond's ball, held the night of 15 June 1815, "the 42nd Royal Highlanders and the 92nd Foot danced reels and strathspeys to the music of their own pipes....the weird sound of the pipes began and the Highlanders came marching in with their kilts swinging, tartans swept over their left shoulders, huge white sporrans bobbing, and the red chequered patterns of their stockings twinkling in the quick steps of the reel." A message arrives for Wellington, who plans the next day's stand at Quatre-Bras and the men take their leave. "The Highland Brigade came marching through the Place in the first rays of sunlight..." In just a few hours those Highlanders would face the French in a battle that would cost the lives of over 8,000 men. That was only the beginning and two days later the British and their allies would fight Napoleon's finest in the rain-soaked fields outside a small village called Waterloo. Heyer's descriptions of Waterloo are moving: the glory, the desperate courage, the chaos, the hideous pain of the injured--both men and horses. It's all there and very real--and it was, as Wellington would say later "the nearest-run thing you ever saw in your life." I also learned a great deal about the way war was fought in those days. For example, infantry squares like these were remarkably effective defenses against cavalry charges. As for the romance...I think the book would have been better off without it. Lady Barbara Child was so selfish and reckless that even her bravery helping with the wounded could not reconcile me to her. Sadly many of the characters seem rather dull, including some old friends from earlier Alastair-Audley books. Not my favorite Heyer, but an interesting read for fans of military history. Content rating PG: for mature themes and graphic descriptions of war. June 2015 Georgette Heyer group read.
