Blog | Twitter | Instagram | This is a rewrite of a review I had posted to my old book blog in 2007/2008. Pop Princess was my first Rachel Cohn novel (and certainly not my last) -- and I instantly fell in love with all that is this fluffy and fun read. I can't remember why I picked up a copy at the library when I did, because looking back I think 'wow, the title is so cheesy' and I begin criticizing the cover art. I think that what drew me in is the promise of something light and the hopes of making it in the music industry -- at the time, I was still fawning over books such as "Gossip Girl", "The Insiders" and "The A-List" and this seemed to be in a similar vein. But it was so much more than that. Honestly, this novel surprised me and I read it within a couple of days -- constantly reading chapters before bed and during study hall. I was addicted. I fell in love with Wonder Blake, our main character and her story. Rachel manages to capture your attention with a fast paced story of the changes that can take place in ones life after the death of a sibling. Once upon a time, she and her sister had been on a children's program (think: Zoom or the Mickey Mouse Club) and things had been upbeat for them. Her older sister, Lucky, had the promise of becoming a star with two of her friends as they formed a girl group. But then, Lucky dies. During the aftermath of the families loss, they moved to their old summer home and attempt to move forward with their lives. Wonder, her parents and younger brother all attempt to adjust to the loss and their new life. Our girl often ends up being teased relentlessly for the work she'd done as a child and isn't exactly well liked -- but at least she has two friends and a job to pass the time away. One day it all changes, again, for Wonder and she is given the chance to record a demo. Reunited with some people from her old world -- including the two girls who'd been her sister's friends -- she embarks on a mission to receive a recording contract. But in her mind, Lucky was always the star; this was supposed to be her life. Lucky was the special one. Even so, Wonder manages to receive the chance of a lifetime and is well on her road to being one of the next great pop princesses. She also learns a thing or two about her sister that opens her eyes to a whole world, a whole other side, to the girl she once knew. Overall, Pop Princess is light. It's fun and an ideal novel for your summer reading. And most of all, it has a heart. Don't let the title or plot fool you, there is more to Pop Princess than meets the eye. It's a story of self discovery, falling in love, loss and everything in between.
