Title: Cam Jansen: The Mystery of the Stolen Diamonds Author: David A. Adler Illustrator: Susanna Natti Genre: Transitional Chapter Book Theme(s): mystery, photographic memory, robbery, jewelry, friendship Opening line/sentence: “It was the first morning of spring vacation.” Brief Book Summary: This book follows Cam Jansen, a girl known for her impeccable photographic memory skills, and her close friend Eric Shelton as they witness a robbery occur at their local mall’s jewelry store and assisting in capturing the thieves. Like many transitional chapter books, there were varying pictures that corresponded to different parts of the story, but nothing too substantial to give the book a better image or different perspective. In the end, with the assistance of the two young teenagers, and the police, they were able to find and rightfully accuse and capture the real robbers. Professional Recommendation/Review #1: Jessie Grearson (Audiofile, October/November 2003) The main character in this popular adventure series, Cam Jansen, is a spunky girl with a photographic memory. She uses her mental pictures ("click!") to solve mysteries. Here, Cam and her friend, Eric, puzzle over how diamonds were taken from a nearby jewelry store. The capable Christina Moore narrates the tale; her Cam and Eric are fully engaged in solving this mystery, and other incidental characters (the nice young couple and an elderly woman) sound authentic, too. Moore creates a strong feeling of suspense that will capture the imaginations of young listeners, who will collect clues, eliminate suspects, and guess "whodunit" along with Cam. Professional Recommendation/Review #2: Recorded Books (Recorded Books, LLC.) When Cam and her best friend Eric are interrupted in the middle of the memory game by the alarm bell of a nearby jewelry shop, they watch the police catch a man running from the scene of the crime. But when the police find he doesn’t have any stolen jewels, they have to let him go. Cam's not so sure the man is as innocent as he claims. Can her photographic memory provide some clues that the police might have overlooked? Response to Two Professional Reviews: Grearson really captures Adler’s talents used to create an easy-to-read, intriguing, and suspenseful story that really differs from different transitional chapter books. She hits on the authenticity of the story, which makes the story more lifelike and allows children to see this through the glass window, or even potentially step through the glass door and relate back to things happen in the worlds around them as readers. Additionally, both readers include some form of her impeccable memory and how this is the basis for the story. Again, something that some readers can relate to, which is a reason that these books are so popular amongst readers who are beginning to transition into chapter books. Reading becomes easier when you are able to relate and can picture these happening in your own lives. Through this book, readers can start to see similarities between their lives and even get a different perspective that they might not have thought of without reading this type of book. Evaluation of Literary Elements: As we move away from picture books, and into these types of transitional chapter books, it becomes more evident the different types of literary elements included within the books. While it includes the essentials of a novel, such as a plot, setting, narrator, theme, etc., it also includes more dialogue than traditional picture books do. now instead of just seeing the characters within the book, you are able to see, read, and comprehend the conversations, feelings, and emotions felt by all the characters through their own words. Additionally, this book begins to capture different pieces of literary techniques like imagery, which can somewhat be seen in the illustrators, but for the most part, the reader is creating these images within their mind and seeing it the way they construct and envision it. Consideration of Instructional Application: This book focuses on the photographic memory of Cam Jansen and her frequent use of “click!” to remember different aspects of the mystery and later used to put all the clues together to find the thieves. Because of this, students can be encouraged to draw out different scenes from the book in a chronical sequence to depict what happened from the beginning to the end of the book. Essentially, children would be turning this transitional chapter book into a wordless picture book, capturing the most iconic moments and making it easy to understand and figure out how the robbery happened, how Cam and Eric solved it, and how the book concludes as a whole. This can be done on multiple pieces of paper and made into their own little booklet or even set up like a graphic novel.
