Irving Stone's "The Agony and The Ecstasy" is one of the best books I've read in a long time. It hits all the right marks and can be viewed as a superb example of several different genres. It's a wonderful biographical historical fiction, it's a wonderful novel, it's a great book for lovers of art history and history in general, and it is a wonderful book for those interested in the wonderful city of Florence, Italy, as this will truly lend even the simplest stroll through the city a wonderful historical background. A true pleasure to read. Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni was born in 1475 in the small city of Caprese. While Michelangelo was a gifted genius, the rest of the Buonarroti-Simoni clan leaves so much to be desired and is a constant combination of drag, hamper, and headache. None of the males are of much worth and the father, Lodovico, is an enormous pain in the ass. Still, Michaelangelo was a devout son and family member, much to his personal ills later. Michaelangelo's gifts as a sculptor are obvious to anyone who has seen his towering David in the Uffizi Gallery of Florence. This book delves deeply into his personal turmoil as the time spent away from carving marble is the literal "Agony" of the title and the "Ecstasy" is the release from creating amazing works. Michaelangelo was not only a gifted sculptor, but he was also a genius artist and I was stunned by the sheer grandeur of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican. Michaelangelo was also a very talented architect and poet. If you are interested in art and the creative process, you will love this book. But as a historian, I rejoiced in the sheer history of this tale. Michaelangelo kept company with giants and his personal relationships and direct experiences span the great figures of Florence. Michaelangelo's personal road will cross paths with luminaries like Lorenzo de' Medici (Lorenzo the Magnificent) and Leonardo da Vinci, to famous religious figures such as Fra Savaranola (Of the Bonfire of Vanities) and Pope Alexander VI ( Roderic de Borgia). In fact, it will be Michaelangelo's unfortunate love/hate relationship with the Pontif that will define him as he will have to deal with, as an artist, over a dozen Popes including: Pope Paul II (Pietro Barbo ) Pope Sixtus IV (Francesco della Rovere) Pope Innocent VIII ( Giovanni Battista Cybo) Pope Alexander VI (Roderic Llançol i de Borja) Pope Pius III (Francesco Todeschini Piccolomini) Pope Julius II (Giuliano della Rovere,) Pope Leo X (Giovanni di Lorenzo de' Medici) Pope Adrian VI (Aryaen Floriszoon Boeyens ) Pope Clement VII (Giulio di Giuliano de' Medici ) Pope Paul III (Alessandro Farnese) Pope Julius III (Giovanni Maria Ciocchi del Monte ) Pope Marcellus II (Marcello Cervini degli Spannochi) Pope Paul IV (Giovanni Pietro Carafa) Pope Pius IV (Giovanni Angelo Medici) Quite the list and quite the pain-in-the-ass, but it also resulted in some of the greatest works of art in the world. Thus the scope of this story is grand and the telling of it rich. You can not go wrong with this wonderful book on any level. Highly recommended.
