Jim Wight is a good author - not great, like his father, but certainly good- and handles his father's life with care. It didn't come across as some sort of money-grubbing book to milk his father's fame, but as a sincere way to preserve his father's memory and show the world who is beloved father really was. He said that he never properly told his father how much he meant to him, and it seems like this book was made to make up for that. While it was sad to see the darker sides of these beloved 'characters,' I thought it was also important to realize James Herriot was actually a real person, a veterinarian with struggles, not some idealized veterinarian that all vet students seem to want to be. I do love returning to his books, to cheer me up and help me stay motivated in my own journey to becoming a veterinarian, but it was actually (maybe morbidly?) comforting to know 'James Herriot' had his own problems in life and his own journey wasn't as whimsical and magical as his books sometimes make it seem. (Not that I'm happy he suffered, but it's nice to see that he wasn't some miraculous superhero, and that someone not perfect can still make such a huge impact on the world) EDIT (9/2023): Holy crap, it's been almost 10 years since I read this. I've been a veterinarian for over 4 years. Granted, in a very different field and world than Alf Wight, and even Jim Wight. In a world where veterinarians don't have such a great reputation, crippling debt, corporate take-overs, increased litigation and boards complaints, demanding clients, social media, owners' unwillingness/inability to pay for the advances in veterinary medicine as demands for human-quality medicine increase, and the many other struggles of the modern veterinary medicine, this book is a fascinating look at both the pros and cons of earlier vet med. It was a nice reminder of one of the reasons I got into vet med in the first place -- while vet med is not what it was in Herriot's time, a lot of similar themes and emotions remain ever-present. I'm glad this was written by his son, also a vet -- it was moving and sensitive and understanding of the profession. This book, and obviously, "James Herriot"'s books, continue to move and inspire me, and it was lovely to see the somewhat more 'warts and all' view of his life (although still tactful and lovingly done), and see the struggles he faced and overcame, including those with mental health.
