BLOODLINE is a 1977 novel by the great and the wise, Sidney Sheldon. My grandmother told me that she saw a movie titled Bloodline before but she wasn't sure if it was the film adaptation of this book. Out of curiosity, I learned that Bloodline was really adapted into a film in 1979, but it was a complete failure because Audrey Hepburn who played as the protagonist is older than the Sheldon character she supposed to portray (Elizabeth). In order to solve the problem, Sheldon revised his novel to place the literary version of Elizabeth into the same age range as Hepburn. (Wonder why they didn't bother to look for another actress to save the novel? -_-) And I read that the film adaptation became a critical and box office failure. Such a waste. I'll try to watch it if ever I have the chance...and if it's still downloadable. Anyway, BLOODLINE is one the amazing stories Sheldon has ever written. It even consists of a Geopolitical agenda back in WWI which targets the World Economy theoretically in Berlin, America, Italy, Paris and England. What interest me most in this novel, is the way the characters portray a different POWER HUNGRY personalities. It will make you want to be exactly like them! >:D “Because there was a hunger in me to see everything and do everything. I wanted to be everyone I saw. I wasn't enough for me. Can you understand that?” ― Sidney Sheldon, Bloodline I shared too much of the novel's background. So here's the plot: The story started with the death of Sam Roffe. S. Roffe is the owner of the biggest and the most powerful pharmaceutical company in the world. The report if his death says that he accidentally fell off a bottomless crevasse and died. His daughter, Elizabeth Roffe (the anticipated heiress of the company) did not believe it happened by accident. She wants to find out the truth but while searching for the heart-trembling truth, she found herself trapped inside a death maze. *I totally recommend this book to everyone. It's summer! Read a book and enjooy!
