This may be a 4-star book, but I was tempted to give it 5 stars just for David Brin himself. It's not quite as rare as one might think to have pretty good ideas and opinions about things, as David Brin does. What's especially rare, that David Brin has, is to not just be smart about things, but to *not be a dick about it*. Even if you don't care about privacy, even if you don't think it's worth your time to read a book about the internet from the time before the internet was really the internet, you should read this book if only to absorb the personality and style of David Brin. He is truly, actually, open-minded, and thoughtfully considers all sides he can think of to an issue, and remembers that there's probably more points that he hasn't come up with. He presents his thoughts as well-argued as he can manage, which is quite well, but reminds us and remains open to the distinct possibility that there is always more to be found out that could change his mind. He notices discrepancies and hypocrises and contradictions with a highly admirable astuteness, and points them out, but in a gentle and genial way, completely devoid of the vitriol and self-righteousness that almost any other such account contains at least one dose of. Maybe I don't even agree with him as much as I think, it's just that he presents his ideas in the most outstandingly reasonable, agreeable, pleasant way that it feels like agreement, since he leaves so much room for discussion. He does have an aim and some ideas and opinions to disseminate, but half the point is really just for everybody to talk about things. It makes me want him to be a part of every discussion ever held on the planet. Brin's discussion of how we are trained to be individuals is one that I think is to this day not engaged in nearly enough, and highlights so many intriguing facets of our society that I can only hope he has more books on the subject. Despite being primarily about the internet, this book doesn't feel like it's 13 years old, which is really quite remarkable. Did they even HAVE the internet in 1999? The only things that really date it are his choices of examples, and that he talks about things like the reaction to 9/11 and the 'percolation' state of art as if they haven't already happened. A lot of the key things about encryption and so forth I don't know whether or not they've even been implemented, so I can't rate how accurate his predictions were, although they were hardly even predictions, just plausible possibilities. It calls to mind another book written around the same time, The Age of Spiritual Machines by Ray Kurzweil, which very deliberately made predictions for 10 years in the future, and yet was not nearly so accurate as the not-even-trying-to-predict speculations in this book. I guess that what happens when you're actually open minded and not just going around trying to convince everybody how smart you are. Still a very relevant book, that actually makes you feel kind of hopeful for humanity, at least if it contains more David Brins. Maybe I'll send him a fruit basket.
