The great AG marathon continues. Reading this as an adult, here's what stands out: - I love that we see Josefina finishing her Christmas dress at the beginning of this. I think that's the first time where a dress that corresponds to one book turns up in another book. The merry scene here with her sisters is so sweet. - Heck yeah, it's Tía Dolores (back to stay, as arranged in Meet ) with an innovative solution. - The sisters' reaction to how Tía Dolores interacts with their father, compared to the relationship between their mother and father is... a little tough. One the one hand, yes: this culture, this era, the patriarchy. There are some deeply ingrained cultural norms at play. But for their reaction to be so strong, I can't help thinking that Papá can be a bit of a bear when he's upset, for all that he always seems gentle and kind here. - This book introduces Teresita, a Native woman who works for Tía Dolores. She teaches Josefina to weave using an upright loom since Josefina is still too small to work the big loom her sisters use. She describes herself as Navajo, which led me in this circle: (A) It would have been nice for AG to use the name the Navajo use for themselves, which is Diné, just as the Kaya books would later use Nimíipuu for her people. (B) "Navajo" is the name given to the Diné by the Spanish (thus the "j"), so given how long she has lived with Spanish people, and specifically speaking to Josefina, yes, Teresita probably would say Navajo. - Teresita and Josefina bond over both losing their mothers as young girls. BUT the situations are vastly different - Teresita was ripped away from her entire family and culture and what exactly are the conditions of her employment with Tía Dolores, hmm? Unclear... - Francisca starts to feel a little caricature-ish. We get the point, she would like to be a lady of leisure. But I like that some of her resistance here stems from the feeling that by learning new things and changing how they do things, they are losing a bit of their mother - that feels earnest. The solution is found at what feels like lightening speed, but all the same, Tía Dolores comes up with just what the sisters need. More Josefina babble Meet Josefina | Josefina Learns a Lesson | Josefina’s Surprise | Happy Birthday, Josefina | Josefina Saves the Day | Changes for Josefina A Reward for Josefina | Again, Josefina! | Josefina’s Song | Just Josefina | Thanks to Josefina | Josefina’s Short Story Collection Secrets in the Hills | The Glowing Hearts
