Hmm. I can't deny how negatively the intro to this book landed with me. Chess, chess, chess+, awkward chess joke, chess, SEXISM, chess, chess, chess. Did I think there was no sexism in chess? No, I did not think that. It was more, so out of left field. Yo, Yasser, why bother saying it? A non-sequitur to such a deeply abstract sport and abstract topic, where did this come from? Yuck. I guess men do this all the time where they have power and only a man could be surprised when it happens and he notices. Fair. Fair. It is like discovering an articulate uncle whose words you admire on leadership actually does legit believe that climate change is a dream beamed into his head at night using the microchips found in the vaccine shot. Eeeeevery other thing he's ever said is shadowed by how dumb that one opinion is. No doubt, this guy knows a lot about chess, but, uh, I'd still rather learn from someone else? Find a better book that covers the below topics. #1 lesson: -Use a physical chess board to play out examples described in chess notation, to play out famous games, and generally whenever possible. It improved my game a TON! I even played out my games against the computer on a wooden board and copied the moves in the real world. It is just easier to visualize all the possible options and then see the better move. It is also deeply satisfying playing the game and handling the pieces. General tips: -Don't obsess over captures -Play for superior force (more pieces overall or more pieces in a strategic part of the board) -Don't develop your strongest pieces in the first few turns of play because that puts them at risk to be taken because no one is there to back them up -Play for superior time (more pieces being in their most optimal areas of the board before your opponent and do so with fewer moves to get them there) -Gain a lead in development by getting your best pieces in places where they can influence the largest number of squares -- e.g. your Rooks do nothing without an open space in front of them -Improve your pawn structure as you play, since pawns actually change the playable shape of the board
