If you're looking for a quick whats-wrong-with-this review, I've got you. I had four problems with this: 1. Having all Christian main characters was very, very risky. Give one of them an attribute that's not very godly, and people are going to say "He approves of this in Christians!" Very risky indeed. His solution? Don't take risks. Make every character feel stale and replaceable with the other. 2. The plot would get interesting and then God saves the day. That's not a problem, but it kind of cheats in my book. Your character should use his special skill to do something and propel the plot further instead of "This guy's going to be in trouble!"*God saves him* All is better. "In trouble again!" *process repeats*. Though I totally believe God does this in real life, when it comes to book plots, the resolution can't be God saving them every time. God is so infinite that it could be *guys walk three miles to a volcano* *volcano explodes* *instead of running away and learning that God saves them through running away and making it with team work and--* *there happens to be the character's friends nearby and so the character runs there, and they get them out of here but some lava scorched a character but he's not burned because God saves* I'm just saying, God can save without literally shielding the characters from harm or something like that. This seemed like the easy way out. 3. Christians rule, non-Christians die and suffer. I'd tell my friends that was the plot. I know that in Revelation a lot of those that didn't accept Christ DO suffer, but from the non-Christian view, no one would want to read this. This series brings glory to God in a "I'm warning you kind of way". Which is great. Please do so. No need to paint this religion with pretty colors. But in order for non-Christians to be warned this way, they'd have to read the book. No non-Christian would though. You'd have to make Christianity seem as forgiving as it really is or the plot would have to be awesome. Which brings me to the plot. 4. I can never nap. Unless I'm in a different time zone or I stayed up a majority of the night, Amytiger can not nap. Wish I could. Much easier on me if I could. But napping is boring to me. You lay down in bed, and then what? How do you sleep? Is there a certain thing you think about? Are you not supposed to think? How does this work?! Reading the Remnant, Amytiger was able to take a nap.
