In Leaves of Grass Walt Whitman sings nature and his symbiosis with America, he sings the universe and his awareness of it all, but above all he sings the people and their quest for individuality and immortality. ‘The proof of a poet is that his country absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorbed it.’ And here he includes himself with all his mysticism and spiritual illuminations. In that, it is a celebration of humanity, his country and everything in it. Some parts of his poems were so beautiful it spoke to me, however not all touched me. For one I am not American, and for other, he wrote it in another time that is long gone. But there are times when he comes through more our contemporary than many other writers I read. I loved him for his love of the common people, for his praise of the most unlucky human beings – like slaves and prostitutes – as for his sense of justice. ‘The attitude of the great poets is to cheer up slaves and horrify despots.’ It’s an ode to equality, and for that, we cannot praise him enough. His words sometimes sounded like music in my ears. It really sang to me. ‘You shall stand by my side and look in the mirror with me.’ Sometimes playful, often insightful and timeless, Leaves of Grass is not to be missed. ‘It is the medium that shall well express the inexpressible.’ Let’s let Whitman speak for himself: Song of Myself I CELEBRATE myself, And what I assume you shall assume, For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you. I loafe and invite my soul, I lean and loafe at my ease . . . . observing a spear of summer grass. <<>> Clear and sweet is my soul . . . . and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul. <<>> I resist anything better than my own diversity, And breathe the air and leave plenty after me, And am not stuck up, and am in my place. <<>> I am the poet of the body, And I am the poet of the soul. The pleasures of heaven are with me, and the pains of hell are with me, The first I graft and increase upon myself . . . . the latter I translate into a new tongue. I am the poet of the woman the same as the man, And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man, And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men. <<>> I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journeywork of the stars, And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg of the wren, And the tree-toad is a chef-d'ouvre for the highest, And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven, And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery, And the cow crunching with depressed head surpasses any statue, And a mouse is a miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels, And I could come every afternoon of my life to look at the farmer’s girls boiling her iron tea-kettle and baking short-cake. <<>> The disdain and calmness of martyrs, The mother condemned for a witch and burnt with dry wood, and her children gazing on; The hounded slave that flags in the race and leans by the fence, blowing and covered with sweat, The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, The murderous buckshot and the bullets, All these I feel or am. Finally, the three last superb stanzas: I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love. If you want me again look for me under your bootsoles. You will hardly know who I am or what I mean, But I shall be good health to you nevertheless, And filter and fibre your blood. Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged, Missing me one place search another, I stop somewhere waiting for you. A Song for Occupations Come closer to me, Push close my lovers and take the best I possess, Yield closer and closer and give me the best you possess. <<>> The wife – and she is not one jot less than the husband, The daughter – and she is just good as the son, The mother – and she is every bit as much as the father. <<>> We thought our Union grand and our Constitution grand; I do not say they are not grand and good – for they are, I am this day just as much in love with them as you, But I am eternally in love with you and with all my fellows upon the earth. <<>> You will hardly know who I am or what I mean, But I shall be good health to you nevertheless, And filter and fibre your blood. Failing to fetch me me at first keep encouraged, Missing me one place search another, I stop some where waiting for you. The Sleepers Be careful, darkness . . . . already, what was it touched me? I thought my lover was gone . . . . else darkness and he are one, I hear the heart-beat . . . . I follow . . I fade away. ___
