Dalrymple worked in an inner city 'slum' hospital and prisons. His choice, so he obviously liked the patients and writes of the trials and tribulations that keep them living in such conditions, often contentedly because they know no better and don't know want to know either. He blames the socialist state and the modern no-blame, no-shame, no-judgement culture for this. He is discussing his prison patients, on asking them what they'd done, they often reply, oh just a normal burglary, just a normal assault, and the wives refer to what their husbands' do as 'work'. He asks how has crime come to be seen in this way by its perpetrators? Is it, he suggests, a weakening of the inhibition against criminality? Academics have used two closely linked arguments to establish the statistical and moral normality of crime and the consequent illegitimacy of the criminal justice system’s sanctions. First, they claim, we are all criminal anyway; and when everyone is guilty, everyone is innocent. Their second argument, Marxist in inspiration, is that the law has no moral content, being merely the expression of the power of certain interest groups – of the rich against the poor, for example, or the capitalist against the worker. Since the law is an expression of raw power, there is no essential moral distinction between criminal and noncriminal behaviour. It is simply a question of whose foot the boot is on. And that is what seems to be the root of the soul-destroying BLM riots as well, of course, of terrorism. The BLM protestors got taken over and used by Marxist anarchists not socio-anarchists like me :-) who seek to destroy institutions, organisations, statues even, without ever wanting to sit and discuss how to replace racism and corruption, no they, in true anarchist form, just want to destroy. There are many other 'pressure groups' each with their own politics of the individual. They want to silence people. Just as in the USSR and its allies, and in China at the present and look where that has got us, a worldwide epidemic and Chinese prevarications, bannings, lies, executions, no word not approved by them of the pandemic shall escape if they can help it. , not a word should be spoken, printed or even hinted at that they do not approve of. Their tools are not execution and prison, but deplatforming, firing, Twitter campaigns and death threats - the cancel culture that took over the Woke movement and now are identical. A lot of the book makes sense to me. I grew up in a middle-class area but went to an IQ tested school that drew 90% of its pupils from working class areas. As a teenager, I had friends from sink estates, I saw how it was. But of course all my friends and schoolmates had escaped the fate that Dalrymple sees as the norm for this 'underclass'. A lot of the book though, I really, really don't agree with.But, to quote Noa Baum, Being able to imagine and understand their point of view does not mean I have to adopt it. It does, however open the possibility that, eventually, adding another's point of view may challenge my opinions or perhaps reveal misconceptions, but I don't have to change or replace it in the moment. Listening to another's story is not a declaration of defeat.”
