The Peabody Emersons are back two years after the shocking events of the previous novel. Ignoring the more recently published The Painted Queen , this story sheds light on what happens after the horrible cliffhanger. It's now 1914-1915 and the winter excavation season is complicated by world events. Britain has officially declared Egypt a protectorate and is at war with Germany. The Ottoman Turks threaten to join Germany in a war that will span in the globe and leave no family untouched. The native Egyptians are restless and eager for independence. Their leader, Warandi, has called for a jihad, a holy war and the British have cracked down on personal liberties. This means dear David has been exiled to India for his participation in the freedom movement. With his beloved Lia awaiting the birth of their first child back in England, the entire family is willing to fight to get David back where he belongs. Ramses refuses to join up with his Emerson cousins and has earned the enmity of the old ladies of Cairo. Nefret is happily working at her hospital while also assisting her foster family with their excavations. When political events start to affect the family, Amelia turns into mother bear to keep them safe. Then a surprising discovery at the dig site leads her to believe the Master Criminal is at work again and this time playing a deeper and more dangerous game that will have far-reaching consequences! There is a LOT going on in this novel which makes me give it only 4 stars instead of 5. The archeology takes backseat to the political events of World War I and the romantic entanglements of young lovers. Add in Sethos and a mischievous young girl with a massive crush on Ramses and it becomes too much. There are so many plot twists I couldn't keep up! The plot was super slow to begin with. I easily put the book down at first to eat and sleep but then it got interesting around the halfway point (archeology -yeah! dead body - yes that's what we read for) and I could NOT put the book down. I read as late as I could keep my eyes open and finally shut off my light. I kept dreaming about the book so when I woke up and couldn't get back to sleep I had to finish it. The prologue that doesn't have anything to do with the story until the very end. I kept wondering about it and when all was revealed, all came out of thin air! What just happened? This one may merit a reread before moving on. The backstories of some characters are revealed but are so fantastical I had a hard time believing it. I wasn't surprised by the identity of the villain though it seemed improbable given the character's decided lack of intelligence. I didn't like the romance plot but the whole story came to a satisfying end. Did Peters intend for this to be the last novel in the series? I just adore Amelia and Emerson. They are so real to me that they seem like friends. I adore their loving relationship and how affectionate they are even after so many years. My goodness they have a healthy marriage and they're in their 50s or so, which is quite old for the Victorian era. I was surprised Ramses didn't know or remember about his parents' private life behind closed doors. He DID know at one point when he was really too young to understand, if I remember correctly. Where does he think he came from? LOL! Nefret doesn't have a clue either and I would think Amelia would have had a little chat with her about such matters. I also like how the characters continue to evolve even after so many books. Here Amelia becomes way more overprotective than she's ever been. She goes into mother bear mode to protect a son she doesn't really know or like. It turns out that public displays of affection are just too un-Victorian for the elder Emersons?! (Pretty sure Amelia has stated she doesn't have much maternal affection for her son). However, Ramses struggling to live up to his father's reputation and expectations due to the lack of affection is somewhat contradictory. When Ramses was small Emerson took great pride in his son. Emerson is just trying to please everyone and keep Ramses safe. He knows Ramses is a man and can take care of himself but he can't help but be wistful and long for adventure himself though this is never implicitly stated. Nefret remains true to herself. It's funny just how alike Amelia, Emerson, Ramses and Nefret are in personality. Nefret has the sunniest nature of them all which is why I did not care for the romance plot. Ramses was cruel to her and almost abusive. She felt abused and that's what matters. I disagree with Amelia's pronouncement about what women want sometimes. The scene following the somewhat abusive scene was nice and I really liked the ending. Nefret is also secretive like her foster brother and I knew what she was up to long before the end of the book. If Ramses hadn't been so self-centered, he could have figured it out. She SAID she knew what she was doing and she was seen quarreling with Anna which means Ramses assumed wrong. I love Nefret and I want her to be as happy as Amelia after her tough beginning and the shocking events of 2 years earlier. The Master Criminal is up to his old tricks. This time his identity was very difficult to guess even for Amelia and Ramses. I really do not like him or consider him a romantic figure. I like him as an interesting character but he complicated the story more than it had to be. I was happy to get answers as to who he is and why. The villain is the most despicable excuse for a human being on the planet. I doubted they were intelligent enough to pull off such a plot and as it turns out, I was partly right. I sort of felt sorry for them being a pawn in a larger game but not so much because this person is supremely evil. For once British officials do not act like fools and morons. They have finally learned to value the Emersons as they ought. Though the British are still patronizing to the locals, they have made slight progress. I liked Russell despite the fact he set up the plot. The Emersons would have become involved anyway. The newest character here is Malinda "Molly" Hamilton, the spoiled teenage niece of Major Hamilton, a British officer stationed in Egypt. Molly is a girl on the cusp of womanhood and is very silly. This is what happens when old-fashioned chaperones try to restrict their charges. Molly is an example of the "Bright Young Things" generation that is to follow the war. She is headstrong, fearless and know what she wants. If she was a little older and Ramses wasn't so in love with Nefret, he would have finally met his match! I think she and Nefret could have been friends if Molly was older and didn't have a massive crush on Ramses. This is a fabulous entry to the series and a good place to stop. Should I continue? What else can they get up to? I'd like to know what happens to everyone at the end of the war though so I will probably continue! Reread November 2021 This was another tough one to reread remembering the dramatic conclusion. I decided to reread in publication order and the plots flow much better this way. Even though the story picks up two years later, it still picks up right where we left off with the romantic development to allow the action to unfold. That makes more sense this way without The Painted Queen. I enjoyed trying to figure out who the Master Criminal was this time. I remembered but it was still fun to guess whether he had more than one persona and which one he was. I guessed or remembered correctly. His plotline came as a surprise the first time but this time I remembered. Melinda aka Molly is a spoiled teenage girl with a crush on Ramses. She's annoying and I couldn't stand her. This time though, I have a LOT of questions about her backstory. Is she in on her father's con game or is she innocent? Did he take her away from Bertha or was she in England for a time? She must sound English but is it a trick or did she grow up in England? Is she spoiled or behaving that way to make herself seem younger? I think at first she was planning to con them but then she saw Ramses and developed a huge crush and changed the game. Her actions toward Ramses when she ran away from her governess make more sense given what we later learn about her background. Modern teens would totally do something like that-virtually though. Amelia's show of maternal affection really touched me. She's usually so stoic and so certain that things will turn out all right. She's under the same strain as Katherine and Evelyn, perhaps even more so because she can't tell them what Ramses is up to and has to keep her fears to herself. I was surprised Ramses was surprised by her maternal devotion. She's always fussed but this time the reality has set in and she sees her son not just getting into scrapes but doing something deadly, something the authorities she trusted put him up to. While Russell seems like a decent guy, he's still British and doesn't understand the Egyptians at all. The British are so smug and sure of their might and right to rule, they totally miss the point of Wardani's movement. Wardani exists because of the way the British have governed Egypt! My mom was confused by the Wardani plot and didn't quite get what was going on. I tried to remember to explain it to her but I had forgotten some of the details. Emerson was too over the top in this novel. There's a heck of a lot of swearing- and sex in this novel! While I adore them as a couple and how much they love each other, I feel like Emerson wasn't being spontaneous affectionate but purposefully affectionate. Emerson uses sex as a diversion to keep Amelia out of trouble and I really hate that. I like it better when they communicate. Emerson seems to be up to something behind the scenes that he can't tell anyone about. He's learning to accept that his son is now a man and knows what he's doing. Emerson is learning to allow Ramses to take the lead and for himself to follow but still tries too hard to keep his son out of trouble. I wish he could bring himself to say "I love you and I'm proud of you!" He's too Victorian for that and before Amelia, the only person he ever loved was Walter and he stood as a father to Walter. I don't think he ever told Walter of his feelings either. Too Victorian for that. I agree with Emerson and Ramses's sentiments about the war but they go a little too far publicly with their feelings and I think that gets them into trouble. There are multiple nations warring for the same territory and none of the options appeal to Emerson. While Ramses believes the Egyptians deserve to be self-governing. Nefret is having a tough time in this novel. I can tell what she's thinking and feeling but I don't like some of her actions. She's trying to atone for the mistakes she made in the previous book and it's costing her mentally. She feels she can't confide her true feelings to Amelia because Amelia is too old-fashioned. It's funny how blind Amelia is about their relationship but when it comes to her son, she's for anything that will make him happy and keep him safe. Is Farouk really the traitor Wardani is after? That seems too obvious. He's really dumb if he is the villain. I think it's someone else. The Count is a hoot with his flirting. He's so cartoonish and so obvious. Who is Mrs. Fortescue? She's heavily veiled. Is she really a woman? She's not a lady for sure. Major Hamilton is a crochety old fellow. He needs a better governess for his niece and to show her some love and kindness rather than distant money throwing. Percy is smarter and more cunning than I remembered. His hatred of Ramses is a disease that has infected his mind. He was already not right in the head as a child and very devious and he's only gotten worse as he's aged. My mom had a few questions at the end How did Percy get away from his captors? Who shot him? Who shot Sethos? Her first question left he wondering as well but the second is answered in the dramatic reveal. The war takes its toll on the Emerson family. I had forgotten how much of the young man's character was revealed. Upon my first read it seems as if his death was a mere mention and I felt bad for the family but this time I got a better idea of who he was and what a horrible impact his death has on everyone who knew him and even those who never met him in person. I adore Daoud. He's so sweet and lovable. Selim is funny and a good choice to be the leader even though he's the youngest son. He's modern and can bridge the gap between Emerson and Ramses well. Sethos is hilarious. He's so theatrical in everything he does. I think he's turned into a lovable rogue more than a devious criminal. He can't help himself though. I liked the Egyptology in this one and had to pause and look up where they were and who the statue was. This was a good ending point and my mom didn't really feel the need to continue. Since she only has 4 more I pushed her to find out what happens to the characters after the war.
