This is a helpful and lay-accessible introduction to some of the key differences between Roman Catholic and Protestant theology. It's written from an unabashedly conservative Protestant viewpoint, and the author makes no attempt to hide his premise: that Roman Catholics and evangelical Protestants are preaching two different gospels. Those who agree with that premise will appreciate this book; those who don't will, quite naturally, have some serious bones to pick with Mr. White. Those who are unsure would be advised to read this book for themselves. It is a major strength of this book that the author endeavors to present Roman Catholic doctrine fairly and accurately. He engages with the decrees of church councils (primarily but not exclusively Trent, Vatican I, and Vatican II), papal encyclicals, and works by significant Catholic theologians and apologists. His interaction with medieval/scholastic theologians is less substantive; for instance, there is no mention of Aquinas, much less figures such as Lombard or Anselm. Some more emphasis here would, I think, strengthen his case; however, it should be observed that this book is aimed at layman and apologists, not scholars and academics. Although White approaches each issue from a Protestant perspective (which, again, is or isn't an issue depending on one's own convictions), he has clearly made a genuine and significant effort to be informed about Roman Catholic theology, and for that he is to be commended. In outlining differences between these two opponents, White has two audiences at mind. This book is not just aimed at Roman Catholics. It's also aimed at Protestants who are ignorant of Roman Catholic theology. This is another significant strength of the book. White has no desire to see Roman Catholicism rejected on the basis of straw men, and he handily takes Protestants to task for buying into shallow and reductionist stereotypes. He also implicitly supports a pastoral approach to the matter by noting that, despite the very real and serious differences, he firmly asserts the real possibility of believers within the Roman church - a possibility for which some Protestants unfortunately will not allow. For White, the fundamental difference between Rome and Protestantism is over the issue of authority. Protestants assert the self-evident and self-asserting authority of Scripture; one of White's central theses is that Rome's ultimate argument is in its own self-evident and self-attesting authority. Rome is the final arbiter; it sets the terms of debate and then answers how it wishes. In essence, the concept of Sola Scriptura represents the primary dividing line between Rome and its detractors. All of the other differences flow out of this: Rome's view of tradition, the papacy, justification, the mass, purgatory, and Mary all emerge from its claim to be the sole authoritative teacher and interpreter of Scripture. Likewise, Protestantism's rejection of Roman views on these issues stems from a rejection of Rome's claim to authority. Why? In the end, Roman theology leads to a different gospel, and one that does not provide the peace and assurance of the Protestant gospel. (As an aside, it is worthwhile reading White's comments in light of classic Reformed statements on assurance by figures such as Luther, Calvin, and the writers of the Heidelberg Catechism; it's also worthwhile to note Bellarmine's comments on the significance of this issue as a point of division.) This book is not without its flaws. As mentioned above, it is not aimed at laymen and not scholars, which is both a strength and a weakness. White remarks several times that various issues cannot be addressed at length, and the book is not intended to be exhaustive in any sense. Nonetheless, some issues receive surprisingly little attention, such as Catholic eucharistic doctrine. In light of the centrality accorded to the Eucharist in Roman theology (and readily observed in encyclicals by Paul VI, John Paul II, and Benedict XVI), I would have expected the author to spend some time on the issue. Likewise, while he spends time addressing exegesis and textual issues on numerous hotly-debated passages, the disagreement over James 2 is relegated to a footnote. And while he makes passing reference to this, he should have (in my opinion) spent more time dwelling on the ambiguity and evasiveness that is a consistent feature of Roman Catholic argumentation. I would also point out some minor disagreements that I have with White's theological presentation itself. Most notably, he leaves the door open to some valid counter-attacks in his hermeneutic of "authorial intent" and "Biblical word usage". A strong sense of Holy Spirit authorship allows room to find meaning in Biblical passages beyond what the human authors realized or intended - something Peter himself acknowledges in 1 Peter 1. Likewise, Protestant theologians readily acknowledge the importance of carefully defining terms in ways that don't necessarily accord with Biblical usages, such as the term "regeneration", defined in Protestant systematic theologies in a precise sense not really identical to its usage in Titus 3:5. Bavinck helpfully addresses the issue of "dogmatic formulations" in Vol. 4, pg. 589-90 of his Reformed Dogmatics. This undercuts White's method of arguing against Rome's latria/dulia distinction, among other things, and it would be better here to acknowledge that this is an *invalid* use of a *valid* argumentation technique. Protestants define terms more carefully than Scripture. Protestants allegorize and Protestants make note of implicit Scriptural allusions to true doctrines (or, at least, they should!) - note the Westminster Confession on deducing truths from Scripture "by good and necessary consequence". However, we do so with final recourse to the guidance and illumination of the Holy Spirit, and not to the authority of Rome. White misses an opportunity to highlight the work of the Holy Spirit and its vital importance in making his case for Protestantism as a Biblically faithful alternative to Rome's departures from the gospel. Overall, this was a helpful and very worthwhile read. For all Protestants who desire to witness to Catholic friends and to engage with them charitably and winsomely, I would recommend this book along with Sproul's "Justification by Faith Alone" as useful and well-written guides.
