I am the man, I suffer’d, I was there. Walt Whitman first wrote and published this collection in his tender age of 37 and it was just 150 pages long. For whatever reason, instead of writing another collection, he kept tinkering with it his whole life, adding and adding to it and that's how we got a deathbed version. I don't know which one was this, but since it had 680 pages, I would guess a later one. It started out being very quiet, melancholy, tender and private and, as Walt was getting older, started to remind sermons and preachings, including patriotic ones. And I must admit, that's were I lost interest, I'm much more about his shy quiet personal poetry myself. I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning, How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn’d over upon me, And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my bare-stript heart, And reach’d till you felt my beard, and reach’d till you held my feet. What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me, Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns, Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me, Not asking the sky to come down to my good will, Scattering it freely forever. The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to repress what would master him, The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats, The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers, the young man all color’d, red, ashamed, angry; The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through, The wholesome relief, repose, content, And this bunch pluck’d at random from myself, It has done its work—I toss it carelessly to fall where it may. But this was the first collection of poetry I've read for fun, not counting epic poetry, and I enjoyed it a lot. It's very sexual, especially in the beginning, Walt is obsessed and worships human body, mostly male (he does remember woman's body, but it was obvious to me, his heart wasn't that into it). But isn't it crazy to think this collection was a contemporary of Jane Eyre and David Copperfield. Good-bye my Fancy! Farewell dear mate, dear love! I’m going away, I know not where, Or to what fortune, or whether I may ever see you again, So Good-bye my Fancy. Now for my last—let me look back a moment; The slower fainter ticking of the clock is in me, Exit, nightfall, and soon the heart-thud stopping. Long have we lived, joy’d, caress’d together; Delightful!—now separation—Good-bye my Fancy. Yet let me not be too hasty, Long indeed have we lived, slept, filter’d, become really blended into one; Then if we die we die together, (yes, we’ll remain one,) If we go anywhere we’ll go together to meet what happens, May-be we’ll be better off and blither, and learn something, May-be it is yourself now really ushering me to the true songs, (who knows?) May-be it is you the mortal knob really undoing, turning—so now finally, Good-bye—and hail! my Fancy.
