Charles Eastman led a truly remarkable life. He was a witness to the Wounded Knee massacre, co-founder of the Boy Scouts of America, and established 32 YMCAs on Native American Reservations. He met and talked with many literary figures of his time, including Matthew Arnold, Ralph Waldo Emerson, William Dean Howells, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and Francis Parkman. He met with four presidents, addressed a gathering of governors, and worked as a lobbyist on behalf of Native Americans in Washington, D.C. He was also acquainted with other well known cultural figures of the times, including Cornelius Vanderbilt and Dwight Moody, and many educators and college presidents. He was the first Native American to actually graduate from Dartmouth, a school ostensibly established for Natives–neither Samson Occom nor Joseph Brant had completed their degrees–and one of the first Native Americans to earn a medical degree. And he published a number of books, including autobiographical material. This particular edition contains the full original text of From the Deep Woods to Civilization , but also much of Indian Boyhood , along with 68 pages of historical introduction (the latter not included in the page count). There are many interesting anecdotes in the book, which is a relatively fast read. Certainly his details of the context of Wounded Knee are valuable, as well as his social critiques of American culture of his day. His description of the widespread bribery and corruption of Washington culture rings sadly believable. My chief criticism of the book is that I do wish he had shared a few more personal anecdotes from his encounters with so many interesting people of his time, such as that with Dwight Moody. The ratio of name dropping to actual stories is regrettably high. But on the whole it's a very valuable biography of a well educated native man who had lived in the Dakota world but also the highest levels of American academia and politics, a man with a great respect for his traditional religion but who chose Christianity, a man who had at times been an author, advocate, anthropologist and acquisitions scout for a museum, camp director, physician, political activist, and an enormous force in the youth activities of Boy Scouts of America and the YMCA. “The rule of two meals a day was more closely observed by the men . . . This was when the Indians recognized that a true manhood, one of physical activity and endurance, depends upon dieting and exercise. No such system is practiced by the reservation Indians of today.” p20 Regarding white American culture, his father said: “Here is a race which has learned to weigh and measure everything, time, labor, and the results of labor, and has learned to accumulate and preserve both wealth and the records of experience for future generations.” p133-4
