If a single phrase can be used to describe Central Asia during the 13th and 14th Centuries, that phrase would be “war without end.” At the beginning of that period, the Mongols under Genghis Khan (Temujin) boiled out of their homeland, and in a decades-long campaign assembled the largest empire the world has ever known. Genghis Khan was convinced that his god Tengri, who ruled the Eternal Heaven, had decreed that he was destined to be the ruler of the world. The Mongols almost succeeded in accomplishing this goal, leaving behind them millions of corpses, devastated cities and farmlands, and scars which would take centuries to heal (if they ever did). Yet, as quickly as it came, the Mongol Empire disintegrated into squabbling, rival Khanates after Temujin’s death in 1227. Though a sizable part of Eurasia continued to be ruled by the Mongols for several centuries, the smaller kingdoms never did wield the power or influence of the early Empire, and gradually faded away as native populations gradually reasserted their dominance. Telling this story in a coherent way is a daunting task; sad to say, Hartog only partially succeeds. This book is a translation from the Dutch and the narrative is told in a very wooden, plodding way. It should have begun with an overall picture of Central Asia and a map showing the relationship of all the small kingdoms and tribal areas to each other (such as can be found in the Wikipedia entries under “Mongol Empire” or “Khwarezm”). Sadly, all the maps in the book cover areas that are too small to give the reader an idea of the overall picture, and the narrative presents the reader with a confusing jigsaw puzzle of tribal names and place names, and the relationships of the various pieces to each other are very difficult to determine (the Wikipedia maps really helped!). While the narrative does give a general idea of the military genius, ruthlessness and barbarity of Temujin and his generals and successors, the main focus is simply on tribal politics and on one battle after another. Much too little time is spent on Mongol society, religion, and military organization, and on why the states of western Asia and eastern Europe proved to be such easy targets in the period 1211-1240; and the narrative cuts off abruptly with the death of Güyük Khan in 1248 without any discussion of the later campaigns in the Levant, the destruction of Baghdad in 1258, or the attempts to invade Japan; or anything about the overall legacy, good or bad, left behind by the Mongols. Perhaps this is because the author did not want to get too far away from the story of Temujin himself, but the way the narrative ends leaves the reader (at least this one!) feeling very unfulfilled. This book will serve as a superficial introduction to the subject, but a search of other sources is highly recommended for better understanding. **** review by Chuck Graham ****
