This book felt like I had been reading it much longer than I had. I really don't know why. I liked this. It was different than the other series. It's a cross country adventure. I could see this being a movie. Yes there already is a few but this had more excitement. Though no Thelma and Louise. I really liked that movie. Now I want to watch it again. I found myself thinking of that movie, crossroads as well as other wanting to make it in LA books and movies. I'm confused. If Crystal is 3 yrs older and the other girls are 17. Why is Crystal still in foster care? I think there's a mistake. K so Gordon is a crank. Yells if you aren't out of bed ready n with the bed made as an example. It's described like a prison to an extent. "Crystal is smart enough to become President if women could." They can now. Though Hilary wasn't voted in. I don't want her to be the first female president. Would be odd how a couple were both President but we have had fathers n sons. Whoops! Okay I'm Canadian but I tend to say we. Lol I have a son (Justin Trudeau) as my current Prime Minister. Lucky Americans have Hitler for president. I mean Donald Trump. Sorry people I may offend. I didn't like either of your choices. I never cared about who was President until Obama. 😍😍😍 I love him. It's been years???? Can't be too many years or Crystal would be gone. Out of the system. Ok so just Louise is nice. Oh and the grandma. But I didn't know of her before. Raven wants to be a singer? And Louise is back to not nice. Ruining Butterfly's chance for adoption to keep getting money. Oh they say Louise loves the kids and doesn't want to give them up. Sad that saying she has some issues made the people not interested. It happens though. Nice so Gordon's a perv. If they have $1400 combined to runaway to California with then Brooke sure wasn't left much. I thought she would have gotten a decent amount. Guess not. I don't like their chant. Seems creepy to me but I get for them it's encouraging. Oh ouch!!!! They pointed out the Twin Towers and that they look like they could fly a plane into them. 😢😢😢 When the bikers gave the girls the shortcut I worried it was a trap. Sure enough!!!!! Me no likey! I'm glad Brooke did what I wanted her to do and peeled off running over their bikes. Ha the old man who has the girls come to his house to be looked after by his wife. Well he talks about all these people like the girls would know who he's talking about. I know people like that. I find it cute n funny. They going to move in with the elder couple they're staying with. Didn't grab their number before leaving? I figured Sunshine the hitchhiker would rob them. Yep! The cocaine they found in the car seats when looking for change for food, I thought they would sell it. Nope!!! Just tossed it into the rain. Raven with the boy Taylor in the town where the girls work at a restaurant to make money to keep travelling since they were robbed, is how sooo many girls I've known are. Like oh he's different for me or doesn't believe it. Or then there's the fun defensive. Is it so hard to believe someone could love me. Uh? Obviously not. But I'm always suspicious if love is thought of right away. So when the girls are debating on what to do for Butterfly for some reason I kept feeling like a girl was missing. I had to think. It's like wait there's only 4. Why do I think 5? Silly me. I thought maybe Raven shouldn't go off with Taylor in case she's contagious or to help look after Butterfly but right away she assumed it was concern for her getting hurt. Though it may be that. I just thought Brooke told her she maybe shouldn't go for reasons I stated. Yep she did exactly what I thought. Raven gave herself to the guy. Stupid girls. 😒 Stupid people. She had arms.... I should hope so. Not that all do. Seemed obvious that garage guy Todd doesn't have a girlfriend. I didn't know this was a cross country adventure. They're meeting many nice people. Borderline unrealistic but they're there. Well that was quick. Already talking of how much they like each other. But that does happen. Ok that was just a few kisses. The girls were worried. I thought they worried for no reason. Wha BAM! She lets him cop a feel. Then takes off her top and there goes the bra. Actually the way the other books were not very sexual I hadn't expected this. She's moving REALLY fast. It's like whoa! Wtf?! And how did he know she never had before? Well I'm glad my first was who it was. Raven's would be awful and upsetting. Him and his girlfriend broke up 3 months prior yet they say recently. I guess if it was a long relationship then I suppose. Butterfly seems so much more mousy and shy in this book. Funny. I had finished the series Luxe right before this series. Both took place in New York. Though this is now cross country. But did start there. When driving the elderly woman left behind and they said there was an odd smell I thought it was going to be tinkle but they said charred wood. Not sure what that smell is. Old person smell? 🤔 When the old lady had them drop her off not at her house I figured something was up. She talked of how big it was so I was surprised she didn't want them to see it. When she said it was a mess I thought maybe she was hoarder. I also wondered if she had dementia or Alzheimer's or something else that could cause confusion. It was really sad she lived in a cardboard box. Often I feel people have a choice to do something but in this case they didn't. What could they do? They are homeless kids virtually broke. And call who to help? Sadly there wouldn't be any help except if she went to a shelter but it would probably be up to her. Oh! Tension rising. Lack of money does that. It adds to other life stresses. I didn't like their chant and now the name Orphanteers is being mocked. Raven said it's childish. So perhaps that was it. It is a total kids thing. I'm a kid at heart but I still feel uncomfortable with the chant. With the man who slumped over the steering wheel I wondered if it would be too late for CPR. For there was the time for the woman to walk to the road. Poor kids the 2 little girls scared about their dad. Brooke at the gas station I thought she would have dialled 911. Chances for him is slim but possible. Oh ok my bad. I was thinking they should drive him to the hospital if they can. I thought he was out on the ground. I'm falling asleep so we'll blame that. Lol Butterfly reminds me of a toddler. It bothers me. After the native man found the girls sleeping in the rocks. They had run out of gas on a reservation escaping the hotel with Gordon. The girls were caught after saving that man. Gordon came. He's pissed about his drugs more than anything. The coke the girls had dumped back when. He said one of the girls had to stay with him. Brooke did. He asked if she wanted to have sex with him because he's experienced and a real man. Hmmm him and Louise didn't have their own kids. 🤔 He tied Brooke's arm to his arm. She untied his side and escaped with her wrist still tied. Got the girls and they raced off. Anyway after all that and they start following the native man one of the girls asked what's next and Crystal said scalping. 😱😱😱 She's not a jokester so 😱😱😱😱😱😱. I'm also confused because she's so smart yet doesn't know that scalping didn't begin with the "Indians". It's a common misconception. I have learned a lot in recent years of the history of Native Americans. Far from enough though. I just had a thought. What about Ravens mom? I'm assuming still in jail or a rehab. Ha! Crystal's like me. Hates to waste time. It's good and bad. Ok if she's in such a trance she's even drooling then yes that is bad. Butterfly needs a doctor. Or natural anxiety relievers. Everything Annie couldn't be. Healthy! Ouch! To me. The baby Steven, Anita and Tommy had after adopting Butterfly. I wish Crystal had her glasses on on the covers. I like the visuals. I HATE that the keyhole covers were discontinued. They should have kept it with the old artistry and the peek a boo cover. All V C Andrews fans loved them. It was like a mystery. I hope if they redo any covers/editions that they do it that way again. OMG Those were seizures Butterfly was having? I had learned that seizures aren't necessarily like what you think from movies etc. Not sure how the chant helped them though. Poor girl really should have seen a doctor a lot sooner. At first I thought Butterfly could be a pretty name but it bothered me through this book. So I guess not after all. Raven is pretty. 🦋 Welp! I'm done that series. But I need MORE!!!! Lol Hopefully off to another V C Andrews series. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
