This book turned out to be as predictable as I thought it would be after reading the first chapter -- you pretty much know what's going to happen. If you don't want details to be spoiled, don't read the rest until after you've read the book... The first 2/3 of the book focus on Christina Hardy's life after her divorce and how she moved on with her life. It really bothered me that this mother of three half-grown children put her own desires ahead of what was good for her children. She said it all when she told her oldest daughter they weren't looking for her permission. She married a man she'd known only 2 months and didn't bother to even tell her kids until the night before the wedding... Then sent them off to school while she got married and left for a week-long honeymoon. Shouldn't the children have been a bigger part of this decision that was going to have a HUGE impact on their lives? Then they promptly bring another baby into the family... Of course everything works out for these characters with only minor bumps along the way. It is fiction, afterall. Having grown up with divorced parents and having had a step-father, I know that's not reality. Stansfield skimmed over any discomfort and made it look easy and perfect. After reading the part about their plan not to tell the children of their pending marriage (after a two week engagement), I nearly put the book down with no intention of finishing it. I've seen too many couples rush into marriage (without kids involved) and have a hard time due to not taking the time to get to know their spouse beforehand. Marriage is hard work and both people have to be willing to do what they need to in order to make it last. This book's plot is just too perfect for my taste. The last 1/3 deals with the tragedies of Sept. 11th, 2001, and how the characters' lives were affected. This part was a little better, showing how they relied on their faith in God to get them through the loss in their lives. Have Stansfield's books always been like this? This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
