1. Plot summary: The novel She Said Yes, by Misty Bernall is the true story of a young girl who was shot and killed in the Columbine shooting. The story is written by Misty Bernall, mother of Cassie Bernall, Misty tells her daughters story and life. Misty goes through all the life struggles and ups and downs throughout Cassie’s life, and also Cassie’s transformation of when she found God. The novel is considered “an unlikely martyrdom”, and has been reviewed by many different types of press, from the New York Times to the Boston Globe. 2. Personal Response to the Book: She Said Yes was one of the best books I have read. It really made me think of how lucky I am to be in a safe school, but it also made me think of how something like the Columbine shooting could happen at any moment. Personally if I was Cassie I don’t know what I would have done if I was in her shoes. I would be so terrified and probably tried to run away. I found it pretty amazing that she could be so strong to just sit there and let the killers take her. When the killers popped the question, “do you believe in God”, and Cassie answered “Yes”, it really struck me, it made me feel really sick and made me cry. I don’t understand how Cassie could be so strong, and how two boys could be so sick and disturbed to go and kill twelve innocent people, just because they were angry. In a way I am sort of like Cassie, not to the same extent, but we relate. Cassie was a teenager that struggled with life and God and had a whole lot of questions. Her parents pushed religion upon her, and the more they pushed the further she’d get from God. Cassie started attending youth church and eventually started getting closer to God again, and she made one of the biggest choices of her life, that was to say “Yes” to the killers. I wonder if Cassie said that she didn’t believe in God, if the killers (Dylan and Eric) would have still killed her. I think Cassie was an unbelievable woman who really should be remembered. I found this novel to be really striking and completely believable, because it’s real and a true story and it did actually happen. While I was reading this I got really scared to go to school, because the speeches and words in the novel from the people are from people who were actually at the Columbine shootings. And the Columbine actually happened. I think the part that scares me the most is that this could happen to any school and to any kids that are at school, there are no warning signs or signals that a kid will show if or when they will attack. Until reading this novel I had never really knew anything about the Columbine, I new it had happened but nothing other than that. Overall I really enjoyed this novel, and it made me really think about life. 3. Quotes When Josh, one of the boys who was there when Cassie died, was hiding under a table from the killers he heard the killers say some brutal words. “They went over to Isaiah and started taunting him. They called him a nigger before they killed him”(13). I found this quote quite stunning, I don’t understand how horrible people can be. This quote is quite ruthless and savage, and I think that’s why it stood out to me. One day Cassie’s mother went through Cassie’s room and found a bunch of notes and drawings that they found incredibly disturbing and never thought that they would hear coming from their daughters mouth. “My guts are hungry for that weird stuff…I f-ing need to kill myself, we need to murder your parents. School is a f-ing bitch, kill me with your parents, then kill yourself so you don’t go to jail. You will go to jail”(40). Misty Bernall is talking about Cassie’s transformation, and about her becoming closer to God. “If change involves growth, it also involves struggle”(96). I really liked this quote because it seems very real to me and I can relate to it, because I don’t believe you can succeed or grow without struggle or failure. In one of Cassie’s favourite books she highlighted one key passage that also struck me and made me think about my own life. “ Often we want to be somewhere other than where we are, or even to be someone other than who we are. We tend to compare ourselves constantly with others and wonder why we are not as rich, as intelligent, as simple, as generous, or as saintly as they are. Such comparisons make us feel guilty, ashamed or jealous…We are unique human beings, each with a call to realize in life what nobody else can, and to realize it in concrete context of the here and now. We will never find happiness by trying to figure out whether we are better or worse than others. We are good enough to do what we are called to do. Be yourself”(105). This quote struck me because I tend to be that girl, or at least I used to. Still sometimes I find myself wishing I was somewhere else or someone else, I don’t know why, because I have an amazing home, loving family and my life is a breeze compared to some people. For some strange reason I still find myself jealous of people or feeling not a good as others. Overall this quote was one of the most dominant quotes in the novel. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
