Amelia and Emerson’s yearly excavations are considerably darkened by the arrival of World War I. Men are going to the front and dying in the trenches; women are anxiously waiting at home and dreading the arrival of telegrams. War fever has taken over Egypt as well, where the British finally given up on pretenses and annexed the country. The British police are worried about a local uprising in favor of the Turkish sultan. The Turks are flaming the resentment of the Egyptians against the British occupiers who treat them as inferiors. War fever is high in among the European expats, who disdain Ramses for being a pacifist and not enlisting in the army. His cousin, the abonimable Percy, however, makes the society rounds decked out in Egyptian army officer uniform, impressing the ladies with his good looks and stories of his valor. What they don’t know is that Percy is lying, and that Ramses is secretly impersonating the local resistance leader in order to stop the weapon shipments and find out about the Turkish invasion plans. This is the longest, darkest, and most complex of the series yet. For the first time, the shenanigans do not involve murders or the stealing of artifacts, but a bona fide wartime spy story. Ramses and David are pushed to the edge of their abilities in disguise, and the family is torn because they have to hide the activities from Nefret. Due to the troubles from the previous book, the relationship between Nefret and Ramses is tense, and they are both suffering from having to keep their feelings, and other secrets, from each other. Peters clearly borrows from the melodramatic traditions of early 20ieth century adventure stories, but she is aware and often makes fun of it, like when Emerson tells Amelia she should not indulge in her romantic fantasies inspired by the novels she reads. Of course she ignores him and indulges, which is what makes these so much fun. Sometimes the romantic melodrama is indeed a bit too far - like the revelations about Sethos’s identity at the end - but overall it is all in good fun, even if the narrative here is darker by necessity. Oh yes, Sethos gets an impressive, and unexpected, turn in this one as well. The series is continued to be narrated by one-woman-all-ensemble cast Barbara Rosenblatt. She elevates them to a completely new level. Hoopla has all of the audiobooks for those whose library has access to them.
