This was the right time in my life to read this book - I found it very affirming. It discusses a wide range of religious and spiritual traditions and how they encourage compassion for animals, as part of a larger recognition of interbeing or interconnectedness or oneness. I do have a few criticisms. I thought it could have included something about indigenous traditions - there's a focus on large established religions, which is a bit limiting. Also, it's dealing with faith and belief, which is of its nature a very subjective and sometimes murky territory... I'm open-minded and have had my share of spiritual experiences and so I was pretty open to these bits, but I had a sense in reading it that some folks would be put off by the seeming lack of rationality and logic in some passages. Finally, I think it could have used a final copyedit - typos turn me off. There are only a few but I wish there had been none - they don't help give confidence in the author and publisher, which is important in a work like this one. These quibbles aside, I think this is a very valuable book. Anyone who practices Hinduism or Buddhism will probably find it tremendously affirming. Folks who practice Judaism and Christianity may find it more challenging. But folks who practice any kind of spirituality will find in these pages some very useful and beautiful ideas about our connections with other living beings (including touching anecdotes and references to specific scriptures and teachings), and what these connections demand of us, morally and spiritually. Randour's conclusion, and it's one I agree with, is that in facing these connections and in changing our actions to relieve our associated pangs of conscience, we open up a vast new world of joy and love and spiritual experience that may not have been available to us before. The form of the book is noteworthy - after going over various traditions and their implications and interpretations, there's a particularly effective chapter where the author takes us through a day in the life of a woman who is beginning to realize a new connection with animals. Since I struggled with this myself for years (as do most vegans) I found it very sympathetic and effective... it brought up a lot of memories for me and helped me see how far I've come since those early days. All in all, I think this book is probably one of the most inclusive and compassionate books I've read on the subject of animal rights.
