I've seen a few Civil War reenactments over the years, I've gone to several battlefields and forts in different states and I've toured homes still bearing the marks of the war - bullet holes in the doorways, Minié balls lodged in trees. I've heard the stories of soldiers' gallantry, young boys who lied about their ages so they could aim their weapon at the other side, families torn apart by the politics that didn't quite have so much to do with slavery as it is taught in schools. I've watched Gettysburg and Glory a freaking lot. The extent of the information I've heard about women in the war was their relief work. They were nurses. They cared for the wounded. They waved goodbye from their doorways as their fathers, husbands, brothers, cousins, lovers, and sons went off to war, and they occasionally opened their doors to help the infirm, or they would go to the nearest camp and lend a hand. But many women served a different purpose - and no, it wasn't prostitution. There were women who dressed as men, lied about their gender, and fought in the Civil War. They killed people. Some of them went to war pregnant, hid the pregnancy the entire time, and may have been found out only when they were found giving birth. I consider myself a pretty tough cookie when I want or need to be, but that's just above and beyond. Ouch, comes to mind, as does "No way in hell" and "WTF!". So there's this virtually unknown bit of American history, a terribly interesting story about the hows, whys and whatfors behind a woman's decision to go to war, and yet this book made it all seem like a routine study session. Names, dates and ranks were rattled off very militarily, the paragraphs were brief at times, segue ways left so much to be desired. I felt there was a wealth of information here and I was eager to eat it all up. Instead I felt like I was being lectured and there would be a pop quiz at the end. My interest waned. I did manage to create a list of other interesting books from the bibliography at the end, but I wish the text itself had given me more. History doesn't have to be so dry, especially a part of history that was viewed by so many as to be downright scandalous. This is a fascinating topic, but evidently I'm just going to have to go elsewhere to get my information. Also, I shake my fist at you, educators! No one talks about Loreta Velazquez when they teach about the Civil War. No one talks about how Loreta disguised herself as a male and called herself Harry T. Buford, who eventually became a lieutenant before she was discovered. This never came up in any of my trillions of women's studies classes! What's up, world? This is why everyone is so freaking dumb. Then again, some people think the war is still being fought.
