He Shall Thunder in the Sky takes place two years after the previous book, The Falcon at the Portal. World War I has started, and Amelia’s nephews are headed to the front. Meanwhile, in Egypt, Ramses is being given feathers by young women, designating him a coward for not enlisting and joining the fight. David is being held in India, as punishment for his involvement in the Egyptian freedom movement. Amelia’s evil nephew Percy one again is causing problems for Ramses in Egypt. After the grim ending of the last book, this seems to start off with things even more grim for everyone in the Emerson family. But never fear, in He Shall Thunder in the Sky the reader gets the ultimate reward at the end of the internal quartet of rather dark books! As usual, there are mysteries aplenty. From Ramses and David’s secret involvement as undercover spies, to attempts on various Emerson family members’ lives, to trying to figure out just which person in Cairo might be Sethos, the mysteries are varied, interesting, and often interconnected. This is one of my absolute favorites in the series. I love the insights we get into Ramses’ feelings and movements through Manuscript H. And I like the hints at what Nefret is really thinking in Letter Bs to Lia. We also get to see, perhaps more than in any other of the books to date, just how much Amelia and Emerson love their son Ramses, and how much he loves them. And the ending? Just fantastic! I listened to this in audio for the first time on this reread, and give both the narration and the story an A. On to the next in the series! NOTE: Re-listen finished June 29, 2019. I just adore this book! So much happens both in terms of plot and character development for a whole host of characters. And the insights into Amelia and Ramses' relationship continues to be fantastic. This absolutely would not work as a standalone, so much would be meaningless. But if you've enjoyed the series this is just wonderful! NOTE: Re-listen finished September 3,2020. GLORIOUS! This book is absolutely GLORIOUS! And as I said above, it will have nowhere near the impact if you start the series here. The payoffs are just fantastic for so much that's happened through the rest of the series. How much do I love this one? I could listen to it again right now ....but I won't .... well, probably not. NOTE: Re-listen finished June 17, 2021. I so love this book! NOTE: Re-listen finished February 3, 2026. The only thing I would change about what I've written above is this is not "one of the best" in the series, it is absolutely my favorite in the series. But again, it will not work anywhere near as well if you have not read the rest of the series!
