Someone with a fondness for experimental literature put David Markson's novel (Book? Read? Thing?) This Is Not A Novel on the fiction display downstairs and I was lucky enough to find it. Thanks, to whoever put it there. This is a fantastic, crazy, experimental, and ultimately poignant book. Here are the first paragraphs: "Writer is pretty much tempted to quit writing. Writer is weary unto death of making up stories. Lord Byron died of either rheumatic fever, or typhus, or uremia or malaria. Or was inadvertently murdered by his doctors, who had bled him incessantly." What follows is nearly 200 pages of quotes and allusions: Random, weird, beautiful and most centered around writing, art, and death. Famous quotes and anecdotes are sprinkled with lines of poetry and stories, mixed occasionally with sentences discussing the ability of a novel to exist without setting, character, plot or conflict. This is a polarizing book, to be sure. If you are put off by experimental fiction such as the work of John Barth, Richard Brautigan or Donald Barthelme, you will probably feel this book is gimmicky or lazy. Still other readers may not have the patience to read 200 pages of seemingly random, pointless quotes and bits of trivia. However, on closer scrutiny the novel becomes just that: a novel. While plot is nonexistent, a story of sorts exists beneath the veneer of meaningless non sequiturs. Themes and patterns become visible. Writer, the narrator and sole "character" of the work, emerges as a man unwell, a man alone and dying, looking for meaning in life, searching for some kind of immortality, or perhaps just the staying power of books and writing. His interaction with the reader, and perhaps the quotes and allusions he records, makes this a very personal, warm account, rather than a sterile thought experiment. The great conflict of this book is whether Writer can create a novel that is "Plotless. Characterless", and "yet seduc(es) the reader into turning pages nonetheless." Though I loved the quotes and the experimental nature of this book, one of the reasons I followed it through to its conclusion was to discover if, or how well, Markson's Writer could do it. Amazingly, he succeeds in my opinion. The book was not a chore to read. His quotes and allusions (even the more unreliable ones) gave me new insight into some favorite writers and the power of literature and the written word. Ultimately, the book came to a satisfying conclusion. Some readers on Amazon may not agree with me, but I was moved by the turn of the last few pages and Markson accomplished something I thought would be impossible: bringing a book such as this, a list of deaths essentially, to a satisfying, emotional conclusion. My experience with the novel became more real when upon finishing the book and discovering that David Markson died alone two years ago. Markson's own death made the noveleven more haunting and thought provoking. However, it wasn't a gloomy end. Markson's book, though devoid of any hope for God or religious rebirth, accentuated the power of the written word to keep memory and art alive for new generations.
