And in the "It Could Have Been So Much Better" category...we have this thing. Every premise they have is correct: we can learn much from the Greeks and should re-embrace a great deal of Greek wisdom; Classicists are culpable for the demise of Classics in America; the love for Classics is moribund in America. The problem is not that they are anti-Christian (though at times they do sound a bit glad America is not under the "burden" of being religiously influenced) or anti-progressive: the chapter on what Greek wisdom is what great, especially its dependence on the Iliad - I wish the rest of the book was that good (or just more of that chapter). The problem is most of the book is not "what Greek wisdom is and how great it is." Most of the book is a rather tendentious (or elevendentious, as Victor Borge would say) "roll call of shame" against their culpable compeers responsible for the demise of Classics. It does sound a bit whiny. What they say is true, and it's great they actually cite a number of inscrutable examples of the guilty parties (why would anyone go to colleges with these professors, anyway?), but they say it too much. Their point is made well before chapter 1 is over. Chapter 2, as I said, is fantastic - we need to know what Greek wisdom is and why it is so great and why we should re-embrace it. We don't need to know why the slackpants pseudo-professors who don't really teach at colleges no one can afford to go to anyway are self-serving hypocrites who don't teach and don't write papers for real people to read. We already know that. What we don't know is what's so great about the Greeks. If Hanson and Heath had switched the proportions of what Greek wisdom is and why it's lost, this would have definitely been a 5-star book. I'm a fan of theirs; I agree with what they say. I know this doesn't make me sound like a good friend - but they belabored their point (just as I am doing in this review). Sadly, some of their assumptions about the non-Western world did not seem to pan out: in a post-9/11 world, "religious fanaticism" does not seem to be so much on the decline as it seemed to be in 1999, nor is everyone as overtly West-embracing already as they thought we'd be by now. Regardless, this is worth reading if you haven't read Bonfire of the Humanities, and chapter 2, what Greek wisdom actually is, is certainly worth reading again and again. Their recommended reading lists are also quite useful.
