I read this book for the podcast I’m currently listening to called “American Girls” by Allison Horrocks and Mary Mahoney. Okay... Well, to be honest, I really don't have much to say about "Josefina Learns A Lesson", but I always do little reviews to each of the American Girl books so I felt like I had to write *something*. This is the story about Josefina Montoya and her (semi - new) life on the rancho now that her Tía Dolores has come to live with the family. Tía Dolores is making a lot of changes. The four Montoya sisters are having to do a ton, especially after a bad flood that has happened to the whole town and the family. Josefina is trying to grow as a person, but is, also, still struggling with her grief over her poor mother and feels like if she grows too much - she will have forgotten her mother and who she wants was. I liked this second book to the series, I just didn't love it because, like the first one, there is not a lot of things going on in the book (in the sense of actual action). It's not as lively, which makes sense because a lot of the things happening are about emotions and the things that happen inside you internally (especially) when someone you love dies. This is NOT a bad book by any means, I just wish it had a little bit more happening in it than a flood that wipes out half of the sheep (although that is a terrible thing that sadly does occur in the book... poor sheep). Compared to other books in the American Girl universe, I just feel like the Josefina story (so far) is a little slow for me and while I love Josefina so much more as a character compared to some (*cough, cough* Felicity *cough, cough*)... The events in her world just haven't really captivated me. In Felicity's time, we were dealing with the Revolutionary War and there was a lot of violence, sadness, and just, in general, crazy times. In Josefina's time, all we've really seen so far is animals ruining things or things ruining animals. I love the internal stuff that Josefina is dealing with as a reader because grief is a very difficult, necessary theme (and thing apart of life), but very little has actually occurred in the actual world she lives in and so it just makes the reading a bit sluggish, to be honest... However, despite this critique, I still very much liked "Josefina Learns A Lesson" and I'm excited to see what our girl will do next. As a person, Josefina (and her family!) are much more likeable than Felicity and the rest of the Merriman clan. I hope it's going to be a good Christmas for Josefina in the next book, but I know that it will probably be a hard one without her mother being around. Also, as always said when I write these, I do not support the servitude that takes place in this book (or any American Girl book) with the Native American people. I do not think this adds anything to the series and I think Valerie Tripp does just as terrible of a job addressing it in here as she does with Felicity's slave - owning family in the Felicity series. I feel the need to mention this in almost every review because it just truly bothers me... This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
