‘A circus here, a circus there; here today, gone tomorrow.’ Surprisingly (to me) this is quite brilliant. Usually I can’t do novels so packed with dialogues (especially when they are very ‘simple’, full of ‘clichés’ (not so much in this one I don't think) and don't really open up to new ideas/go anywhere (doesn't apply to this one)). For instance, I’ve tried Ballard a few times, and I just can’t do any of them pass a quarter way through because of that very reason (that being the primary reason anyway, I feel). But with Peace, he’s very ‘direct’. Every line is well-considered and intentional (or seems to be). They’re so ‘succinct’ that they almost remind me of poetry/free verse. But I could be the only one to say this about his writing (let’s hope not; validate me). “If you want to know the artist, look at the art.” He was usually talking about Stanley Matthews or Don Bradman when he said it. “Everything’s linked. Show me two things that aren’t connected.” “Stoke City and the League fucking Championship,” laughed Gaz again, Mr Sport, lighting up another. “Big match tomorrow, eh?” I said, part-time football fan. “Be a right fucking shambles if it’s owt like last week.” I thought I wouldn’t like this, but I actually ended up thinking that the writing was clever. The setting and characters were so well-written (don’t get me wrong, none of them were likeable). For me, the hyperviolence so often topples over to either homoeroticism, or simply and absurdly dark comedy (which is probably not the writer’s intention, but just the way I read/perceived or rather responded to it). Half-laughs inducing — like I’m obviously uncomfortable about it, but also impressed that it was written that way. I think horror/violence and sex/romance are a few of the most difficult things to write well because it could just end up appearing ridiculous and resembling a bad imitation of something else — ‘kitschy’ is not the right/accurate definition, but I think something along those lines. ‘There was Elvis on the jukebox. “Power’s like glue. It sticks men like us together, keeps everything in place.” “You and Foster are…” “We’re peas in a pod, me and him. We like to fuck and make a buck and we’re not right choosey how we do either. But he’s got too big for his fucking boots and now he’s cutting me out and it pisses me off.” On the other side of the office, Gaz was taking bets on the Newcastle-Leeds game.’ The way Peace went about those matters in his novel is exactly how I like it/them to be — straight to the point, no gross authorly self-indulgence (which to me, always look/seem very trauma-pornographic or even just like the author having a literary wank sesh (and that’s just kind of ‘sad’ and gross to read/experience really)). Everything was well-described with well chosen diction, well-constructed lines, without any unnecessary extras. The characters are all so believable (but no less ‘bizarre’) as well; so well done in every way. ‘The half-time scores were coming up under the horses: Leeds were losing at Newcastle. Yesterday Once More on the jukebox, my money. Fuck The Carpenters, my eyes stinging from my own smoke. The M1 southbound out of Leeds, seven o’clock busy, the rain beginning to sleet in my headlights. Always on My Mind on the radio. Flicking through the radio stations, avoiding the news. Newstead View was a single line of terraces looking out onto dirty moorland. Ponies grazed between rusting tractors and piles of scrap metal. A pack of dogs chased a plastic shopping bag up and down the road. Somewhere babies were crying. “You tell me you love me, tell me you care, and then you fuck me up the arse and write this shit.” She picked up the paper, opened it, and started to read: A Mother’s Plea by Edward Dunford. Mrs Paula Garland, sister of the Rugby League star Johnny Kelly, wept as she told of her life—’ Reading Peace’s novel today in comparison to reading it closer to the publication date might make a difference perhaps? The real-life ‘crimes’ that influenced Peace’s writing are well-known and nothing surprising to ‘contemporary’ readers. But it’s the way that he so cleverly ‘used’ them that adds/results to the brilliance of the writing/novel as a whole. To reiterate, all the characters are very ‘real’ and horrendous people. There is no ‘hero’ in the story, not that one should be expecting one (but those who are more ‘used to’ reading popular crime novels might ‘want’ that feel-good ‘moral’ satisfaction/relief). ‘Huddersfield were playing Everton. Town got a free kick on the edge of the Everton area. Vie Metcalfe steps up, bends the ball round the wall, Jimmy Glazzard heads it in. Goal. Referee disallows it, forget why, says take it again. Metcalfe steps up again, bends the ball round the wall, Glazzard heads it in. Goal, the whole crowd in fucking stitches.’ Not surprised that this was adapted into a TV series(?). It makes sense. Felt ‘cinematic’ (excuse the horribly inaccurate phrase). Read this primarily because I thought the covers (of the tetralogy(?)/quartet) was stunning (or at least to my taste/preference — and I specifically meant the ones published by Serpent’s Tail). I think I might ‘enjoy’ the TV series(?) more ( like how I felt about ‘Sharp Objects’ by Gillian Flynn). Not because the writing is ‘lacking’, but just because this particular ‘story’ translates better on screen/film. Lots of car rides, music (song after song; just brilliant, complements the writing so well), fast action; fast-paced in general anyway. An easy read. Read someone comparing this to ‘True Detective’ (TV series), and I can see why the comparison was made, but I personally don’t agree with that (as I think very, very highly of ‘True Detective’ — and by that I meant Season 1, and only that one (I couldn’t care less about the rest)). ‘Fuhrer of a bunker of my own design, screaming, I’VE NEVER DONE BAD THINGS. Tears soft and cock hard, screaming across six lanes of shit, I’VE NEVER DONE ONE SINGLE FUCKING GOOD THING. Radio 2 suddenly silent, white motorway lines turning gold, men dressed in rags, men dressed in crowns, some men with wings, others without, braking hard to swerve around a crib of wood and straw. Honey, I’m home. Giving you all you ever wanted.’
