i always hate getting stuck with a main character like this! she's all concerned with fame and fortune,has apparently slept with everyone-sometimes just to boost her career-and had an affair with a married man. what started out like a good book ended quickly.really quickly. the prologue was the only interesting thing in the whole book.and nora never really went anywhere with it. the characters aren't likeable,which is typical in a nora roberts book. there's a lot of short. sentences like.this that are.annoying to read- 'Appearances were important in business.Were important to Peter.' nora spends so much time writing about decorations in the house or views from the window or plants outside and all this fancy stuff and doesn't focus on much else.at times she would go on and on about it and you couldn't ever really get a great mental image of it because half of what she's talking about you've never heard of,and all i wanted was to her to just get on with the story. i was never sure why laura would automatically smile when she saw her husband or go up and kiss him after she knows he cheated on her.&while we're on that,why did it take her so long to dump him? i don't like reading about characters like these or the situations they're in at all. sure,its situations real people are in,but it shouldn't be in a romance book. there was nothin romantic about any of that at all. the main character was impossible to like.not sure why she slept with a man who's divorce hadn't been finalized.she didn't deserve a happy ending at all.she was broke and yet didn't wanna sell her stuff.her really expensive stuff that you'd have to be an idiot to buy in the first place. &then she would say she wouldn't let anyone give her money or pay for stuff and yet when someone offered the thought of denying didn't even cross her mind.she would always say something and then do the complete opposite. she's a materialistic self-centered arrogant person with no morals. &everyone kept complimenting her and pumping up her already inflated ego. all the cussing in here was unnessary. every other sentence was GD this and F that. the whole relationship between the friends and brothers was weird.like them watching him do it with that girl years ago.&kate kissing margo on the lips. some of the stuff in here was straight perverted. 1st its animals and now its family.i tell ya,nora roberts has some very sick fetishes. usually its the guy whos been around the block a thousand times and not the girl,so it was weird to have that reversed in here. &i just love (and i mean hate) when these guys love the girl for years but all throughout this they're getting with other women. i mean is it just impossible for ppl to be dedicated to one person? &as always in a nora roberts book,the guy would do something outrageous like say she would stay with him and she gets mad but suddenly fogets how to refuse or just leave.&then all of a sudden she'd get over it. margo was a smokeaholic and an alcoholic,while kate was a Tums popper.characters in noras books are always drinkin wine. Kate turned into a real a hole when they got older.their friendship was terrible. &susan better watch her husband,because i swear margo was after him which was gross.but hey that's just how margo rolls. there were some funny comments in here and the whole locker thing was funny. everyone who had a hand in the shop were cons if you ask me.talking people into buying things,saying people looked good in stuff even when they didnt. basically,its the kind of shopkeepers you don't wanna run into. the prices at the stoor were outrageous.you'd have to be insanely rich to buy that stuff. how is the store gunna survive when you run out of stuff?you can't keep buying off people's hand-me-downs. &who the heck kisses someone out of gratitude and friendship on the lips?! &i know margo was upset when she said she wished she had slept with claudio,but idk if she was serious or not.given her personality, im not entirely sure she wasnt serious. all nora's girl characters say crap like this-"i select the time, the place, and my playmates" talking about sex.its annoying&i have to wonder who actually talks like that. margo wanted wanted wanted and kept wanting and everyone always gave her everything. she never dealt with the consequences or felt bad about anything. margo had basically hit rock bottom,and had gotten a lot of money back because everything works out for margo but she kept forking out money,using her credit card, spending more and more money &then has the gall to make josh buy a house.so basically she learned that even if you screw up ad wind up broke,you can always make your friends pay for everything. &nora roberts characters always braid their hair.how many grown women do you see doing that? i mean french braid,pigtails,whatever,grown women dont do that alot. &the whole 'if you walk' talk-meaning josh leaving the relationship-was stupid. one minute margo was saying she didn't wanna marry or have kids and the next she's saying she wants to start a family with him.i didn't buy it. margo isnt a sincere, faithful, loyal person at all and she doesn't deserve josh at all. i dont see them having a happily ever after. also,nora roberts put seraphina in there &then never went anywhere with it.we didn't learn more about the story.&we didn't find out if the gold dabloon was even real or how much it was worth or if there was more gold out there.of course,all that might be in the other 2 books in the series,so i'll let this one slide.
