This book is absolutely marvelous (and I just read the second edition; little did I know that there were newer ones). It was indeed (to the best of my knowledge) the instigator of my application of programming outside of Visual Studio, which, if you're well acquainted with these areas… well, never mind. Oh, in between Visual Studio and Perl, I learned some shell scripting and various markup languages, because I started using Linux (Debian and Slax specifically) instead of Windows (YAYYYYY!!!!!!). Well, when an aspiring programmer has the bountiful power of the Linux kernel at his command, along with a worthy tome, something is bound to happen. And thanks to this selfsame worthy tome, it did so excellently. "Why is this a worthy tome?" you may ask. I shall supply you an answer. Firstly, It was published by O'Reilly , which, as the enlightened know, very often makes for an excellent book. Secondly, Larry Wall, the creator of Perl, linguist (quite interesting… a linguist creating a programming language), and employee of O'Reilly Media is co-author of this book, which is considered canonical for Perl developers. Definitely something to read if you want to program in Perl. Thirdly, information is presented in a kindly manner (typical of books published by O'Reilly) instead of the general chaos of some other programming references I've read. And any programmer knows how important order is. Fourthly, it has an index, which is a small fact comparatively and indeed most reference books have indices these days. (NOOO!!!! My web browser's dictionary does not recognize the word "indices." Where has it been for the last five hundred years?) However, ind ices are so imperative… so essential… so undeniably needed that I believe that I shall mention the fact. Fifthly, there are examples, quite terrific in their own right. Sixthly, it includes some stuff about using Perl as a Common Gateway Interface programming language. Seeing as I am predominately a web programmer, this is fantastic. All that said, reading this book is a brilliant way to embark on the programming adventure. Therefore, I fully endorse the second edition of Learning Perl by Randal L. Schwartz as a reference to the Perl programming language. I hope sometime to read the later editions, because Perl is simply that wonderful. There are some that would argue, but I stick by this thought. I use JavaScript more, and I certainly find JavaScript most amusing, but Perl can operate on "any" operating system without the support of a web browser! It is also a wonderful CGI language, widely used for CGI purposes. And also… I've read that it inspired parts of JavaScript. So up with PERL!!!!!!!! (May it's majesty live forever (for my sake).) And now they're working on Perl 6!!!! Also, as an official apology: Sorry for dedicating most of my review to irrelevant clauses and exclaiming wildly about Perl. I became a little excited, for I believe I may be writing some code using Perl soon and it's been a while since I have.
