“The Magic Unicorn” by Caroline Repchuk. This is a story about a beautiful but conceited Unicorn called Sebastian. While Sebastian was admiring his magical reflection in the pond, the horrible warty frog named Trevor asked the Unicorn for a favour. The Wicked Witch wanted Trevor for her caldron so she poisoned Trevor’s pool so he could not hide from her. Sebastian was doing nothing that day so decided to help the frog and put a spell on the Wicked Witch. The Witch was furious and wanted Sebastian’s magic so she captured him. Sebastian soon lost his powers. Trevor gathered up the forest friends and agreed with Sebastian that they would help him escape if he would be kinder to his forest friends. Sebastian was saved and he gained the respect of the animals in the Emerald Forest again. I really enjoyed this story because there is a mixture of fantasy and reality. The animals chosen are both fantasy and real life creatures. There are different emotions displayed throughout this book. First we see the conceited Sebastian, who is admired by everyone but has no care for the other animals. Then there is evidence of fear from the frog when the Wicked Witch poisons the frogs pool. Sebastian shows signs of loneliness when he is alone in his cage and expression of joy when his furry friends come to save him. The illustrations are exquisite and mesmerising. There are gold nymphs is the story that stand out in a shimmering paper. Similar to “The Rainbow fish”. The dazzling images capture the Unicorns beauty, and it is a joy at the end to find out he has made friends from just being nice. This story would be suitable for young readers aged three years and up. This story has a theme of sharing, caring and getting along with others. This story could be used in the classroom to teach social skills and social interaction. The pages in the story are colourful and bright, the characters are playful and mystical and the background conveys life by a pond. The activities around the story could be about the life cycle of the different animals seen in the story and also the story could be re-enacted. I feel this story would be amazing in a classroom environment, with the endless fun in reading about the beautiful Unicorn.
