Shattered is another of those Dick Francis novels which takes place mostly outside the world of British horseracing, which is where most of his novels were set. There are a handful of racing scenes here, but the protagonist, Gerard Logan, is a glass-blower who makes delicate glass sculptures in his shop near the Cheltenham race course. As the book opens, Logan has gone to the races in the company of one of his best friends, a jockey named Martin Stukely. But Stukely dies tragically that afternoon when his horse fails to properly negotiate a jump and crushes him to death. Logan, naturally, is heartsick and collects his friend's personal effects to that he can deliver them to Stukley's widow. As he does, Stukely's elderly valet gives him a package, explaining that someone had given it to Stukely, who in turn was to give it to Logan for safekeeping. The valet doesn't know who delivered the package to Stukely, only that the jockey had joked that the contents were "worth a million." The package turns out to be a videotape, but before Logan can examine it, someone steals it and Logan is badly beaten up. Meanwhile, some very rough customers learn that Logan has been given the videotape. They don't know what is on the tape either, only that it's supposed to be very valuable and that Logan is supposed to have it or know where it is. They refuse to believe that it has been stolen from him, which will place Logan in grave danger throughout the book. Logan will thus spend most of the book attempting to discover what might have been recorded on the tape and who might have taken it. Along the way, he will be assaulted several times. He will also spend a great deal of time discussing the intricacies of glass-blowing. I've noted before that I think that Francis's most successful novels were the ones set firmly in the world of horse racing and that when he wandered away into other fields, the books often lacked the tension and suspense of the majority of his books, basically because he felt compelled to display all of the research he had done for the novel. Such is the case here and so, in my opinion at least, this book is okay, but it's not as good as many of his others.
