I truly understand the origins of the author's thesis and passionate expression of it. Latin was expunged from high school study just a few short years before I attended. While that development perhaps saved me many day, weeks and months of anxiety over grammatical memorization, I feel in retrospect that I was never really given the chance of previous generations to be exposed to history, literature and philosophy of the ancients. It is an omission that I have spent the last several years finally reversing. Thus the author's (both classicists) heart felt and experientially derived conclusion that the loss of Homer, or classically focused education, has diminished American society and education. My personal experience argued for a similar conclusion...This book is an effective prosecution and presentation of the facts as they have seen them. Their arguement is compelling and articulated with torpedo like focus....They unfortunately continue to pile on their arguement towards the end of the book first proposing what I consider a slightly wooley new curriculum for college education, basically removing what they consider extraneous non-core subjects, like music, fine arts, etc, and replace them with a concentrated version of their classically derived curriculum of great books. I did not mind the presentation of their ideas, but found it tedious and unrealistic as an exercise in change. Recommending such changes as they argue for, knowing that they stand not a chance of happening in their lifetimes strikes me as a waste of intellectual effort and they would have been better served dealing with the realilty of our higher education structure as it is and suggesting changes begin to bend the curve of ignorance of our classical heritage......better yet, I would have, based on my own personal experience preferred some thoughts on how to bring classical education down to the high school level where creative thinking and exposure to new ideas really should begin. These observations notwithstanding, Hansen and Heath make a sound arguement and their book began a conversation (in 1998) that needed to be made....it appears that someone listened at least partly given the greater emphasis, interest in and popularity of all things Greek in recent years. A very good book.
