#3 in the Josefina main series in my opinion. I have a lot of the same mixed feelings about this book that I had for Meet Josefina. I really like Josefina as a character. She is sweet, kind, caring, hardworking, and wants to please the adults around her. She doesn't whine or complain, but her emotions are also described in depth; she isn't just a one-dimensional character. And the depiction of the girls doing chores and also of their religious faith are historically accurate and realistic, much more so than many of the other American Girl books. And I like (in theory) that the book focuses on Josefina and her family rather than on exciting adventures outside of her family; it meant I could get more immersed in Josefina's world. So I really WANTED to love this book. But yet again, the experience of reading this book felt slow and a bit tedious. I guess this is similar to how I loved Samantha as a character but felt that her books were uneven. Or maybe my reaction to them is more similar to my experience reading the Marie-Grace and Cecile series; there SHOULD be a lot of exciting things about 1853 New Orleans, and Marie-Grace is a sweet character, but I just couldn't get very emotionally invested in the books because they felt like they were written at a distance and like not very much happened in them. Josefina is a precious girl and I love her, but I don't think I'm enjoying the experience of reading her series very much. I liked the plot (in theory more than in practice, unfortunately) of Francisca and to a lesser extent the other girls feeling nervous that Tia Dolores's presence and all the changes she brings will lead them further away from their mother and perhaps to even forget her. I was surprised when Francisca raised that concern; I thought based on what we'd seen in the book so far that she might be worried about Tia Dolores trying to marry her dad and replace her mom, but I was glad that wasn't the case. Francisca's concern about things being different = feeling further away from her mom made sense to me, and I thought the book handled it sensitively. And I love the solution that Tia Dolores and Josefina found where learning to read could help keep their mother even closer by being able to read and write the words she'd said to them. Cards and letters and emails are such an important way for me to keep people I've lost close in my own life, so it had literally never occurred to me before how difficult it would be to remember a loved one when you can't read or write (and especially at that time when they didn't have photographs either, and probably they weren't in a financial position to commission a painting). I was side eyeing the scene with Teresita a bit...being literally kidnapped and taken away from your family is not the same as your mom dying, and also it's not clear to me what Teresita's relationship with Tia Dolores is. Is she a servant who gets paid...or is she a slave? Once again, Valerie Tripp's racial politics are not great. Also, Ana seems to never spend time with her children or her husband. Why make her married at all if they're never going to show her doing things that a wife or mother would do, since she's always with her sisters? This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
