One of the seminal American ghost stories, arguably the preeminent American ghost story, with a name as recognizable as any contemporary pop culture phenomenon (thanks in large part to its perpetual resurrection in Halloween tradition, Disney, Tim Burton and now numerous derivative and inspired works of fiction), The Legend of Sleepy Hollow indicates Washington Irving’s fascination with the mysterious, the legendary, and the macabre. Even when it was published in 1820 (less than half a century since the ending of the American Revolutionary War) it was about an America haunted by its past and the lingering specters of its inception (as an abstract idea struggling for independence rather than as a conquered land). Irving, being among the earliest generations of Europeans to call this new world his native home, was enamored of its ‘youthful promise’. It seems to have been very much in his character to create his own legend as someone who made himself ‘familiar with all…places famous in history or fable’, and who knew ‘every spot where a murder or robbery had been committed, or a ghost seen’. (This is according to the author’s own account). The story, as with the ‘drowsy, dreamy influence’ of the town of Sleepy Hollow itself, is, as the cliché goes, dripping with atmosphere from the rustic milieu to the folkloric superstitions of its inhabitants which can lead a modern reader to lament the loss of such fanciful reveries and eerie landmarks like Major Andre’s tree (‘regarded with a mixture of respect and superstition’), which one can imagine uprooted and supplanted by a 24-hour-drive-thru a century and a half hence. As for our fainthearted protagonist, the harsh, unflattering description of Ichabod Crane (‘one might have mistaken him for the genius of famine descending upon the earth, or some scarecrow eloped from a cornfield’), especially when juxtaposed with the imposing epitome of archetypal machismo made manifest in the alliteratively uber-brawny Brom “Boom Bones” Van Brunt, and the rivalry established between them over the affection of the immediately and intensely sexualized and coquettish Katrina Van Tassel, almost seems to initiate the narrative trope of the nerdy underdog and the intimidating jock a couple centuries prior to Revenge of the Nerds . Only in this case, the underdog does not come out on top, but is instead infused with the legend of the town after being rejected, humiliated, and speculatively killed by The Headless Hessian Horseman. The ambiguity of the tale’s conclusion is the ambiguity of history, to be received dubiously by any who can’t recognize their own susceptibility to particular interpretations of passed-down events. Legends endure because they are fascinating, exciting, and cathartically significant. The Legend of Sleepy Hollow is (to some extent) a nostalgic story about (to some extent) the power of nostalgia and its legend deserves to endure. I hope it is read to young people at Halloween-time for generations to come.
