First off, I loved this atmospheric, picturesque tale, meant for a women's audience. The Entertainment Weekly summarized the story as: " Her books unfold artfully without feeling fussed over or writing-workshopped to death ... [In] Here on Earth, she plumbs the interior lives of, among others, a drunken recluse, a heartsick teenage boy, an angry daughter, a near madman, a cuckolded husband, and three wounded women, with such modesty and skill that she seems to witness rather than invent their lives.” Sadly, the book did not explore the characters of the men in pain enough. But there was a gentle approach to these men who just could not let go of their hurt and had to deal with sorrow in their own lonely ways. The story was riveting, gripping, and beautifully written. The prose was outstanding. Jenkintown, near Olive Tree Lake in Massachusetts, had its collection of characters. Some lovable and others not; some were devils and others angels, or so the inhabitants believed. There were the illusive foxes roaming the woods, after most of them were eliminated since the hunting prohibition was lifted, only to leave an uncontrollable population of rabbits behind. But the foxes were there, lurking and waiting. Even the firefighters were relieved when there were no fires on the hill. Some localities were accompanied by just too much bad luck. When March Murray, and her teenage daughter Gwen, after nineteen years, returned from California to Fox Hill Farm, to attend the funeral of an old family friend, Judith Dale, more than just a grave were dug in the cold October weather. The past was also demanding a few determined diggers to expose the skeletons of long ago and how it influenced the hearts and minds of the current population in town. Love sometimes had to be renamed. Love could be set aside too. It did not always carry the sweet smell of the roses from Annabeth Cooper's garden. Nor did it reflect in memories of the siblings, Richard and Belinda's future. The foxes were lurking...waiting. And sometimes there simply was no time for crying. Life was always interfering. The day when Hollis saw the Unity, Peace and Double Delight roses bunched together in March's hand, he blamed a stupid dog, a stonewall and a rose garden for everything he lost. That was years ago. Many years later the townsfolk believed that the black snow was a sign of the devil coming to collect his due. But Forgiveness and Understanding forever brought the foxes back into the woods where they belonged. The was new hope that the rabbits will finally be brought under control. This is my first encounter with this author's work and it really convinced me to explore more of her beautiful writing.
