I got this in the Humble Max Your Mind Bundle, which I paid for. So essentially this is a book that touts itself as a shortcut to keeping important things in your brain simply by giving you mnemonic devices to help you with your recall: turning a list you have to memorize into an acronymn, turning an awkward acronymn into a sentence so it flows better, making numbers into letters so you can just say a word and the whole string is right there. Certain aspects of this book seem very useful! Associating bizarre images with things I must memorize has been helpful with remembering where certain things are. Others are the kind of stuff I do already: put your stuff in the same place every time so you don't lose it, when in doubt do some brute force memorization and note taking, etc. One of my biggest problems with this book is a very small aside in one of the first chapters: what if you just have the rhyme or mnemonic and totally forget what it's attatched to? The response is "well, you just have to know your list" essentially, which seems like it's the book's entire point is it not? Of course a lot of the lists are things I could see myself using basically in a class unless I were to rather suddenly dedicate myself to a field. Kings of England in ancient times, dates and events over large swaths of history otherwise mostly unconnected, parts of the human anatomy. That is my problem here: your memory does improve but over essentially information that is one and done laundry lists as an example, one that refers back to brute force, sitting down and memorizing it. See, I actually have very few problems with my memory. I still remember things from when I was six, more or less, and I can easily recall stuff I learned in school. Why is that? Because I was interested in those subjects and how the world works as many fields currently understand it. Memorization wasn't tough because I was a fairly voracious reader and seeker of information, I still am. I was looking for something to make it sharper but honestly I do a lot of this just from making my way through school. Would somebody have use for this? Yes, but honestly I feel like if you're not interested or excited by what you're learning as a book of study it's probably not going to help. It might be a shortcut for certain aspects of education but there isn't much to be done for someone who doesn't find it interesting. Cultivating an interest in a wide array of subjects seems like it would be a more valuable use of one's time and improve memory substantially. Show more
