This is a book that will make you realize how good your life is. It also gave me a new appreciation of being an American by birth and having the privilege of living in a free country. Kitty De Ruyter was born in Indonesia, on the island of Java. She and her family became prisoners of the Japanese during World War II. They had lived comfortable lives with servants and in a spacious home and lands. They suffered terribly, nearly starving, and being treated horribly. They survived and eventually were able to go to Holland, which was the father's homeland,on a freighter. But they still lived in poverty. They received a wonderful opportunity to immigrate to America which they did. This is the storyline, but the biggest takeaway from Kitty's story for me was her spiritual journey. Her nanny, her baboe, taught her about God, and to live a good life. Her mother, Mams, taught her to pray daily, and to have faith, and be positive in any circumstances. Mams looked for the good even in their enemies and treated everyone with love and respect and taught her children to do the same. Toward the end of the book, Kitty shares her religious journey's capstone as she followed her husband's lead to join the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He joined in Holland after she moved to America. Their story is quite unique in itself. She herself studied the church's teachings for two years before being baptized. She and her husband served in many capacities in the church organizations. They represent some of the most selfless people I've ever known about. She and her husband took in her Mams when she had Alzheimer's and the rest of the family thought she should be put in a nursing home. Bob, Kitty's husband, had promised Mams when she had lived with them earlier in their marriage that he would never let her be taken to a nursing home. Mams had expressed that people didn't take care of their own anymore. Bob kept his promise, and they speak lovingly of caring for her in their home, and how sacred the experience of her last few days was to them and their children. This book was very inspirational, and I feel more determined to live a more positive life, with less whining about and dissatisfaction with my trials. I will remember Kitty DeRuyter and her life story and attitude for a long time.
