As I mentioned in my review of Mearsheimer & Walt's The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy they bend over backwards about how the Israel lobby isn't a Jewish lobby, sometimes leading to unintentionally hilarious results. Around 80 % of the people in the lobby they themselves name in the book are Jewish, yet somehow we are supposed to believe that that's insignificant when that group make up roughly 2 % of the population. Their argument is basically that because not every Jew supports the actions of the lobby, it can't be described as Jewish. An argument which is so nonsensical it can be discarded immediately. If the criteria is that everyone within the population a certain group claims to represent must support said group for it to be legitimate, then no lobby organizations would count. Even though perhaps not all gun owners support the NRA, it's still a gun lobby. (Funnily enough they later write about an "Arab lobby" without applying their own criteria). Findley is much more frank and honest in his description of the lobby as being a Jewish one and the examples he lists are countless. And of course they don't have to register as foreign agents in accordance with FARA since they have American politicians by the balls. It's interesting how a country's internal political process has been hijacked by a small interest group doing the bidding of another state. Ever since a corrupt neoliberal NAFTA-hugging capitalist managed to lose an election that was rigged in her favor against another corrupt neoliberal capitalist, Western politicians and their loyal lackeys in the media have screamed at the top of their lungs about Russian "meddling". Not only is the hypocrisy mind-boggling given US and European constant meddling in other countries politics, the omertá regarding Israeli meddling is absolute. Just to give one example, Swedish public service broadcaster SVT published a clip online where a journalist set out to explain the close ties between Israel and the US. Of course it was filled with platitudes about how there are "an enormous amount of people with Jewish or Israeli background in the US, which explains the close ties not only between the two countries but also between people". I wrote him and pointed out that Jews make up about 2 % of the US population, which can hardly be described as "an enormous amount". I asked him why he didn't mention the Israel lobby which, and this fact should be uncontroversial, is the single most important reason. Imagine trying to explain US gun legislation without mentioning the NRA. His answer was in essence "I didn't think of it". A great addition to this book would be the the fantastic documentary series The Lobby by Al Jazeera, which didn't dare to air its second season due to American pressure. Luckily, both seasons are available on Youtube if you're truly interested in seeing what meddling actually looks like. The Lobby season 1: The UK Episode 1: Young Friends of Israel Episode 2: The Training Session Episode 3: An Anti-Semitic Trope Episode 4: The Takedown The Lobby season 2: The United States Episode 1: The Covert War Episode 2: Managing Elites Episode 3: The Witch Hunt Episode 4: Marketing Occupation
