I thoroughly enjoyed this book which is so much more than your average travel book. Before leaving for this trip Wright pretty much devours every book on the Maya that he could find (he finds more books on his journey and consumes them too), this knowledge is well used when giving a history of the Mayan Culture. The book can be heavy going at times but this is well balanced by the people he meets, their love of life and sense of humour gives the perfect bit of respite before the reader is taken on the next part of this educational journey. This book is another example of just how bad my education was at school and how much historical amnesia there is in the UK. I knew the Spanish had caused a lot of damage to this civilisation but I don’t think I grasped just how bad it was, reading about how individual cities were destroyed in such an awful manner was harrowing and becomes more personal than thinking they went over and nearly wiped them out. England and the USA managed to get in on the act too, causing more wars and getting murderers into power. There is so much killing in these three countries, I’m amazed there is anybody still left standing and that shows just how clever they were, most would succumb to the religious terrors that the Spanish brought with them, but the Maya adapted Christianity in such a way that they were able to keep many of their beliefs. Wright spends a lot of his time looking into the Maya calendar and gives quite a comprehensive account of how it all works, I found this very more interesting than expected, it comes across as very complex, but after a while once you get your head around it, it ain’t too much different to what we use today, they have their cycles like we do, even better is their days are named, have symbols and meanings for the day. The book was first published in 1989 and this edition has an Afterword giving an update for the few years after people thought the Mayan Calendar claimed the world would end and it is sad to see things haven’t changed much, still so much death is happening. This has to be the go to book for finding out out Mayan Culture, Wright has worked tirelessly to produce a comprehensive account of the people and their lands. Blog Review: https://felcherman.wordpress.com/2020...
