The Pillars of the Earth is one of the best books I’ve read. Who wudda thunk 12th Century England could be so riveting? It’s all centred around the struggles experienced by Monk Phillip, the Prior of Kingsbridge (first seen in the prequel to this series – The Evening and the Morning , which was set in the late 9th Century. Phillip wants to build a cathedral in Kingsbridge, this is the hug of the novel, and is the catalyst for all these characters to do their thing. If you want to: • Feel so mad, and truly despise the worst of the worst in people (yes, I’m talking about you William – you bastard!!). There are many other bastards too! • Swoon so hard you just want to sleep all afternoon with a smile on your dial. • Learn about building – to the level that you could, in fact, unbelievably – build your own cathedral. If you had the time. • Understand quarrying. Fall in love with Stonemasonry. • Acquaint yourself with characters, real ones, you may have only heard about in passing – like Thomas Beckett, King Stephen, the first two King Henry’s. • Travel by foot to France and Spain encountering a whole lot of motley and no so motley characters along the way. • Start muttering under your breath “………Prior Phillip wouldn’t approve of this.” • Be immersed in politics at a local and wider level, making you realise that nothing has actually changed. Nothing. • Start sending emails to any people you know called William to say you don’t want to be friends with them anymore. • Start wearing sandals (but not with socks because we still be conscious of good fashion, no matter how excited we are). • Change your name to Jack. • Trade wool on a level never seen before – because you can, want to, and need the cash. • Learn how to do felting. • Want to celebrate because someone you despise has died (I’m not ashamed to say). • Go days without eating, showering, or going to the toilet because this is just so, so good. • Walk the streets of this modern world, confronting strangers with phrases like “ Welcome, good sir. Wilt thou take meat and ale, and then we may sit by the fire and hear tell of England’s victory over Argentina in the Football .” • Make and wear your own Monk Habit, surprising friends, family, and strangers when they see you. • Know what it feels like to go hungry. Have your throat cut. Cut someone’s throat. Be assaulted in the vilest ways imaginable. • Be shocked, truly, genuinely surprised by an event. • Want to move to Kingsbridge and help them with literally ANYTHING!!!!! • Understand the murky and scurrilous politics between state and church. • Want to buy a sword. • Never look at a cathedral in the same way again. ................... Well, this is the book for you!!! You know, without banging on too much – I could read another 10,000 pages about this crew, with the entire book devoted to a workshop for the good folks of Kingsbridge to develop operational strategies, a marketing plan and a budget for the challenges expected in the fiscal year 1175/76 CE. Yes, it’s that good.
