Solid first Chess book for teens and adults. Seirawan is a gifted writer (unlike many Chess authors) and explains the basic components of the game really well. Unlike many books that say they're about the fundamentals (looking at you Capablanca), Seirawan doesn't immediately expect the reader to know what the pieces do. You can be a complete neophyte and pick up this very accessible book. That about coves the first chapter. The rest cover more helpful concepts to the more advanced beginner. They are: Force: The overall firepower the player has (where it counts). Time: How quick the player can get down the board and execute their plans. Space: The spacial control and general mobility of the pieces. Pawn Structure: How pawns control the board, determine the course of the game (a big emphasis is placed on what NOT to do. Overall, I found these categorizations helpful though I already learned much of them from Capablanca's Fundamentals. I recommend reading the books back to back as I did. Seirawan and Capablanca made wonderful teachers for me at about the same grade level. Seirawan is the smiley affable type you remember because he patiently explains thing to you in ways you remember. Capablanca is the grim type who expects you to work things out for yourself . Go with what resonates with your more first. This book does not get a fifth star only because I found the instructive games kinda lame. Helpful, but not as exciting. Capablanca picked much, much better games that I'll likely play through again for the pure joy of it. In summary, this is a fine first book for the 0-1,100 ELO crowd if you combine it with a diet of beginner mating puzzles (Bobby Fischer Teaches Chess did the trick for me as a first book). Those above may see it as an opportunity to see the fundamental concepts under a new light, but won't likely find anything outstanding. If you're in that boat, I think you would benefit more from returning to one of your own formative books. I'll return to a couple passages in the future, I'm sure. This book has earned Seirawan a spot as one of my Chess mentors. I'll be reading other books in this series (possibly all of them).
