Diana Athill died in early 2019 at age 101. Stet: An Editor’s Life was first published when Athill was 83. Between her birth in 1917 and her death in 2019, Athill did a lot of living and a lot of editing, most notably at Allan Wingate and then at André Deutsch Limited. Stet leads the reader to guess that Athill was intensely interesting and intensely irritating in equal measures. Stet contains two parts. Part One provides snippets of Athill’s observations on her life: she’s masterful at quick, deft portrayals. Here she describes her childhood: "It never occurred to anyone in that family [meaning Athill's] that reading could be a duty, so it never occurred to me. Reading was what one did indoors, as riding was what one did out of doors: an essential part of life, rather than a mere pleasure.” And here’s Athill on her romances: ”At that time I was all but unsexed by sadness, because the man I was engaged to, who was serving in the Middle East, had first gone silent on me, then married someone else, then been killed. A little later I would start to find that promiscuity cheered me up. . .” Perhaps my favorites are Athill’s comments on the vicissitudes of publishing. Authors complaining of the cosmic unfairness of publishers, take note: ”The only publishing figures that remain with me are the shaming £25 we paid Jean Rhys for an option to see her novel Wide Sargasso Sea , and the impressive (at that time) £30,000 we paid for the serial rights of Franz von Papen’s memoirs” . Publishers bemoaning their bad luck in accepting manuscripts, should also take note of Athill’s observation about André Deutsch’s history with Philip Roth. After publishing Roth’s first two books, they decided that his third, When She Was Good , didn’t come alive. ”So we thought ‘No more silly money’ and decided to calculate the advance on precisely what we reckoned the book would sell — which I think was four thousand copies at the best — and that was not accepted. As far as I know When She Was Good was not a success — but the next novel Philip wrote was Portnoy’s Complaint . This space represents a tactful silence. ” Athill uses a simple measure in identifying her favorite authors to work with: ”The ideal was to receive a script that could go through unchanged (Brian Moore, V. S. Naipaul and Jean Rhys were outstanding providers of such scripts. . .).” Part Two provides more discursive recollections about some of Athill’s famous and not-so-famous authors: Mordecai Richler, Brian Moore, Alfred Chester, V. S. Naipaul, Molly Keane, and Jean Rhys. Jean Rhys obsessives should read Athill’s chapter on her. Athill despaired over Rhys: ”No one who has read Jean Rhys’s first four novels can suppose that she was good at life; but no one who never met her could know how very bad at it she was.” But Athill also deeply admired Rhys. Here Athill discusses Rhys assembling the short story collection Sleep It Off, Lady , in her decrepit mid-eighties: ”The proofs of Sleep It Off, Lady came in from the printer while Jean was in London, and she told me she was worried about checking them because she feared she was no longer capable of the necessary concentration. So I suggested that I should read them aloud to her, going very slowly, and doing no more than twenty minutes at a time. As soon as we began she became a different person, her face stern, her eyes hooded, her concentration intense. When I was halfway down the first galley-proof she said: ‘Wait — go back to the beginning — it must be about three lines down — where it says ‘and then’. Put a full stop instead of the ‘and’, and start a new sentence.’ She was carrying the whole thing in her mind’s eye. / The tiny incident seemed to me to give a clear glimpse of the central mystery of Jean Rhys: the existence within a person so incompetent and so given to muddle and disaster — even to destruction — of an artist as strong as steel.” Stet contains several wonderful quick bits: the ornate men’s room with a piano in the André Deutsch offices, in which Athill’s colleague regularly played mood music; the unpromising early days of the Booker; and the ins-and-outs and ups and downs of estimable British publishing houses. All in all, Diana Athill’s Stet: An Editor’s Life is a fascinating memoir by an indomitable woman who participated in, shaped, and observed twentieth century literary history. 4.5 stars
