James R. White's The Roman Catholic Controversy seems oddly titled. I managed to see his idea of the controversy to be a willingness on the part of some Protestants, and even Evangelicals, to minimize the importance of the theological distance between Rome and Reformed. I would guess that those who see that as a controversy would not be in need of being convinced by this book. What the book does aim to do is put Roman Catholic beliefs logically outside of the Gospel as defined by the New Testament. Some of his arguments are more persuasive than others, but ultimately I feel the book lacked the ability to bring about a change of mind in someone who is more open-minded toward Rome than he. I was especially alarmed by chapter three of the book in which it states that since the New Testament speaks of a Gospel of peace, and Catholics do not believe that one can be certain of his status before God as one who is eternally secure at any moment prior to departing this earth, then the Catholic faith cannot bring peace of mind, and thus cannot truly be in keeping with the Gospel. This to me is not a solidly Biblical argument, and to initiate one's critique of Catholicism in such a less than scholarly manner does not lend much credibility to the author. He is essentially also throwing any non-Calvinist believers under the bus along with Catholics here, though he's not willing to follow his logic to the point of stating that. I also question his trust in the clarity of the Scriptures with regard to the Gospel - what is required to be saved. If it is so clear, why can so many scholarly and well-meaning people disagree about it? But to be as invested in sola scriptura as he is requires one to see the Bible as clear, able to interpret itself, and self-authenticating. His attempt to paint the Catholic view of authority as being the one truly guilty of circular reasoning seems weak. His section on the Catholic view of development of doctrine is likewise feeble, but interesting in the light of Pope Francis's teachings that appear to reverse the Church's prior teachings on capital punishment. I was drawn into reflection on this based on the article by Monica Migliorino Miller in the December 2018 issue of The New Oxford Review . If anything makes the unquestioned authority of the church seem to be a doctrine ready to topple, it is the reckless teaching of Pope Francis. And speaking of the papacy, the book seems to bring its strongest case against the theology of the papacy. White brings up several convincing points in the New Testament that would make one question this stance of the Catholic Church. I could go on. Though there are a couple good arguments he makes against the Catholic Mass as a sacrifice, he doesn't seem to deal with John 6 very convincingly. The theology of justification isn't handled well by him. He is not able to show persuasively that all the passages dealing with it are speaking of forensic justification that is imputed and not speaking of the infusion of Christ's righteousness in those who are justified. If the just shall LIVE by faith, that means a bit more than just having a legal slight of hand going on in one's heavenly accounts. He shows the weaknesses of extreme Mariology in terms of Biblical evidence against it. He also pokes a pretty big hole in some of the beliefs about purgatory. But I see two problems that make the book less than capable of warning his audience away from Rome. First, he claims that the church has authority to teach, but isn't willing to invest it with any Holy Spirit guided guarantee to be able to teach the truth. He is willing to give that guarantee to individuals, but not to the church as a whole. Secondly, I just never sense anywhere in the book that he has any admiration or love for any Roman Catholic. If I felt he were trying out of love for misguided people to steer them toward the truth, I would be more drawn to his arguments. Instead, I sense an eagerness to shoot down the tricksters who are trying to toy with his Gospel of peace.
