”'If you ever looked at me once with what I know is in you, I would be your slave.’”- Wuthering Heights It’s been almost twenty years since March Murray has fled her hometown in Massachusetts, and even longer since the love of her life and the other half of her soul, Hollis, has disappeared. But when her beloved family housekeeper Judith Dale dies, March makes the trek back to Jenkinstown with her teenage daughter Gwen to handle the estate. And who else should be back there as well? Hollis. Adopted siblings and tempestuous teenage lovers in the past, March just can’t seem to keep away from Hollis. However, when their love affair is reignited, it threatens to consume everything and everyone around them, including each other. There’s an old saying that state with age, comes wisdom, and I believe that reading this book was the perfect example of that. When I first read this book in my early twenties, I was still in the mindset that while Wuthering Heights was a toxic love story, it was still pretty tame. So when I read this book by Alice Hoffman, by the end of the book I was steaming. This book was full of even more despicable people doing even more despicably vile things to the point where it was melodramatic and Lifetime movie-esque. But that’s exactly the point of the original. I think I was just too young to see it. Nenia was actually the one who inspired me to reread this book. She had recently read it and gave it a glowing review. Mainly it was the for the writing and the descriptions, but it got my interest peaked. Was my blind rage over the fact that Alice Hoffman had seemingly trashed one of my (at the time) beloved favorite novels of all time clouding my vision as to how this book actually was? Now that I’m older and have reread both Wuthering Heights and this book, I can see the parallels and what Alice Hoffman was trying to do, and it works brilliantly. Take the tale of two horribly selfish, self-centered, conniving, and manipulative people and throw them together and you get a disaster party. What Alice Hoffman did, and I think she did brilliantly, is she picked up where Emily Bronte left off, and even went places where I think Emily Bronte was hinting at, but probably couldn’t due to social constraints and morals. Make no mistake. This book has two main characters who are despicable people doing despicable things and not even giving a damn. Hollis is even worse than Heathcliff in his behavior. He’s a straight up wife beater and animal abuser (which automatically puts him in the garbage pile.) He’s a cad and a jerk and a control freak who doesn’t believe in loving objects or things; just possessing them. In March Murray, this iteration’s Cathy Earnshaw, we see what might have happened if Cathy had left Edgar to be with Heathcliff… and it ain’t pretty folks. Cathy was always pretty strong-willed in the book, and March starts out that way. But in restarting her semi-incestuous relationship with Hollis, her personality and character diminishes until she’s nothing more than a meek dormouse. She even partakes a bit in the animal abuse by continuously locking the family dog somewhere so she and Hollis can get it on. Speaking of incestuous relationships, Alice Hoffman even keeps the cousin relationship going with Gwen and Hank, March’s nephew and Gwen’s cousin. Hank’s mother died in a house fire and his father Alan (March’s brother), drank himself into a stupor because of grief. Hollis then takes Hank to live with him and raise. I had mixed feelings about this relationship. On the one hand, DRAMA. It also helps that Gwen and Hank are pretty much the only likable and sympathetic characters in the book, thrown together by circumstances. And I really, really wanted them to be happy. Truly this almost-thirty-year-old woman was rooting for them. And yet… would this really have flown in the ‘90s? And nobody made a big deal out of it? It’s like the situation with Circe. I want them to be happy… just not like that, LOL!!! One thing that didn’t change from my initial reading was an overwhelming and intense desire to move to Jenkinstown. The writing is absolutely gorgeous. I didn’t even mind the purple prose writing. I want to live in a town with a town square surrounded by open fields and foxes and rabbits and apple orchards and constantly smells like cinnamon bread. Give me the New England seasons and the changing of the leaves and the cozy cafés and small town traditions. MAKE IT HAPPEN, DARN YOU!!! This is one of the rare instances where I changed my opinion drastically after a reread, but in this case, I think it’s warranted. With time comes wisdom and experience, and I think I was just too inexperienced at the time to fully appreciate what the author was attempting to do. The writing and setting is still gorgeous, but most importantly, she took what Emily Bronte started and explored the places where she probably wanted to go but couldn’t because of the time period. What you get is a hauntingly dark yet impossible to out down tale about the perils of toxic love, secrets, and how sometimes love can be so all consuming it threatens to destroy everything. Plus if you're interested, I've kept my old review so you can see my review from five years ago, haha! Synopsis: Emily Bronte, sobbing incoherently: WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO MY PRECIOUS BABY? I DIED AT THIRTY AND ONLY EVER GOT WRITE ONE FULL-LENGTH NOVEL IN MY SHORT TIME ON EARTH AND THIS IS WHAT YOU DO WITH IT? ALICE HOFFMAN, I CURSE YOU TO THE HEAVENS. Biblio-Babble It’s Like Kryptonite: Every reader has their kryptonite- a genre or trope that they just can’t seem to stay away from and that draws them in like a moth to a flame. For me, one of those is Wuthering Heights retellings. I can’t help it; I’ve got to read them. I don’t even look at the reviews beforehand. I’ll read that sucker. I just can’t help myself. Naturally, I found this book, saw it was a retelling of one of my favorite novels, and aggressively hit the mouse button to put it on my TBR. Goodbye, I’m Moving: One thing the author did do that saved this otherwise atrocious read from being a total garbage fire is create a setting that made me want to move there. Her descriptions of the quaint, fictional New England town of Jenkintown, Massachusetts were so descriptive and evocative of an idyllic fall on the East Coast that it made me want to move back East and experience fall in an area where they experience actual seasons. Besides those elements, it was all downhill from there, children. All downhill. Oprah, Are You Okay?: It’s no secret that Oprah’s Book Club Selections and I don’t get along. I couldn’t stand The Underground Railroad and A Tale of Two Cities is one of my least favorite books of all time. What I gather about her selections is that they deal with a lot of heavy issues and are books that are designed to make you seriously think about important social topics. Therefore, I can’t even begin to comprehend why Oprah chose this book to be one of her selections. Frankly put, this book is a literary bodice ripper. It’s a book with pretty purple writing that’s full of white people making extremely poor decisions. This book is so anti-Oprah Book Club that part of me wonders how she ever wound up making the decision to include this in her prestigious club. The poor editing and numerous grammatical errors also added to the puzzle that was how this book managed to snag a spot. I Want Your Sex: One thing I notice a lot in Wuthering Heights retellings are that there’s a shit ton of sex included. Maybe Emily Bronte wanted to include some explicit hanky-panky in the book but couldn’t because of such prim societal standards. We’ll never know, but modern authors who rework her novel almost never fail to include a little steamy sex in there. Hell, there’s even a Wuthering Heights erotica retelling (which is in good company with Jane Eyre Laid Bare. ) This book is no exception. We’ve got all sorts of sex going on here. Standard sex, kinky sex, sink sex, car sex, incest sex… you name it, it’s there. I guess this goes to show that Oprah isn’t that much of a prude, either. That’s Not How the Force Works: There are a lot of elements of this book that make it a failure, and one of those reasons is some of the circumstances the author chose to have her characters become involved in. I don’t think the author took into account how although some of the plot points made sense back in the 1800s, they don’t translate well into modern times. For example, Heathcliff is an orphan foundling boy that Mr. Earnshaw finds wandering, brings home, and just makes him part of the family. Alice Hoffman decided to just straight up twin and have her version of Mr. Murray do the same thing: he just finds Hollis, brings him home, and he just… becomes a part of the family like that. No, honey child. That’s not how it works. Where’s CPS? Where’s the case worker? Where’s the long, legal process to foster or adopt this kid? No one in their right mind would be able to get away with this kind of nonsense. And are we just going to not talk about the fact that Gwen Cooper and Hank Murray embark on a relationship even though they’re first cousins? And nobody in the town bats an eye at that? And their relationship in and of itself is illegal in the state of Massachusetts and punishable by up to 20 years in jail? THIS BOOK WAS WRITTEN IN 1997. It’s not like this law is a new phenomena or anything. Again, relationships between cousins was quite common in 19th century England; it’s against the law here in most U.S. states. Purple Rain: The prose in this book is so purple. SO. MUCH. PURPLE. If it were any more purple Barney the Dinosaur would have competition. It’s like when you’re reading that book you’re assigned to read in school and you have to analyze why the author chose to make the sky that color. And in your head you’re thinking “The sky is blue because IT’S FUCKING BLUE. I think Alice Hoffman belongs to the school of “Go Big or Go Home” descriptive writing school. The sky can’t just be one color; she had to use a whole Crayola Box. ”On the day of Judith Dale’s funeral, the sky is as gray as soapstone.” ”All this time she has lived in California, where light is so lemon-colored and clear it is almost impossible to forget there are other places in the world.” ”He knocked at the door after delivering the bricks needed to repair the chimney early on Monday evening, when the sky was the color of a velvet ribbon falling over the hills.” The air always has to be smelling of something unusual. The food ones weren’t bad, ”Over on the corner of Elm Street and Main, the bakery must have loaves of the cinnamon bread they’re so famous for in the oven, because the scent is everywhere; it’s as if someone has tossed the dough over the town.” but for some reason the author decided that emotions has to have a smell as well. ”It was probably the scent of fury, which, in Hollis’ case, was overpowering.” ”He smelled quote strongly of soap, since Mrs. Dale had insisted he take a shower each day, but also of some other scorching scent, which March would later come to believe was anger.” Aca-what? We’re getting way too descriptive over here, ma’am. Stupid and Vicious and Cruel: Wuthering Heights is a book about vicious and cruel people who are vicious and cruel to everyone around them. I think one fatal flaw readers have when it comes to Bronte’s book is that they categorize it as a romance. NO. It’s not a romance; it’s a character study about the destructive power of an obsessive love. Hoffman not only took that element and ran with it, she plunged off a cliff with it and ended up face planting in the process. Like Bronte’s novel, Hoffman’s book is also about stupid and vicious and cruel people, but it’s far more destructive. It’s made worse by the fact that she chose for March Murray (her modern-day Cathy Ernshaw), to live. And she made Hollis (her Heathcliff), an absolute monster. He’s not just consumed by his passion for Cathy; he becomes a monster because of it. He’s physically and emotionally abusive to the point where March just starts to waste away and NOBODY DOES ANYTHING ABOUT IT. He manipulate her daughter, Gwen, into agreeing to get her mother to move in with him at his house where he leaves her completely isolated. Bronte’s Catherine wouldn’t have stood for it. She was just as tempestuous and temperamental as Heathcliff was, and she would have fought back. March just becomes a submissive shell, leaving behind all the characteristics and traits that made her literary counterpart mean something. ******************************** This book was a hot mess. I don’t know what juice Oprah was drinking when she read this and decided this would be her next book club selection, but it must have been some really strong shit. With its overly purple prosey writing, despicable characters, and a complete failure to update the book’s plot elements with the modern times, this book would make Bronte spin in her grave.
