First read of a non-Fleming Bond novel - and inspired to do so as Goldeneye - thanks to my age when the film came out and the legendary N64 game - is my defining Bond film. I'm aware this is a novelisation FROM the screenplay, so I feel bad about being negative about it, but I have come to really enjoy the contrast between the literary and film versions of Bond, rather than seeing the screen version in print. This does (expectedly) read like an action movie script and for the most part it is thoroughly entertaining and exciting - how can it not, as this is exactly what the film delivers. However, one of the main things I enjoy about reading novel that has been adapted to screen is seeing the choices made by the screenplay writer in terms of how to practically adapt it to the big screen. How they cut or add dialogue and exposition, scale back scenes that would be too hard to film, combine scenes and add new ones to make things more bombastic etc. Being so familiar with the film (and because this book so closely follows the film) I found it impossible to not just play the film in my head. This is for the die hard fans of Goldeneye as it does give a small amount of extra insights and expansions on the story thanks to Bond's internal monologue so we are able to read Bond's thought processes (the highlight being the famous stolen tank set piece). The dialogue is a bit more fleshed out throughout this which allows for some extra exposition, helping to develop the characters slightly. Although there are some changes which I didn't like (no 'For England James?' 'No, for me' gone!?). There are a few longer scenes and a pinch of extra scenes (such as a small prelude to the damn mission) which slightly try to fill in some of the location jumps and plot holes (such as why there was a sled outside the radar station) in the film. The extra scene of a meeting between Bond and the new M (who he certainly clashes with) was one of my favourites as it helped to explain the change from the old and new M, how she had had his office renovated and a nostalgia and fondness for the original M. On the whole I really didn't feel this added enough extra to the story to make it a worthwhile read for most people. I feel this was a very restrictive although perhaps a refreshingly easy one to knock out for Gardener - but I can't help feel his talents as a writer have probably been wasted in this. It leaves me eager to return to my read through of the original Fleming novels.
