As with most short story collections, this is a mixed bag. For me, though, this one was like unexciting trail mix that I had to pick through to get to the good bits. It's going to take a while to get through comments on all the stories, but I'll update it in pieces. "Bed & Breakfast" Gene Wolfe I kept getting bored with this story. The language was stilted, the main female character was bland, and the story didn't offer anything interesting enough to pull me into it. "Chatting with Anubis" Harlan Ellison This one was certainly intriguing. It's written as a letter to document a significant event, which works well. Making the narrator Chinese felt like an arbitrary choice to add a touch of something ancient and exotic--a costume rather than a fundamental part of the character. Also, I have no doubt many people will like the clever surprise ending, but it left me rolling my eyes. "The Ripening Sweetness of Late Afternoon" Douglas Clegg Despite the beautiful title of this one, it just couldn't hold my attention. I flipped back and forth through it, and toward the end it got a little more interesting, but for all the talk of atonement for the murder of two gay boys, there was nothing to indicate that anyone had given up their bigotry or were sorry for the murders, apart from the fact that the town was being punished. "A Wreath for Marley" Max Allan Collins "Smart Guy" Darrell Schweitzer "The Great Escape" Ian Watson "Hell is for Children" Nancy Holder "Dropoff" Brian Herbert & Marie Landis "Canto (Evocare!)" James S. Dorr "Tunnels" Rick Hautala "Hell is a Personal Place" Brian Lumley "The Kingsbury Technique" Sean Doolittle & Wayne Allen Sallee "The Bridge on the River Styx" Jody Lynn Nye "Islington" Ian McDonald "Get on Board the D Train" Gary Gygax "Epiphany" Rick R. Reed "Screams at the Gateway to Fame" Ray Garton "Elegy for a Maestro" Alexandra Elizabeth Honigsberg "Above It All" Robert J. Sawyer "The Burdens" Steve Rasnic Tem "A Taste of Heaven" James Lovegrove "Ferryman" Doug Murray "Return to Gehenna" Storm Constantine "Dark Society" Brian Aldiss "Office Space" Richard Lee Byers "Among the Handlers" Michael Bishop
