This book was first published 21 years ago. If I'd read it back then it would have terrified me because of some of the scenarios he illustrates. I have since parented and survived through even worse examples than are shown in the book. Yeah, in some ways I wish I'd read it sooner, but the ideas are still potentially helpful for my current situation of parenting an older teenager and young adults. Our world has become much more complicated and challenging for parents since 1999. Evil is even more pervasive and relentless. Cell phones have changed everything. Even so, many ideas in this book are potentially helpful if approached in the spirit in which they are given. Trying to emulate Christ is a timeless idea. Despite it's overly simple approach to an ever more difficult parenting world, this book's ideas have exceeded my expectations. I like that the author shares potential dialogs, even though I don't like how he addresses the child as "Son" or how he sounds a little condescending at times. I like that the scriptures he shares are all from the Bible so that the wider Christian world might see their worth. I like that he quotes famous religious leaders. I like that he quotes modern day prophets and apostles, though he doesn't state that's what they are. He doesn't name his religious beliefs though they're clearly from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He's trying to reach out to parents who are believers and followers of Jesus Christ, not just to one denomination. I like that he encourages parents to be happy; to not beat themselves up with guilt; to not revile against their children (sometimes stay silent or walk away); to not use coercive techniques (no violence, lecturing, manipulation, preaching, or reasoning); to create a place where children feel loved, wanted, and safe; to use natural consequences instead of punishments; to not give up (don't kick your teenager out of the house); and to reinforce the positive rather than reinforce the negative. When in doubt, think about the way Jesus Christ treated people. I want to remember his formula for setting up choices which he models after the encounter between the Lord and Adam and Eve. It's probably the most important reminder from the book: "1. Parents must first teach children what they can do. 2. Parents state their expectations of their children. 3. Parents clearly state the consequences that can/will be 'earned.' 4. Parents allow children to make choices. 5. Parents let the consequences of these choices speak for themselves." This book has helped me want to give more positive reinforcement, to keep my emotions under control during challenges with my children, to leave the responsibility of consequences firmly on the children's shoulders, and to make our home an emotionally safer place where my children and grandchildren feel loved and where they want to be. I don't think anything can possibly take "the pain out of parenting" like the title says, but this book certainly has ideas that help manage and reduce the agony.
