I’m running a marathon in 2 hours and I read this book way too late - after the most difficult training weeks had already passed and I was already tapering. So it was very interesting to read it almost retrospectively - and see how differently I ended up training from what’s advised in this book. There were also many similarities - I did form my training plan according to all the information I found on the internet after all (and undeniably, perhaps shamefully, an AI-generated training plan was used as a starting point) and I visited Hal Higdon’s website often to tailor it. My plan was pretty standard: I had 3 days of running per week; an easy run, a long run, and a “quality” run where I would ideally work on speed or strength. I progressively increased the distances (with cutbacks every 3 weeks) until my long run reached 32 km. Since I was training for 22 weeks (as opposed to the standard 18), I actually got to do 3 runs over 30km. However, my weekly total mileage was on the lower end. I tried to run my easy run truly easy. As for my long run, I probably should have ran it slower, but I was training with my boyfriend so we chose a compromise pace (too slow for him, too fast for me). Hal Higdon’s programs also feature a progressive increase of distance with cutbacks every few weeks. His long runs also peak at around 32km, and the last 3 weeks is devoted to tapering (where one cuts back intensely to allow for recovery and rest before the race). According to Hal Higdon, a beginner marathoner should focus mostly on increasing mileage and their main goal should be to finish the marathon. All the runs should be at a slow pace or occasionally, the intended “race pace”. I’m a beginner marathoner, though not exactly a newbie to running - I’ve been running more or less consistently for the last 5 years or so. I understand where he is coming from with his advice - speed training and strength training does increase chances of injury. Coincidentally, I did get injured (hip pain), but it wasn’t so bad that I would have to pause the training (not advised!) Hal Higdon also talks a lot about overtraining and fatigue. During my peak weeks, I was extremely tired - especially on the day of the long run and the day after. I didn’t know that this was not normal. I thought it’s expected - in my mind, marathon training was supposed to be hard. The programs here also often feature 4-5 days of running, as opposed to my 3 days, and the total milage per week would be slightly higher than what I ran. Looking back, maybe it would have been wiser to decrease the quality run frequency to once every two weeks and add one more day of easy training overall to increase my mileage. The book itself is very colloquial and contains lots of advice on how to make a training program, what types of trainings there are, how one should eat, and some really cool race day tips, such as breakfast (ideally eaten 3 hours before the race) and no more fluids with less than 2 hours to go (to avoid unnecessary bathroom breaks). There are quite a few passages about qualifying for the Boston Marathon, which requires a very strict qualification time - it got me wondering if I would ever be so fast. Before reading this book, I was convinced this marathon would be my first and last. Now I’m not so sure. Perhaps I still have a few more in me, but maybe I shouldn’t speak too soon, especially right before my race! I will add an update here on how it went. **Update** It went pretty well! I was feeling confident and paced myself until 21km. Afterwards I sped up a bit until 34km or so, when I hit the mythical wall and had to pace myself again. My time was 4:20:51. Hurray!!
