Well. I had some really good childhood memories of Mark of a Cat , which I read several times when I was a teen, but that was a good fifteen years ago and I haven't read it since. I've never read the sequel, which only published in this omnibus and, as it went out of print almost as soon as it was published, is rare to find and apparently highly coveted. I went to a bit of trouble to find a copy of the omnibus... and it's just that, now that I've obtained it, I don't think it's quite worth the desire. The thing is, Mark of the Cat by itself was an imperfect novel with a lot of plot holes in it, and Year of the Rat not only fails to fill in those holes, it introduces three times the number of new ones. Characters will be of major importance for five chapters, then exit offstage and never be heard from again. Characters interacted for no explicable purpose and without any resulting reason. Characters completely changed personal goals and personalities. Massive amounts of plot were handwaved. The villains were suddenly multiple and without any connection to each other. There isn't any pacing, there isn't any finesse. And the loose tarot-card structure of the whole first book? Well, the second book adds a sixth suit. The opening author's note made it clear that Norton developed this story because of her observations of Karen Kuykendall's tarot artwork, but I got the feeling throughout reading this that her observations gave her only an idea of a story; the published works seem like rough sketches or outlines of that idea than stories proper. I found the books inventive and even fascinating, but they are so incomplete as to be unsatisfying. I'm happy I had a chance to read Year of the Rat ... but I would never pay the $40+ markup Amazon Marketplace is currently charging and the copy I obtained via a bookswap I'll gladly give away again. If anything, it's a disappointing tease as an example of Grandmaster Norton's imagination without a grandmaster's quality of follow through. I'll concentrate on just keeping my fifteen-year-old memories.
