I read an abridged version of this story in reader's digest as a kid and it stuck with me so I thought I'd better read the official version. The book was published the same year as the tragedy and it mentions that it was being written about a month after the event. The bonus to that is all the emotions and recollections are fresh, the downside is that there is no perspective because only time gives that, and some of the events were still jumbled as of the writing. She is candid that all the details were not known and that accounts of the events differ. I have mixed feelings on this book. I found Misty Bernall's perspective easy to understand and I liked that she wasn't one of those over-the-top fundamentalist Christians. Even so, I found myself rolling my eyes in parts. You think your child had given her soul to Satan (her words) because she listened to Marilyn Manson and wore clunky necklaces? (It seriously mentions the necklaces and her clothing style way too much). Her references to the "occult" seemed painfully ignorant and vague. Leaving aside that real Wicca has nothing to do with the Christian Satan, her daughter didn't seem to actually be into Wicca or any of its associated religious beliefs. It doesn't sound like she was actually into the occult, or even real Satanism. The references mostly seemed like teenage rebellion cloaked in terms most likely to scare fundamentalist Christian parents. I also had misgivings about her account of her and her husband's intervention with Cassie. They put her under house arrest, cut her off from all of her long-term best friends (all friends actually), tapped her phone, and changed her school to one where she knew no one and didn't share the beliefs the school expounded. And then they wonder why she felt isolated and angry. I appreciate that they felt that she was hurting and in tonic relationships that were keeping her from getting better, but their choice of intervention made me deeply uneasy. That episode also made me wonder about how the girl they refer to as "Mona" (also seriously, you couldn't come up with a better pseudonym than Mona the Vampire?) felt about the whole affair. Clearly both girls were hurting and cutting her off from her best friend of five years probably didn't help. I'd love to know her side of things and how she felt when she heard about Columbine. I wonder how she feels now that she's in her thirties. Now that's a book I'd like to read, if it exists. A huge red flag for me was that Mona's parents had offered to take Cassie in if she felt she had to to runaway. In my experience other parents don't suggest that a teenager run away unless they feel they're in an unsafe environment. It made me wonder what Misty left out in her account if other parents felt so strongly that Cassie might need a safe place to go. I initially thought I'd give this three stars. I still think Cassie is inspirational (whether she actually said yes or not) and I think that by all accounts she was a wonderful person whose life was cut far too short. What dragged down my rating was Bernall's obvious belief that their parenting choices 'saved' Cassie and that somehow if only other parents did likewise other teenagers would also be better off. Given their questionable parenting choices (phone taps?) and there class status (they can afford two private school tuitions on a single income, even with sacrifices that's more than a lot of American parents can do) I found this distasteful. I also disliked her ignorant statements about certain genres of music and her lumping paganism in with "drinking the blood of kittens" and self-harm.
