Had the audiobook on my computer (references in content suggested early to mid-90s), so figured I would listen to it some days back. Guess they've done new versions, so can't be too negative on the antiquated aspects of it. (Talking about ancient technology, including the card catalogs which I doubt any libraries have used in the past 10+ years.. considering a decent library lets you look up by isbn, author, title, title begins with, call number, etc.) The main problem though is it tries to be all things to all people, so they're going between adult learners with kids (suggesting having television babysit them is lesser of two evils or having neighbors look after) while a moment later making high school references to people who barely (or don't) have driver's licenses that just seems weird. (Mentioning coffee in between!) There are some useful ideas, such as seeing where 15 minute blocks of your time seem to disappear to each day (most of us would be scared by that, I am sure; consider it more practical than W Clement Stone's suggestion decades earlier of keeping track by 10 minute increments), using an empty classroom on campus to study (quite a unique idea), and perhaps predating David Allen's (Getting Things Done) suggestion of writing things down to clear your mind. On a neutral note, the complete "How To Study Program" seems to have a repetition on some points/ideas which probably is negative if you stopped listening/reading for a time and are trying to figure out where you left off or feel like you're wasting your time rereading or they used it as filler. Positive if it helps reinforce ideas.. I would be somewhat curious how the newest edition differs, especially as they touch upon the topic of ADD ("Attention Deficit Disorder") in it and specifically state the jury is still out on whether it exists, hinting about psychiatrists who use it as a catchall and (inferring) drone lazy baby boomer parents who wish to medicate rather than having children develop. They also suggest it's just a cookie cutter formula for robots in an industrialized society that wants a standardized workforce. Suppose if nothing else, this book would be a decent starter on exploring study habits if your library has it..
