My first foray into Whitman territory, and I decided to go with the 1855 text of Leaves of Grass . My purist tendencies made me pick up this edition, despite knowing that Whitman preferred his “deathbed” edition, one that had seen him tinker with the main text for approximately 40 years. I have never watched Dead Poets Society , so I went in blind. I did know, however, that the famous “O Captain! My Captain” is not in this edition. What an enlightening experience. I had heard shouts of critics (mostly the loud, erudite, and yet bleating voice of Bloom) who had placed this right beside Melville, Twain, and Emerson as the peak of American literature. I haven’t read much of Twain and Emerson, but I have read Melville. When Whitman is hitting, it’s hitting as good as anything I have read in Melville. There were entire pages of poetry that were nothing but flow. I would be wrapped with the warm hug of his words, not knowing where I was or what was happening, only to come out with goosebumps and a shiver down the nape of my neck. The origin of the American Religion, as Bloom mentions. I have yet to truly grasp the influence that this work has had on poets and writers after it. To think that Whitman and Melville were doing their thing at the same time and in the same location is wild to me. Some special highlights in this collection: • Whitman’s Preface. Before even getting into the main body of the work, you are slammed with his thoughts on America and living within what the country and its people represent for him. Interesting to see the strong theme of a unified collection of states, as the name of the country suggests, not just one mass nation. He finds similarity, sympathy, and unification in the sum of the whole of the parts, rather than a uniform glob. • Song of Myself. Not surprising at all, the beating heart of the collection. Section 33 had me chanting and shedding tears. Also home to a classic: Do I contradict myself? Very well then…. I contradict myself. I am large…. I contain multitudes. • To Think of Time. A theme that is sure to make me want to come back to a work again and again: the passage of time, ageing, senescence. • There Was a Child Went Forth. Honestly, not sure how he is able to achieve this effect of a life contained in what is probably a span of 2-3 weeks. Perhaps there isn’t a time period set. Perhaps we are just looking back at a life already passed. • Great Are the Myths. A perfect sign off. I don’t usually rate poetry, but man. Away with that. A resounding 5 stars. I am headed to the bookstore to pick up the complete collection of Whitman right after this.
