November of the Heart has stuck with me for a long time. This book came into my life at a time when I hadn’t been doing much (fiction) reading (*gasp*, I know! It was just what I needed to get me back into fiction. I was a total sucker for this one right from the start – a forbidden romance, a boating theme, a Norwegian male lead character – not to mention that historical fiction is my absolute fave. (This one set during the Victorian era.) I still clearly remember reading this during my lunch hours at work. I was 10 pages away from finishing it one lunch break when I couldn’t extend my lunch time any further and had to go back into the office. Total torture! A pleasant, minimalist read that will make you smile. It’s not the type of book that will win rewards for massive historical research, but I didn’t notice any anachronisms or other blatant faux pas’s, and the setting, mood, and love story at the heart of the novel are utterly charming. Great reading recommended for a light, spring day or for cozying up with a blanket on the couch in fall. ---04/24/2023 Update--- THE GOOD: Lovely, almost Southern-like atmospheric lake scenes. Beautiful boats on the water. Boat craft, wood smells... very evocative of time and place. Our leading man is a stubborn but determined Norwegian of blond hair and blue eyes. Lorna is very sweet, if naive. Takes you through the rigors of a good narrative: Introduce your characters, throw stumbling blocks in their path. THE BAD: A few sex scenes. Not fade to black, but not overly detailed. A bit more descriptive than I typically feel comfortable with, though. I also don't love that the early 20th century characters break social convention many times with premarital sex. They pay the ultimate "price" with an out of wedlock baby. Then when they have their happy ending and get together again at the end, they don't learn their lesson. Two rooms at a hotel, but they hook up again immediately. CONCLUSION: Great escape fiction with a feel-good ending. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
