THE BRITISH UNDERCLASS Dalrymple's great subject is the underclass – he's worked with them for years as a doctor in an inner city area and in prisons, he knows what he's talking about, this is a guy I respect, and he's thrusting before our horrified faces the terrible facts of the matter. He sounds like a right wing git half of the time but maybe I'm turning into a right wing git because mostly I think he's got it dead right but sometimes he's just like a slightly more intellectual Jeremy Clarkson who can write well and maybe his books are nothing more than the posh version of Is It Just Me or is Everything Shit Which is something that makes my flesh crawl - I hate all the jeremiads which pour forth about modern life from every source these days, and all these complainers think we'll wag our bonces and ruefully say "ah how true", oh how they denigrate and carp, the economy, the ecology, the music the kids listen to, the reality shows, the celeb culture, the poxy politicians, the schools, the police, everything according to all these foisters of their own neurotic unhappiness has been on a one way downhill roll into shitness since 1956 when yes of course all was sweetness and pop songs had tunes and we were good, ah, remember when we thought we were good, and there was none of this political correctness and there were hardly any immigrants – oops, what a giveaway! Did I say that? No, you moaning modern-life-is-rubbish demiwolves, you didn't say it but you meant it. Try being anything other than a middle class white guy in 1956, then report back. Oh wait – the moaning demiwolves are all middle class white guys. On the other hand there are lots of things wrong with Britain in 2012. One of them is that there's a swathe of the population who are simply redundant, not required anymore. The underclass. All they do is make their own lives a living hell and break into your house if you leave the smallest window open. And if you run into a gaggle of them on the way home from the pub they just might take it into their heads to kick you to death. In 1956 all these people worked, there was almost no unemployment, imagine that, but now Chinese and Indian people do all the backbreaking factory work in China and India making all our ipods and stuff & so the 20% of the population who can only do factory work [euphemism alert ] have nothing to do except drugs and each other. TD describes the calamitous moral decay of this class of people (you don't need me to recap, Jeremy Kyle and Jerry Springer have done this already) He identifies the underclass as something which has been growing since the 60s, is mostly white and is aided but not caused by the Welfare State. Lack of employment is one thing but the miasma of drug usage, domestic violence, child abuse and all types of crime except those which require brains needs further interrogation. On p 12 he is saying that they are like children who have been encouraged to behave badly by misguided liberal parents. This is a big theme which runs through all of TD's thinking. Liberals took over the way society runs itself and have wrecked it with their ludicrous cuddly notions of being nice to people. They have given the feckless (the sturdy beggars of yesteryear) a loaded gun – now the feckless have realised they are themselves passive victims. TD tells us that when apprehended, all the criminals of the underclass will portray themselves as "Putty in the hands of fate" or "marionettes of happenstance". They never stab someone intentionally, no, they tell you "my head went. The knife went in." Another burglar demanded to know from me why he repeatedly broke into houses and stole VCRs. He asked the question aggressively as if "the system" had so far let him down in not supplying him with the answer, as if it were my duty as a doctor to provide him with the buried psychological secret that, once revealed, would in and of itself lead him unfailingly on the path of virtue. Until then he would continue to break into houses and the blame would be mine. Hark - I hear an old song from West side Story... do you hear it too? Dear kindly Sergeant Krupke, You gotta understand, It's just our bringin' up-ke That gets us out of hand. Our mothers all are junkies, Our fathers all are drunks. Golly Moses, natcherly we're punks! Gee, Officer Krupke, we're very upset; We never had the love that every child oughta get. We ain't no delinquents, We're misunderstood. Deep down inside us there is good! There is good! There is good, there is good, There is untapped good! Like inside, the worst of us is good! TD points the finger at (please, anyone in the caring professions should look away now!) The legions of helpers and carers, social workers and therapists, whose incomes and careers depend crucially on the supposed incapacity of large numbers of people to fend for themselves and behave responsibly. …their entire therapeutic worldview of the patient as the passive, helpless victim of illness legitimises the very behavious from which they are there to redeem him from. … ...the idea has become entrenched that if one does not know or understand the unconscious motives for one's acts, one is not truly responsible for them. Officer Krupke, you're really a square; This boy don't need a judge, he needs an analyst's care! It's just his neurosis that oughta be curbed. He's psychologic'ly disturbed! We're disturbed, we're disturbed, We're the most disturbed, Like we're psychologic'ly disturbed. (Spoken) In the opinion of this court, this child is depraved on account he ain't had a normal home. (Spoken) Hey, I'm depraved on account I'm deprived. My father is a bastard, My ma's an S.O.B. My grandpa's always plastered, My grandma pushes tea. My sister wears a mustache, My brother wears a dress. Goodness gracious, that's why I'm a mess! Also the spectre of the swinging 60s haunts the pages : If anyone wants to see what sexual relations are like, freed of contractual and social obligations, let him look at the chaos of the personal lives of members of the underclass. (note – great American book detailing all the chaos : Random Family) However - there should be a word for someone who wrecks their own arguments by continually overstating them to the point where they sound mad , and TD does this every so often, alas. I won't embarrass him by quoting some of the dafter parts. And also, in the end, while I admit of the awfulness whereof he speaks and the eloquence which makes these essays not only bearable but compelling, he offers absolutely no answers. He's a great diagnostician (is that a word?), and I kind of suspect that if he proposed any solutions they might involve abolishing parliament, appointing a National Salvation Council and setting up Re-education Centres for every social worker. Giving teachers electric cattle prods would probably be part of it too. I recommend TD if like me you're comfortable with despair and you're quite happy to read and weep.
