When I ordered this book, all I saw was a 5.0-star rating; I didn't notice that there was only one rating. All of the stories in this volume are original to this book. They are all contemporary stories. I bought the book because of Margaret Browning and read that story first. Then, I noticed that the story by Ruth Jean Dale was connected to Browning's story by using the mother of Lynne Hancock, Rosemary. At the end, I will rate the stories from favorite to least favorite. STRIKING A MATCH (Janet Dailey & Sonja Massie) -- When the pillar of the town's front porch burns, Rev. Dylan Gray is tasked with getting it repaired while the owner lies in the hospital. This sets off a chain of reactions that leads to an absolutely delightful story. TO LOVE AND TO CHERISH (Beverly Beaver) -- Mary Beth has been in a terrible accident, which brings her divorced parents together after five years. Since their daughter's recovery seems to hinge on having both parents help, they agree to stay on Trent's ranch, while Lara takes a leave of absence from her banking job. Mary Beth hopes that spending time together will lead to a reconciliation. SOMETHING OLD, SOMETHING NEW (Margaret Brownley) -- This story is based on a coincidence so wild that it really ruined the story for me. Lynne Hancock was in a mountain cave-in with Jeff Blakely five years ago. They were each engaged to different people but had a night of passion. When they were rescued, they agreed that they would never discuss the night and never see each other again. So Lynne didn't tell Jeff when she had a baby. Rosemary, Lynne's mother, calls and asks to use Lily (the 4-year-old) as a flower girl for her close friend's daughter's wedding. You guessed it, it is Jeff and his fiance finally tying the knot. With characteristic wit, Brownley tells her story. However, I couldn't understand why Jeff took so long to get over his upset. He wasted almost a year, getting over not being told about the baby originally. SOMETHING BORROWED, SOMETHING BLUE (Ruth Jean Dale) -- If the last story was unfortunate, this one was worse. Putting cutesy words in a child's mouth does not an interesting story make. Rosemary's (story above) ex-husband Doug, was too late to the wedding, but just in time to aggravate Rosemary. Our heroine, Rosemary, was not good enough as herself, she lost weight, joined a health club, and became toned. Now men are looking at her. The message is: you aren't good enough as you are, you must lose weight, to find someone new. Bosh. **Overall ratings (from favorite to least) -- Dailey & Massie, Beaver, Brownley, and Dale (yes, that's in the order in which they appear in the book).
