This book is challenging to get a copy of unless you want to fork over $50 or so for a used Library copy, or even more for a new one. It also is at times challenging to read, though ultimately worth it. Individually, the stories don't always have massive impact, but together, combined in the collection, it's extremely impressive. Characters return from one story to the next. The overall plot is vague, and those expecting a set of traditional monster stories may be disappointed. Several stories have only hints of the supernatural, focusing instead on Kiernan's fragile characters: transexuals, goths, rivetheads, drug addicts, prostitutes, and the like. The cast of characters is bizarre, but not in the sense of being weird for the sake of weird, and the extremely dark, surreal tone makes the reader feel as though the supernatural is hiding there just beyond sight, even when it doesn't directly appear. With the characters and settings shared in this, Threshold, Alabaster, Daughter of Hounds, and To Charles Forte With Love, Kiernan seems to be creating a unique mythos--not unlike what Lovecraft (who she often emulates) did with his monsters, but with a much greater emphasis on the human characters that Lovecraft never had any interest in. Kiernan has a Best Of collection coming out summer 2011, titled "Two World and Inbetween." Although it will have some of the best individual stories in this collection, I think that this collection's stories are best read together, because a great deal of what makes them so fascinating is discovering how they intersect--what characters will return. Keirnan's mysterious plotting, combined with her interest in creating transcendence through terror and her extremely skillfull prose, make this sense of discovery all the more pungent. Although the climaxes of the tales are often given less emphasis than the buildup, the plot isn't what matters here: it's a slice of fucked up life in a world where it's possible (though rare) to come across the horrifying supernatural. It's enjoyable, frustrating, impressive, disturbing, beautiful, moving, boring, exciting, and unique--ultimately being a true work of art that's definitely worth a read.
