Derogatory and sarcastic towards women: Bob has a “built-in alarm system to warn him of incoming threats to his control.” And Betty’s “the guided missile” Women have made their “number one goal getting the man to open up”. “It is often their only goal in life” “They all like to talk. A lot.” “Seemingly never-ending monologue” “When you’re talking to her, it’s the Spanish Inquisition! So return the favor when she’s talking” Authors thoughts about women and their talking ... “I don’t do brief! I like to talk and I have lots of words” Hallmark movies: “I’d rather take a beating than sit through one. But it makes the Blonde (his wife) happy” “Your wife will start 75 percent of your conversations. She can’t help it.” “It’s hard to listen and respond to all that talking” “Go ahead and include mundane, trivial experiences. It’s hard to predict what she’ll find interesting” “Evaluating your relationship... this is one of her favorite topics” ... “this is conversational gold” “Women can’t stand to hold in what’s inside. They have to get it out - and I mean all of it - as soon as possible.” “Spraying out all the stuff that’s in her head. And there’s a lot of it.” Women’s talking ... “There are no pauses ... it doesn’t even look like they’re breathing” and you “bury your man in an avalanche of words” “She shouldn’t rattle on and on because she might lose the man in her Niagara Falls of words”. “It’s hard to live with a woman”. Excuses and coddling of male behaviors: When Betty asks Bob to talk he “automatically responds with defensive maneuvers”. “His responses are unconscious reflexes” “Bob learned from his dad that you keep your guard up with a woman.” “Every man is a master at sidestepping questions and holding back on information and feelings” “If the man provides any information at all, it is intended to get the woman off his back.” “It’s an old lesson we men are taught as we grow up: Never, ever let a woman beat you at anything.” “There is no recorded incident of a man breaking down and sharing any personal information under his woman’s questioning. Sorry, all you Bettys, your man will not be the first.” If the woman pushes too hard you “hit his control alarm” “If he knows you really, really want closeness, ... He sees it as a contest, a power struggle in which he feels he has something to lose. And he intends to win in this struggle” “The more you” (woman) “want something, the less chance you’ll get it”. “He’s thinking a number of unflattering thoughts: How can I get this screaming meanie off me? What a nag!” “Direct approach with a Clam will never work.” “Control will always be inside a Clam.” “It’s a God-given trait” “No pressuring him to open up is an essential” “Men are lousy listeners” (to their women) “by nature, by upbringing and by cultural education” but they can listen very successfully at work, with other men, to sports, to news, to YouTube videos” “the man is unable to focus and understand” If you don’t listen well “she won’t be happy. And you know that if she isn’t happy, you ain’t gonna be happy either” “With a man, control is critical.” Crowbars have “twenty to thirty topics running around in your head at any given time. Your Clam has exactly nothing in his head most of the time.” The man desperately needs frequent praise. “It is a requirement”. “Men need praise because we just like the attention” “When a man gets home from work, his day is over”.....“He wants to relax” “The zone is a periodic mental blank spot that men move into without warning.” ... “The man is, for all intents and purposes, a vegetable.” “The Zone is a protective shutoff valve for a man’s brain. When his brain is in danger of taking in too much information at one time - like when you’re talking - it automatically shuts down. By doing so, his precious neural circuits are shielded from damage.” “The Male Zone is an example of a very important truth” “Men are out of touch ... they have no idea what their reactions are or why they come.” “He’ll talk when he’s good and ready ... patiently wait” “She is careful to not pump him with a ton of questions, because that will overwhelm his listening apparatus.” This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
