A real disappointment. This author has been highly recommended by a number of friends and I was very much looking forward to my first Dick Francis novel. The author has apparently won a number of Edgar and other awards and has published over 40 books so he must be doing something right. Well, if he is it certainly was not evident in this book. As others have said, it concerns a missing videotape, and that should give you an idea of how dated this book is. It is set in January 2000, and was written in 2005 when the author was already 85. And perhaps that explains why there is so little sparkle or even logic. The novel seems to have a lot of trouble deciding exactly what it is. It does not work as a mystery for the reader to solve: major characters pop up halfway through the book and even later, with no foreshadowing or hint that this is the direction the novel will take. And it certainly does not work as a thriller. There are so many plot holes and inconsistencies that at times I wondered if it was a satire. The plot begins with a glass blower leaving his shop just before midnight on Dec 31 1999 to join in the celebrations on the street. That’s fine, except that he leaves his shop unlocked, with a bag of money sitting on the counter when he could have put in his safe, and with a man he dislikes intensely left standing there inside the shop. There is also the obligatory sexy unattached police woman who ends up in the main character’s bed after only three nights. And even though he is beaten badly TWICE, and even though he can identify the culprits, the police in general and his lover in particular seem to take no interest at all in investigating the attacks. He is left to rely on a series of informal bodyguards who show up at opportune times, again without any foreshadowing of their existence. There is also the question of the attacks themselves. Even though this is in the middle of the English countryside, the attackers use BASEBALL bats. Amazing. I can only assume that some editor said, “The Americans will laugh their heads off if we say they used CRICKET bats (as they almost certainly would) and our American sales are a lot more important than the British sales, so we’ll have to risk the Brits laughing their heads and not offend the Americans.” And there is also the small matter of how the thugs manage to use said baseball bats to shatter his watch while it is on his wrist without causing any damage whatsoever to his wrist. A short time later, the police woman shows up – even though she is a detective, she has been on patrol by herself in a small country town well into the night. And our glass blower is so taken by her beauty and her mere presence that he creates an elaborate three piece glass sculpture to capture her essence. This is well after midnight, and immediately after he has been badly beaten. And what of her police training – does she call an ambulance, or at least question him about the attack? No, she sits and enjoys the adulation while he immortalizes her in glass. I could go on but you get the idea: the book is very poorly constructed. The only reason I finished it is because the author has such a strong reputation for carefully plotted mysteries that I was constantly expecting him to bring the novel together, to pull it out of the glass blower’s fire that is constantly being referred to – the author has obviously done a lot of research, and he makes sure that the reader knows it. But no such luck. Another one of those books that the author’s fans excuse as being "not his best" and only for “completists”. In other words a complete waste of time. P.S. I heard a rumor later that his wife did most of the actual writing of his novels, while he supplied the "color" based on his career as a jockey. And sadly his wife died a few years before this story was written and that may well explain the deep disconnect between this and "his" much better earlier work.
