Blech. Oh how the crime thriller is a paradoxical conflation Of the realistic and the bonkers in one tough narration. Our author requires us to sit back and gape At his tale of child torture and of course anal rape. Like every other crime thriller, this packs in as many exact details as possible and he’s very good on English life in Leeds in December 1974 – it’s gritty, unceasingly unpleasant, and the incessant use of the F word is very authentic in certain areas of English society. But the more the story ploughs on in a relentless James Ellroyish way (David Peace is a big fan) the stupider it gets. I can refer to two big plot items which are not spoilers because they are mentioned in the blurb (watch out, the first one is gruesome). 1. The child killer stitches a pair of real swan wings to his latest 10 year old victim. So when did you ever hear of something outlandish like that happening in the actual world? Never. Leaving aside the fact that it would be physically impossible to do that (the wings would not be able to be sewn, they’d be too heavy), murderers don’t have those kind of florid fantasies – or maybe they do, but they don’t have the time or the resources to put them into practice. They just want to rape, torture and murder, nothing as fancy as swan’s wings. 2. By the end of the book there’s a series of child murders but also, within the space of a week, a series of criminal-conspiracy murders of adults – maybe six or seven in total, I may have lost count. A series of murders like that has never happened in Britain. I’m not saying it never could, but it never has so far. Six related execution-style murders in one town in one week? It’s off-the-scale ridiculous. Leeds in 1974 was not Ciudad Juárez in 2010. So you get the realistic surface and the florid conspiracy theory. We can see this in miniature when the hero reporter takes a terrific series of beatings and tortures lasting at least 24 hours (inflicted by a whole stationful of bent coppers), and then is dumped at the side of a road someplace, and then springs back into life and is on the trail of the bad guys as soon as he wakes – and doesn’t require the week in hospital to recover. Same thing would happen in Clint Eastwood spaghetti westerns, but there it was all part of the fun. Here, with your gritty realism, it’s beyond parody. I just read James Baldwin’s amazing short story "Going to See the Man". There is hair-raising very extreme violence in this story, real violence which you feel in your heart and bones. It’s there because it was there in real life. It’s not there because you have to crank up the shock value to get through to the jaded. 1974 is a sad indictment of itself and its genre.
