Blames the poor for their poverty. A taste of it here: https://www.city-journal.org/html/wha... There's a (white) underclass in England. As it was 100 years ago, described in The People of the Abyss by Jack London , the underclass is people "the work of the world does not need." Unlike in 1905, England's underclass doesn't slowly die of malnutrition, exposure, and overwork in poor houses. England still has welfare. To our current author, it's /because/ of welfare that the lives of the underclass are meaningless. Not so much. Lives weren't better in 1905 London, slow starvation. The absence of welfare in the U.S. does not infuse with purpose the lives of homeless veterans. Rather it's that the work of the world does not need them that makes lives futile. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor , William Julius Wilson Work has been moved to lowest-wage, lowest-environmental-protection, countries. Mom and Pop businesses can't compete with multinationals. Work no longer pays the rent. Hired: Six Months Undercover in Low-Wage Britain , James Bloodworth . The New Poverty , Stephen Armstrong . The world is organized for the greatest good for the greatest wealth. Ending welfare won't fix it. (Gifts /only/ to the poor, "earn $1 more and we take back your home and medicine," keep the poor, poor.) To undermine the working class is an old ploy by the powerful. Roman victories were pouring slaves into Italy; this led to the loss of the dignity of labor. The small farmer was forced off the land, usurped by large slave-worked estates. The impoverished farmers, unable to compete with slaves, flocked into Rome which developed a large unruly population of poor people on what we would call "welfare." -- Isaac Asimov , Asimov's Chronology of the World , p. 82 Remember too, the biggest beneficiaries of the welfare state are not the poor. It's the middle class and higher, who get most from the governments--in pensions, insurance, home-mortgage deductions, subsidized higher education, employment in government-subsidized industries. Corporate welfare is no aberration in the system: it /is/ the system. ( Tony Judt makes some of these points in Postwar: A History of Europe Since 1945 .) For a clearer-eyed view of the problems of urban poverty and the sorts of actions needed, see Separate and Unequal: The Kerner Commission and the Unraveling of American Liberalism , Steven M. Gillon . Different country and race only: same issues. See Trevor's review of Give a Man a Fish: Reflections on the New Politics of Distribution by James Ferguson for why work is no longer sufficient to base distribution of subsistence on: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... . The U.S. pattern: The Surplus American: How the 1% Is Making Us Redundant , Charles Derber (Elites have attacked the poor before: goodreads.com/review/show/887422551 ) As of 2018, the top .01% average 960 times the average wealth of all Americans--yet their share of the tax burden (4.9%) is only half their share of the wealth (9.6%). https://inequality.org/facts/wealth-i...
