I read it because 1) I was looking for a book touching on business espionage, and 2) I've been meaning to read a Francis novel. There is an industrial espionage component. A jockey gives a video to a glassblower right before his death on New Year's Eve, 1999. The video is stolen from the glassblower that night. Eventually we learn the video has the only copy of a potential cure/treatment for cancer. On a VHS tape. Yeah, because that makes sense. Separately, there is some discussion about secret glassblowing methods, which might have been a more logical candidate for recording on a tape. Or that the stolen tape might shed further light on the jockey's death, but no, that is never revisited. The combination of horses, glassblowing, Y2K, and cancer research came across as random. The plot is Gerard's search for the tape and the thief's identity. Meanwhile he begins a love affair with a female police detective. You'd think that she would help him with his investigation. Not so. For some reason, Gerard gets help from a bunch of random guys, including an ex-con in the neighborhood who has three Dobermans. This is because some masked thugs beat up Gerard so he needs protection. Which again, why wouldn't his cop girlfriend be the one to protect him? Which brings me to a related point. The interactions among the characters in this novel are bizarre. There's a long hunt by Gerard for somebody named Daniel Force. Once he's found, we are told again and again that Force is charming and that everybody likes him even when they know he does shady things. But his behaviors and dialog do not make him appear charming in the slightest. The real mystery is why anybody would like Force. We're also told repeatedly that the jockey's mother-in-law, Marigold, is a charming, delightful woman. But every statement she makes throughout the novel is pouty, self-indulgent, or idiotic. I cannot see why anybody would be charmed by her. More broadly, there are the good guys, (Gerard and team), and the bad guys (Force, a sadist named Rose, et al). For some reason in the beginning and middle of the book, interactions between the good guys and bad guys are fairly convivial or muted. Gerard asks lame questions like, "Did you do it?" He gets lame answers like, "Maybe, but I won't tell you any details." Rebuttal: "Well then, guess I'll take a train back to my glassblowing shop." To me this was very passive by typical mystery/thriller cat-and-mouse standards. The climax was sort of compelling but by that point I'd already given up on enjoying this awkward mashup.
