This is the first book that I have read by James Patterson and it will not be the last. The protagonist, Alex Cross, has just been recruited by the FBI to investigate the kidnapping of a judge's wife. What makes the case more bizarre is that the kidnapper does not demand a ransome. When Cross discovers that this kidnapping is related to a few other recent unsolved ones, a Russian Mafya head that goes by the alias, The Wolf, becomes the main suspect. To complicate matters, the mother of his son makes a surprise visit and uses Cross's dangerous profession as an excuse to gain full custody. As Cross gets closer to discovering The Wolf's identity, more kidnappings occur and the lives of his own family are threatened. The pressure mounts on Cross to locate all of the kidnapped victims in a hurry before they're killed while trying to keep his ex from tearing his family apart. For a first-time reader of James Patterson, I was hooked from beginning to the end. The story had all of the elements of a mystery thriller--it was faced paced and had chapters that ended in cliff-hangers. It also had an interesting protagonist that readers could love, and most importantly, a great villain that readers could hate. Patterson's writing style is different from what I have read in other novels. Namely because the chapters are very short and were straight to the point. The story rhythm was on cue and never dragged. It almost read like a screenplay. My only criticism, although not a major one, is about Cross's first assignment that involved a hostage situation in Baltimore. Although the scene was well written, by the end of the book I was left wondering why Patterson included that scene in the book since it did nothing to advance the storyline. I was expecting that somehow it would've been connected to rest of the story. The subplot, although a good one, came a bit late in the story. With Patterson's talent of having excellent plot twists throughout the story which gave me several WTF momments, I'm convinced that he could have begun the subplot earlier in the story which would've added another WTF moment by the time that Cross's ex maked her surprise visit. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
