Spoiler alert: This is not a novel. But what is it really? It is a novel in that there is a writer-as-character (Writer), but it is also probably an autobiography. It is most certainly a list of anecdotes about famous writers, philosophers, artists, musicians, celebrities. It is like a Google search, if you just want to know something about someone. You can flip to any page in the book and read out of sequence and discover something new without feeling lost. It is a collection of scribbles from someone's notebook, random thoughts and wonderings, put together into one book. It is a book of a history - the history of our artists, the history of literature, the history of life. It is a reminder that everything is temporary, that legends outlive truth, that truth is subjective, that death is the only certainty. It allows the reader (Reader?) to question the pillars on which we place heroes, for in the end we all die some sort of death, no matter how skilled or talented or amazing an individual might be; or that they had some curiosities about them that we did not expect because we tend to believe our heroes are flawless. No one is flawless. And everyone dies. But it is not a melancholy read, which is surprising as at times it is a book comprised of recognizable names and the manner in which they died. One would think that would take a toll on Reader, like that one part in 2666 , but that is not the case here. (Though truly nothing is like that one part in 2666.) This book could easily be read in one sitting, but I chose not to do so. In fact, I started this book almost 10 years ago and never finished it. It was a book sitting on my friend's coffee table and I started to flip through it, fascinated but annoyed by it, and pissed that I had never heard of it (even though at the time it was still relatively new), and angry at postmodernism in general. That friend turned into my boyfriend and somehow the book landed on my bookshelves (because that is how I roll, your books are not safe around me), and I always meant to go back and see what this novel-book-thing is all about. I chose to start over with it now because I won a copy of Fare Forward: Letters from David Markson through the Goodreads Giveaway program and I really wanted to read something by Markson before starting this collection of letters. So now that is what I am going to do. And, one day, I will die. And, one day, so will you. Says El.
