3 ½ I guess. This novel tells a pretty good story, about the abduction of a young girl, possible related abductions of other girls, how the story is handled by a fairly corrupt police establishment, how it’s reported by a local newspaper, and … well, it’s a pretty good “page-turner” … but I don’t know, I just feel not all that enthusiastic about recommending it or rating it highly. In fact I really don’t know what to say about what I liked in this book, other than the fact that I did read it over the course of about three days (during which I didn’t have a whole lot of reading time), and read no other books during that time, so it was a story that held my interest. Beyond that? I don’t know. My favorite American crime writer, George Pelecanos, actually praises this book (back cover). He is quoted as saying that the book “is raw and furiously alive, the literary equivalent of a hard right to the jaw. David Pearce has delivered the finest crime fiction debut of the year.” Well, but I still think Pelecanos writes better novels than this one. The book is raw, both language and sex are raw, and the violence is raw. That doesn’t disturb me in the least. (Pelecanos’ novels are also raw, on at least the first two of those points.) But Pearce doesn’t give us the characters that we can root for in the way Pelecanos does. Here's some of the things that left me unimpressed. 1) Too many characters. This is a problem for me because of my memory, mostly. The characters that are mentioned frequently from the get-go I can handle. But there are many characters in this book that are mentioned very briefly the first time or two, then later in the book become more prominent/important. By that time their names were simply fog-shrouded signposts to me, and I didn’t search back to find out who they really were. 2) The main character, the narrator (it’s first person all the way) was unbelievable to me. First, he’s not a tough guy, except that he is able to punch out or otherwise physically harm several women in the story. But put him up against another man, and he basically is a punching bag – doesn’t even put up a fight, gets the shit kicked out of him again and again. In fact he gets beaten worse than the previous time over and over, and eventually the sadism of his many beaters is so extreme that I simply couldn’t believe that within hours, he seems to be pretty much okay again , as if that beating was nothing but a bout with alcohol, and requires no more than getting though the morning after hangover. Second, he seems to cry a lot when he’s confronted with photos of victims, or personal sob-stories from victims. I have no problem with his tears, but this simply seems thrown in by the author to make him more … something, I don’t know. It doesn’t seem to fit with the way he acts otherwise, his anger, his rough language. Our sensitive narrator also uses the phrase “I’m sorry” at least a hundred times in the story (it seems). Any time he isn’t demanding something, or pleading with someone to give him information, or saying “fuck”, he’s saying “I’m sorry”. ( note: re comment #4 below, this mildly disturbing aspect of the dialogue is apparently a realistic depiction of how the English speak.) 3) Like Pelecanos, Pearce throws in references to pop music throughout the story. But the mentions are just brief throwaways. The music means nothing to the characters, they aren’t playing it themselves because they like it – it’s just music they hear over the radio as they drive, or hear coming out of a club as they walk by or enter. It recalls the time, the era of the story – but nothing else. 4) The dialogue is perhaps realistic? But also a bit leaden. Just one example. Paula Garland came back in and closed the red door. ‘Sorry about that.’ ‘No, it’s me that should be sorry, just phoning up …’ ‘Don’t be daft. Sit down will you.’ ‘Thanks,’ I said and sat down … She started to say, ‘About last night, I …’ I put up my hands. ‘Forget it.’ ‘What’s happened to your hand?’ Paula Garland had her own hand to her mouth, staring at the graying lump of bandages on the end of my arm. ‘Someone slammed my car door on it.’ ‘You’re joking?’ ‘No.’ ‘Who?’ ‘Two policemen.’ ‘You’re joking?’ ‘No.’ ‘Why?’ I looked up and tried to smile. ‘I thought you might be able to tell me.’ ‘Me?’ She had a piece of red cotton thread … blah But I said, ‘The same two coppers warned me off after I was here on Sunday.’ ‘Sunday?’ ‘The first time I came here.’ ‘I never said anything to the police.’ ‘Who did you tell?’ ‘Just our Paul.’ ‘Who else?’ ‘No-one.’ ‘Please tell me?’ Paul Garland was standing … blah ‘Please, Mrs Garland …’ ‘Paula’, she whispered. I just wanted to stop … blah But I said, ‘Paula please, I need to know.’ … ‘After you went, I was upset and …’ ‘Please?’ Oh well. Look, there are two more books in this series. As of May '17 I've decided I will try to get the next book in the series read - maybe sometime this year. But I’m just not bowled over by Mr. Pearce. Maybe you will be. If you like raw crime fiction give it a try. NB. By the way , as I understand, the reason for all the accolades was basically the backstory of the novels, that is, the utter corruption of the regional police and the horrendous violence they routinely perpetrated in order to cover up this corruption. So maybe you're not supposed to pay too much attention to the characterization?
