I literally just finished this book and I can not even begin to write how amazing it was. My favorite book of the series hands down. I am having a hard time even putting it into words. I am a bit of a history geek so when the events were set during World War I I was already excited, but then Ramses and Emerson's involvement made it all the better. This novel was also a lot more emotional and suspenseful than the other ones in the series which I loved, but also almost gave me a heart attack. There is only one criticism that I have and that is the death of Johnny. We never really met him in any of the books and though his death was felt by the reader, it was more something to spur Ramses along. I would have liked it to be a bit more meaningful then that, but seriously that is my only complaint with this novel. My favorite part of this novel had to be the fact that Ramses and Amelia were finally affectionate with one another. When Amelia started crying by his bed I had to close the book so I wouldn't get the pages wet. Ramses has slowly and effectively made himself my favorite male character of all times. I am hopelessly in love with his wit, courage, compassion, and everything else about him. I was very unfair to Nefret in this novel because when we got to the end she had more courage and intelligence about some of the matters then the rest of them. I love her and Ramses together and I am so glad that they finally are together. They might even be more entertaining then Amelia and Emerson together. This novel also put my all time favorite villain, Sethos, and the character I hate with all my being, Percy, together. If I thought I hated Percy at the end of the last novel, it was taking to new heights in this one. There are very few characters I have been happier to see die then him, which says a lot about how wonderful Peters is in character development. I thought his death was a little too quick, but at least he is dead. On the other side of that coin Sethos has always been one of my favorite characters and he solidified his place there with this novel. By the end of the novel I had completely forgotten the prologue so when Sethos revealed who he really was at the end my mind was blown. It explained so much, why Emerson wasn't close to his family other than Walter for one, and also why Sethos hated Emerson so much. When I first read it I thought it was a bit too easy, but now I really love it. I don't know how any of the future books can top this one, but I believe I have said that before. This series is literally going to kill me when it ends. I can't imagine not reading about the Emersons' anymore. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
