It's probably a good thing I didn't read this 1989 book -- though I probably had it -- before I traveled to Guatemala and Belize in 1995 because I might never have gone. The book's tales of guerrilla wars, atrocities and tourists getting robbed are downright scary. Gives a bad mark to the Eisenhower administration as well, which toppled a nascent democracy just because the gigantic United Fruit Company didn't like the looks of what was happening. As it was, my trip didn't go too badly. Tour groups were often quite small, often just me, and never larger than about 15. My first night in Guatemala City the hotel people told me not to go out in the evening because they couldn't vouch for my safety. I felt cheated by the idea, so I defied them and walked the high street to the end of the urban area and back. No problems, though it was rather boring and few people were out. I was cheated by the currency exchange people in the hotel who gave me some cash that was no longer valid, the currency having been devalued. This was something virtually no tourist would be able to figure out, until they tried to spend it, that is. I should have just destroyed the currency so that people couldn't perpetuate this trick on foreigners, but I was so incensed that here I was bringing my money to this country that nobody wanted to travel to and still they felt that they had to cheat me. I asked my tour guide for help. He wouldn't take it himself, but he did know someone who was willing to change it for me and did. I got to Belize by flying via El Salvador. On the way, there was rumor of a bomb on board, so we had to wait while they put everyone's luggage on the tarmac and then we had to go out and identify what was ours and then wait some more while they put it all back on again. Really an anxious time when you don't know Spanish and have no idea what is going on. Other incidents: - my watch died in the extremely humid Tikal region - the tour jeep stuck in the mud on the way to Xunantunich, so I never reached that site, sadly - one day in Guatemala the tour guide elected to bring about ten family members along Overall, I would still say it was a good trip. Even went on some dates with other tourists. In a curious development, I found out in Belize that my usual tour guide had three wives, none of whom knew about the others. I asked him how he could possibly handle the Christmas holidays, which were upcoming at that point. He just said he made himself scarce around those times. Three wives weren't even enough for him. He was even flirting with the receptionist where I would book my day trips. I considered telling her, but didn't. He even made a pass at a young, blonde tourist in a narrow tunnel. Bad guy. Anyway, this was a great book in its time. It's only downside now, as with all journalistic efforts, is that it is no longer up to date.
