I loved this book so much it's hard to know where to begin. Theodore Dalrymple, a physician and writer specializing social pathology in Britain (everything he writes about in Britain also applies to the U.S. in spades, BTW), brilliantly describes the rising numbers and overwhelmingly ubiquitous of nature societal ills and how and they've become so prevalent since the 1960s. If you've ever looked around and thought, Gosh, why are so many more people on welfare, addicted to drugs, illiterate, born into families without two parents and generally resigned to a life of government dependent-misery and victimhood these days? Dr. D has the answers in this book -- he carefully provides case after case after painstakingly descriptive case of exactly how the lower classes in crime-ridden slums think, how their worldviews developed and why they stay in nearly fatal cycles of abuse, poverty and misery, which they pass on to future generations, creating a problem no one seems to know how to address. Darlymple places blame squarely where it belongs -- in the hallowed exalted halls of academia and government, where abstract social theories prevail but are untested, really in fact, rejected, in the lives of the liberal well-meaners who espouse them. Despite living in the most technologically and medically advanced period in human history, the ever-growing numbers of people who continue to live in slummy government-subsidized housing, are cared for in government-run medical care and educated in government-run schools continue to grow. These problems were created to solve problems and help the lives of the destitute but somehow have instead created even more monolithic quandaries that no one knows how to unravel now. The solutions to these problems may be obvious to some, but how bad it has to be before someone actually does something is anyone's guesss. It's worth noting that this book was published in 2001, and most essays were written in the 1990s -- as is evident in the sections that cover spousal/domestic abuse. In the pre-O.J. Simpson era, authorities in some places and times were much more lax in prosecuting domestic battery. In the U.S., the laws changed so that victims will have charges pressed on their behalf by the police -- and I hope it is that way in the U.K. at this point too. It was also pre-9/11 and before technology changed the lives of all classes even more than what could have been foreseen at the time. However, the central issues have remained the same and grown worse in more than 20 years: liberal well-meaning social programs put in place to help people have disastrously backfired and have created a social-political Frankenstein no one could have seen coming and have no way to rein in.
