I first came to the topic of the Tsavo man-eaters via the movie called "The Ghost and the Darkness", which is very loosely based on this book here. The movie went more towards action while the events in the book probably would have been better adapted into a thriller or maybe a light horror movie. So when I read this book and heard the author's own account of the man-eaters I must say I was pleasantly surprised, and kind of disappointed in the movie. Especially since the lions in the book looked totally different. Tsavo lions tend to be bigger, having a built more suitable for a hunter than a wrestler and often have only small or no manes at all, unlike their more famous maned brethren. Not to mention that the movie lions were often loud and ravaging brutes while the lions in the book tended to be more silent and their most chilling feature was that when you did not hear them, someone would be going to die. Now I was also kind of disappointed with the book. The thing is that I think the title is misleading since the story of the man-eaters is not such a big part of the book and most of it deals with Patterson's other adventures in Africa, albeit expect no chilling tales of cannibals and the like, this book is too realistic for that and Patterson is by no means a writer, that is pretty obvious by the fact that some stories later in the book actually happened before or during the events of the man-eaters. And to be frank, when you read the story about them , I had goosebumps several times when I read about these hunters , the rest of the book might be pretty boring. What you read there is certainly interesting and people interested in the time and people of the place will get some nice glimpses into that world, but when you came to read this book solely for the man-eaters, like I did, you might find this book lacking. So basically I would say that this book is recommendable for reading it as a sort of diary or travel journal, but not as a thriller. The story about the man-eaters would have been great for that, or maybe that is just my overactive imagination at work there, but the rest not so much. So all in all, I think this is a book that people will have mixed feelings about.
