Let's start off by saying something: I love Carmilla. I loved the book when I first read it, in my early teens. I still remember how genuinely disturbing it was. And I totally loved the character, Mircalla Gräfin von Karnstein, the titular Carmilla and female vampire. Not being altogether happy with Joseph Sheridan le Fanu's choosing to terminate her at the end of the story, when I discovered that a sequel existed, I naturally read it. And, unfortunately, I was less than happy. Mircalla Gräfin von Karnstein's vampirism in the original was an obvious stand in for lesbianism. There can be no doubt of that. But in this book, Carmilla, as she again calls herself, is a vampire quite separately from being a lesbian. She is a lesbian, but that has nothing to do with her vampirism. This is not in accordance with the original, where she spent her time seducing her quarry and being to all appearances in love with them. There are other problems. Carmilla, in the original, had no problems going out in the sunlight, though she didn't enjoy it. Here, she can't tolerate sunlight like the typical 20th century vampire. She was pink cheeked in the original, Here she's as pale as snow. And for heaven's sake, if you're going to have your character speak gratuitous German, get someone with at least a basic knowledge of the language to edit your writing. So what's it about? Carmilla managed to survive her would be murderers by substituting a peasant girl in her place, whom the locals somehow failed to recognise. She fled to France, and began feeding on wounded soldiers of the Franco Prussian War. Later, she was a brothel madam, and then somehow or other made it to Chicago in the 1990s. Which, since unlike the original Carmilla she can't go out in the daytime, is a feat. Anyway, so she seduces and kills a girl who's the ward of a retired officer (just like in Carmilla), says officer vows to hunt her down, she seduces a girl named Lauren (like Laura in the original Carmilla), they have explicit and quite separate from their blood drinking vampire sex, there are lecherous hicks and wolves involved, and the second half of the book begins reading like bad Stephen King*. The ending is stupid beyond belief. Could have been so much better, really. That's what's so bad about it. *There is no good Stephen King.
