If ever there was a book to really make you appreciate how versatile the word "fuck" can be, I think this might be it. I'm not sure if that's a compliment or not. You'd think it would be, from me, considering that it could be considered a 'get rich quick' scheme for someone to put a swear jar in my vicinity. But my goodness, there were a fucking lot of fucks being said in this book, and I think that, in combination with the slang, it tended to muddy the waters a bit and make it harder to follow conversations. It was a bit hard to follow in general, though, especially when there's apparently an unwritten rule where one never finishes a sentence or question, and one never gives a full answer when a grunt will do. Not that I'm complaining all that much about it. It's far more realistic this way than if everyone was super forthcoming and just spilled all of their secrets bond villain style. But what did not help at all was the fact that there were so many recycled names. Multiple Clares, one being a young girl who is the catalyst for the story when she goes missing, and the other one being a middle-aged Scottish woman. Multiple Pauls/Paulas, double Barrys and Johns, etc. Basically, what I'm getting at is that, between the reused character names, choppy dialog, the dialect, the slang, and the busy-bee "fuck", I was doing a lot of context guessing and a lot of hoping that things would make sense in the end. And now you're dying to know: DID things make sense in the end? Umm, kinda. The whodunnit's revealed and whatnot... but it was a bit messy and convoluted, and a little bit out of left field. Like life, I guess. And I'm not even sure if THAT is a complaint, because... well, the structure of the story, and the narrative, are just kind of neurotic and random and always a step behind and confused... so the resolution being that way, while a little frustrating for the reader, does fit. This story is broken into three parts. Parts one and two felt a lot like build up to me. There were a shitton of strings going in every direction, with our narrator, Eddie, following them rather blindly and not quite knowing what the fuck he's doing, but just feeling like there's something more and that things just aren't quite right, so he keeps digging until he's in over his head. (Well, to be fair, he was in over his head from the start.. but he just didn't know it yet.) Part three, though. Part three starts with a fucking wrench to the face and then graduates to sledgehammers and keeps hitting. Never having read David Peace before, I wasn't sure how much to trust the narrative style. I mean, it's first person, right? So one naturally assumes that the narrator is going to make it through to the end of the book? Except that a skilled writer who isn't afraid to fuck with the reader's head can get around that... and Peace is one of those, for sure. Eddie is the kind of character that I just wanted to slap, constantly. He is an inexperienced, weak, idealistic, selfish, dick. He wants to see his name in print, but won't stand up for himself or his story, and let's his senior staff walk all over him. Granted, he does whatever he wants anyway, but I just wanted him to grow a pair. But then the deeper he goes into his investigation, the more... unhinged he becomes. His sort of unraveling is fascinating, in a "Oh shit, where is this going??" kind of way. It was very deftly handled, and he's about as unreliable as they get. Even I didn't trust him... though I WANTED to trust that he was at least being honest with himself and trying to get to the truth, despite his being a totally unstable shitbag. The investigation into the missing girl goes fucking EVERYWHERE and ties into just about everything. There are, as I mentioned before, a TON of characters, many of them sharing names, and it is hard at times to keep them straight. So, as I said before, it's something of a mess, though it does all.. mostly, come together in the end. There are a few loose ends though - and these may be tied up throughout the rest of the series... or maybe not and they were just forgotten, or there was some oblique reference to them that I missed or something. I don't know where I'm going with this review. I can't say that this book was light reading in any sense (content or style), but once it started to pick up, it was hard to put back down, so overall, I enjoyed it quite a lot.
