Those of us who are either currently serving in the military or are recent veterans of the US Armed Forces (I fall in the latter category) are quite accustomed to seeing female colleagues in the military--for any of us who've served in the post-Vietnam area, female troops are nothing out of the ordinary (with the exception of certain Combat Arms career fields such as the Infantry). And in this day and age of thorough physical examinations at the MEPS (Military Entrance Processing Station) as well as personnel background investigations, one could hardly imagine a woman attempt to disguise herself as a man in order to enlist in today's military. The authors of this book, however, give us an eye-opening reminder on how starkly different things were in the US military--and American society as whole--back in those Victorian times 150+ years ago. In the process, Ms. Blanton and Ms. Cook provide an eminently readable book with valuable insights into a facet of the Civil War that's either been under-reported or, even worse, inaccurately in most Civil War scholarship since the end of the First World War, i.e. the notion that "women who masqueraded as men and enlisted in the armies were crazy, sexually loose, lesbians, or all of the above." (p. 193) The authors give a more accurate and balanced accounting of Civil War female soldiers, positive and negative alike. While there were certainly some proverbial bad apples (as there are in every bunch), Blanton & Cook ague convincingly that the overwhelming majority of women soldiers, Yankee and Rebel alike, who served in America's bloodiest conflict, did so with honor and bravery. Not only did they willingly and ably take on the toughest and most dangerous jobs in the Armies, from infantry to artillery to cavalry, as well as the dreary, drudgery-laden jobs like picket duty, they earned the respect of their male colleagues, and for the most part retained the respect of those male comrades even after their gender was discovered (unlike the aforementioned post-WWI scholars who weren't actually there serving alongside the women soldiers). There is a little bit of overlap and repetition (for example, multiple citations of the allegations of insanity and suspicious character against Mollie Bean of the 47th North Carolina Infantry) in Chapters 5-7 ("The Prisoner of War Experience," "Women Soldiers as Casualties of War," and "Women Soldiers Discovered in the Ranks," respectively), but even these repeated facts and references serve a useful purpose within the context of the individual chapter topics and do nothing to detract from the overall excellence of the book.
