5 Stars for The Bookshop; 3.5 Stars for The Gate of Angels; 1 Star for The Blue Flower. The Bookshop is a masterpiece of a novella. I think it may be flawless. Mrs. Green, a widow in England in the late 1950's, wants to open up a bookshop in her sleepy seaside town. Who ever would have thought that this could be a situation so fraught with intrigue, political manipulation, back-stabbing, and rancor? It is, but the story's arc builds so gracefully and inevitably, that nothing seems quite significant -- until it is. A glorious little gem of a story. The Gate of Angels is an entirely different sort of story. Now, Ms. Fitzgerald has set her characters in pre-WWI England in what I suppose must be called a love story between a Junior Fellow at Cambridge and a disgraced nurse. The first part of the story seems bent to go one way -- toward a contemplation of epistemology, metaphysics, and the potential conflict between science and religion; then, part two introduces the nurse Daisy, and all that philosophical stuff is dropped in favor of her more engaging personal story; part the third sort of throws an ending together that doesn't really work for me. It was a strange tale, but one that held my interest. The last novella in this collection, The Blue Flower was a real snore. Apparently at the end of the 18th Century, there was a German Romantic who wrote under the pen name Novalis. OK. And Ms. Fitzgerald apparently decided that his personal story was compelling enough that she needed to fictionalize it and thrust it into the public's attention. Except, it's not. Spoiler alert. This German dude, Friedrich von Hardenberg (Novalis) roamed hither and thither over Deutschland on an old horse -- a horse so old and decrepit that everyone who encountered it deemed it necessary to comment upon its ancient decrepitude. Now he's at school, now he's at home, now he is apprenticed to a tax collector, now he is studying Salt. In between these ramblings, we meet his annoying family (a herd of people of either indiscriminate personalities or repellant ones) and he meets an insipid twelve-year-old girl and falls "in love." It's not quite Humbert Humbert territory (Hardenberg is 22 at the time), but it's still kind of eew. The rest of the book is more about how he continues to go all about, not doing much, while his young fiancée slowly falls ill and dies. And that's the book, folks. There. I have saved you a few hours of time.
