So I struggle with how to review this book. I appreciated it immensely, yet Higgs "unique style of girlfriend theology" puts me off. The "woulda"'s and "sis" got to be a bit much and there were times when there was a flippancy about scripture that I did not like. (Early on she talks about Eve and the Devil in the Garden, and any good scholar knows the devil never makes an appearance, so Higgs is connecting to the 'belief' that the snake represented Satan - however, the concept of Satan as an individual comes late, much later than the Garden story of Adam and Eve.) However! There are many moments when it is clear that Higgs knows her stuff, inside and out, so I think she knows this, but seeks to not muddy the waters with the point she is trying to deliver. So, what is the point? From my point of view, Higgs does a great job of capturing her reader with a re-telling os Mary Magdalene's life, first in fiction and then by breaking apart every element of scripture she can find connected to Mary Magdalene, or demoniacs, or women, etc. in the time of Jesus. And through her work we come to know Mary Magdalene, the plight of women and outcasts in the time of Christ. But more than that... this might be the first book I have ever read that helps me to better personally know Jesus himself, albeit through another's experience. So much of my studies bring me to know Jesus and/or Christ academically and theologically, keeping in mind historical-criticism, redaction and textual criticism, through exegesis. But that does not help in building a personal knowledge of Jesus. This book does exactly that. Higgs style of giving even just a portion of a verse from scripture gets the reader thinking deep on each character's actions, responses and feelings. It is a great style and very engaging. I can recognize that even though I bristled at a few points myself, or when she speaks to the reader 'directly'. So, now I debate is I will pick up another of her books... This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
