Reading Dalrymple's Life at the Bottom was like going to McDonalds with Margaret Thatcher and having her constantly whispering in your ear while pointing rudely at strangers, 'Oh, aren't they awful, look at their table manners , oh how ghastly!' Now, while Margaret might be right, there might be a bit of lettuce saturated with orange sauce hanging out of a spotty teenager's oily mouth, and you might indeed be repulsed by it, but after her diatribe you will be determined that you see the dining etiquette of a demigod before you. While I do suspect that there is more than a glimmer of truth in Dalrymple's entirely anecdotal exploration of the British 'underclass', I found myself mentally contradicting him at every turn. He was just too gleeful in pointing out the proverbial lettuce hanging out of the oily mouth of society; he was almost certainly enjoying himself too much when recounting the abject misery of countless other human beings. If I were to write a book on the same topic, I might simply copy and paste this passage from Joseph Conrad's (let's be honest, unreadable) Heart of Darkness : "Oh, I wasn't touched. I was fascinated. It was as though a veil had been rent. I saw on that ivory face the expression of somber pride, of ruthless power, of craven terror — of an intense and hopeless despair. [...] He cried in a whisper at some image, at some vision, — he cried out twice, a cry that was no more than a breath — 'The horror! The horror!'" This is probably the most appropriate response to the cycle of violence, drugs, domestic abuse, parental neglect, illiteracy, misery and alienation explored in this book. You won't get this from Dalrymple, who at one stage describes nightclub attendees as a 'seething mass of people' who 'move like maggots in a tin'. Lovely. This isn't a bad book, it's actually pretty compelling, and gives an unwavering look at the realities of life 'at the bottom' in the UK. The author doesn't set out to right these wrongs, he simply states them, and I think he's faithful to this aim. However his lack of true sadness and lament at the situation disturbs me; he is simply enjoying himself a bit too much. All of his evidence is also anecdotal, which is problematic in and of itself, and so anyone looking for an in-depth sociological study into the class system in the UK should look elsewhere. This is more of an opinion piece, a very readable opinion piece, which raises some valid issues which would bear further scrutiny. As an aside, if you were to read Dalrymple's Life at the Bottom alongside Owen Jones's Chavs: The Demonisation of the Working Class , you might feel like you were allowing a UFC fight take place in your brain. Please someone do this and let me know what it's like.
