A terrible book by a decidedly foul man. The best parts were the bits that, while boorish, patronising and unpleasant, were at least not offensive - for example his bizarre description of walking through a city centre on a Saturday night just to exacerbate his insecurity in his masculinity by looking at the 'steroid-inflated' bouncers. Everything you need to know about this book appears relatively close to the beginning - his early complaint that the liberal democrat party prioritised gay marriage, or the following section (with all his extra verbal garbage removed): "Why so insistent a denial of the obvious by the very class of people whose primary function was to be truth bearers? The answer is sought in the causative relationship between the ideas that liberal intellectuals advocated and every disastrous social deelopment of the last four decades. [...] And so if family life was less than blissful, they called for the destruction of the family as an institution. The destigmatisation of illegitimacy went hand in hand with easy divorce, th eextension of marital rights to other forms of association between adults (...)" To clarify, yes, the author is blaming the ills of society on liberal intellectuals who think you should be able to divorce your abuser or marry your gay partner. I could happily leave things there, but there is plenty more to say. The author is obsessed with his sense of superiority. He engages in extensive discussion about how much cleverer he is than his nursing colleagues (presumably all women) - for example when he explains how his nurses are unwilling to pass judgment on patients, and are taken aback when he decides who is a criminal when they walk through the door. He doesn't call the nurses stupid for this, but there is an undertone. This patriarchal patronisation is a common theme throughout the book - you could easily believe that minorities and women are constantly coming to him for his sage wisdom. He explains to one woman how she will fall into a cycle of abuse, and relaxes into a gentle cloud of superiority while she scrambles to explain why relationship are more complicated than that. There is a feeling that if only everyone else could understand things the way he does, it would all be fine and the poor would know their place. He explains that "for migration across half the world is very stressful, and old customs therefore become to some immigrants what soft toys are to children in the dark - a source of great comfort". He genuinely believes he understands everything, for example when from a single walk through a homeless hostel he identifies how terrible the administration is from just looking at it for 10 minutes. His evidence is the number of documents they seem to be producing. The themes of many chapters are utterly bizarre. Chapter 1 is a bizarre tirade against liberal intellectuals. There is a chapter that is a bizarre tirade against tattoos - it's unclear what the source of his angst is in this arena, or what he wants to change. He just doesn't like them, I guess? But it's not that - he gets to feel superior to people who have them. One chapter is a bizarre description of his walk through a city centre on a Saturday night. There is the chapter where he explains why we actually care *too much* about the homeless, and the chapter where he explains that poverty doesn't actually exist in England - his evidence is a description of some people who don't live in poverty. Notably, this chapter ends with an explanation that while people in India/Africa live in 'genuine' poverty (walking 50 miles in the sun with heart issues, 10 children killed because of no brakes on a truck, etc), British poverty is still worse because it is of the soul. So we don't have poverty, but what we do have is worse than dead kids. The author complains early on about how the liberal elites confuse correlation for causation, and then goes on to mishandle statistics throughout. The highlight was certainly his point (again in the poverty chapter) that while poverty is ostensibly correlated with miscarriage, pregnancies out of wedlock are twice as likely to fail, and this is the actual underlying factor - that not being married is causing miscarriages. He claims that decriminalisation of suicide happened about the same time as an attempted suicide boom and therefore must be the cause. These statistical mishandlings are in stark contrast to his remaining claims, which are made without evidence or expertise of any kind. The 'straw poll' or 'informal poll' is a common feature, and astonishingly always proves the author right. Sociological judgements are everywhere, despite the author having no relevant background and no relevant consultation with experts (explained by the fact that he thinks he knows more than the experts because they are liberal elites). He constantly talks about how things are in 'England', despite having claimed to be writing only about the underclass and despite having no frame of reference for the whole nation. For someone who works with the chronically underprivileged, his lack of empathy is genuinely astounding. He explains, for example, that he met a homeless man who tried to rejoin mainstream society because his homelessness was literally killing him. However, this man found that he missed the thrill of being homeless and mentioned this to the doctor. Rather than think about how disadvantaged people often struggle with short-term vs long-term decision making, the author instead uses this example to prove that this man really only wanted to be homeless, and that most (all?) homeless people are only there because they want to be, and we should therefore stop enabling them. His position is that the government funds homelessness as a lifestyle choice, which is why people choose to take it up. He mentions that homelessness rises with unemployment, but explains that this topic can't be viewed through the lens of statistics. The number of topics that can't be viewed through the lens of statistics that disagree with his position is startling - he explains at one point how statistics are the tool of the liberal elite who are unwilling to engage properly with their subject matter. I took an enormous number of notes on this failure of a book, and it wouldn't be possible to write a review that included discussion of all of them. However, there are a few relevant quotes to highlighty: "Today no one seriously expects to go hungry in England" "Where fashion in clothes, bodily adornment, and music are concerned, it is the underclass that increasingly sets the pace. Never before has there been so much downward aspiration" "a system of welfare that makes no moral judgments in allocating economic rewards promotes anti-social egotism" "Come rain or shiine players may be seen arriving at the bingo hall as punctually as alcoholics arriving at the bars for opening time" (NB the author has a warped view of the bingo hall, lcaiming also that is populated by 'whales' and people looking for the 'simalucrum' of a social life, as if you can't legitimately socialise at bingo) "I recently heard an Oxford classics don aver that in point of quality there was nothing to choose between Mozart and the productions of the latest rap group" (naturally he is obsessed with the value of art from his culture over any other) Of his attendance at a black church - "Oh Lord, sighs the Juior Apostle, 'many are widout jobs, amny are widout mudders and farders, many are widout homes. We pray thee Lord to find dem work, to find dem homes, to bring comfort to dem dat are widout mudders and farders'" "The statistical association of crime with tattooing is stronger, I feel certain, than between crime and any other single factor, with the possible exception of smoking. Virtually all English criminals are smokers, a fact that sociologists have also unaccountably overlooked" (see earlier point about conviction that he know more about anything than any expert) Some other relevant points: - Why does the author go for his nighttime city walk? Why does he visit the betting shop and patronise its patrons? Why does he go to play bingo? Why does he go clubbing? The answer seems to be so he would write a column about how much better he is than people who do these things. He knew he wouldn't like them going in, but he is desperate for his superiority fix. - The word "Marx" (or derivative e.g. marxism, marxist) is mentioned 13 times - about once per chapter, usually concluding that Marxism has caused all the social evils of English life. - The chapter 'about' multiculturalism never actually goes on to explain how multiple cultures cause friction - it turns out instead just to be a chance to shit on Pakistani culture. - The author sincerely makes the argument that the BBC'S move from received pronunciation to more regional accents was based in the idea that lower cultures are subscribed to by larger populations (ie the working class), and therefore are superior. This idea had it's foundation in the writings of Marx, and this event is therefore symptomatic of engrained communism at the BBC. - The author makes multiple references to rap as an example of modern low culture being less good than classical western culture, or a sign of low culture or similar. The best selling artists at the time these articles were written were white pop artists - perhaps there is some other reason he decided instead to focus his snobbery on rap. - The author unironically uses the word 'slatternliness' All in all genuinely the most awful book I have read - basically a collection of random disparagements of other people for the sake of the author's feeling of superiority, with no evidence provided whatsoever and a healthy side of casual racism. The only interesting question this book raised was how tf it got on to my reading list. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
