This book was published in 2001, so it is possible that some things have improved since then. They could also be worse, but it’s hard to imagine that without contemplating a complete Mad Max -style collapse of civilization. The author is a doctor who worked at a hospital and prison in the poor parts of a large unnamed city in England, and wrote a column for a weekly newspaper. The situations he describes are grim, desperate, and hopeless. How bad have things become when a woman stays with a brutal thug whose beatings regularly send her to the hospital, because if she were to leave him she would have no protector on the mean streets and would be a target for even greater violence by street thugs? The situation is further aggravated by incompetent social services. The city councils and welfare agencies enforce capricious, harmful, and ineffective rules, when they can be bothered to do anything at all, to avoid having to actually do their jobs and investigate the cases presented to them. For instance, the limited number of public housing units available are parceled out using a Kafka-esque set of rules that encourages people to attempt suicide in order to move to the front of the queue. The theory is that anyone desperate enough to attempt suicide to get a new apartment must be in serious danger, but people know they can game the system and when they show up in the emergency room with an apparent overdose they claim it was a suicide attempt so they can jump the line. And the police? They are not interested in what happens in the slums, so assaults and burglaries are not investigated, much less prosecuted. It takes a murder for them to get off their collective asses and actually do something. The reason for this is that they have been battered by well intentioned but uninformed middle class do-gooders who think that the poor are the real victims, whose own alleged crimes pale in comparison to what society has done to them. As a result the police would rather do nothing than risk another blistering editorial in the papers accusing them of crushing the virtuous proletariat. The author’s writings have brought him enough notoriety to be invited to the soirées of the movers and shakers, the ones who could actually do something. Their response, however, is disbelief. They think that he is exaggerating at best, and likely making up the stories he tells in order to sell newspapers. When he replies that the situation is actually worse than he describes, because the papers will not print the worst stories, they dismiss him as a fabulist. Après moi, le déluge , and since the book was published the situation has continued to spiral downward. According to a UNICEF report from December 2023, of the thirty-nine countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the UK was thirty-seventh in child poverty, trailed only by Turkey and Columbia. And it is no longer just the poor who are affected; the rot in the social fabric has spread from the slums to engulf much of the country, reaching critical levels in health care, crime, education, and the economy. Just like in the US, politicians talk and talk and talk, and do nothing. The author has a clear, forceful writing style which gets right to the point. I couldn’t think of anything else to add, so I will let him speak for himself in the following quotes that I found interesting, informative, or alarming. - The lack of either internal or external restraint has allowed “natural” man to emerge: and far from being a delight, he is a charmless psychopath. Man is a wolf to man, and more particularly to woman. - It is a mistake to suppose that all men, or at least all Englishmen, want to be free. On the contrary, if freedom entails responsibility, many of them want none of it. They would happily exchange their liberty for a modest (if illusory) security. - The aim of untold millions is to be free to do exactly as they choose and for someone else to pay when things go wrong. - Violence, vulgarity, and educational failure: three aspects of modern English life - Is it surprising that recidivist burglars and car thieves now ask for therapy for their addiction, secure in the knowledge that no such therapy can or will be forthcoming, thereby justifying the continuation of their habit? - this is an attitude I have encountered many times among burglars and car thieves. They believe that anyone who possesses something can, ipso facto, afford to lose it, while someone who does not possess it is, ipso facto, justified in taking it. - the very term “dispossessed” carries its own emotional and ideological connotations. The poor have not failed to earn, the term implies, but instead have been robbed of what is rightfully theirs. Crime is thus the expropriation of the expropriators—and so not crime at all, in the moral sense. - The language of prisoners in particular teaches much about the dishonest fatalism with which people seek to explain themselves to others, especially when those others are in a position to help them in some way. - A closely shaven head with many scars on the scalp from collisions with broken bottles or glasses; a broken nose; blue tattoos on the hands, arms, and neck, relaying messages of love, hate, and challenge; but above all, a facial expression of concentrated malignity, outraged egotism, and feral speciousness—all these give the game away. Indeed, I no longer analyze the clues and deduce a conclusion: a man’s propensity to violence is as immediately legible in his face and bearing as any other strongly marked character trait. - Attempted suicide—what is also known as “parasuicide” or “deliberate self-harm,” in a vain effort to find the perfect scientific terminology—is the most common cause of emergency admission to the hospital in England among women and the second most common among men. - The boredom of self-absorption is thus one of the promoters of attempted suicide, and being attached to a cardiac monitor for a time or having an intravenous infusion in one’s arm helps to relieve it. I’m treated, therefore I am. - There is, for example, the pre-court-appearance overdose, precisely timed to preclude the appearance of the defendant in the dock and calculated to evoke sympathy for him when he finally does appear there, insofar as he now has a psychiatric history. Anyone with a psychiatric history, of course, must be of doubtful responsibility for his own actions and therefore can expect a correspondingly reduced sentence. - there is the preemployment overdose. A surprising number of the unemployed who succeed at last in finding a job take an overdose on the evening before they start work: their nonattendance the following morning gets them the sack before they’ve even begun, and so they join the ranks of the unemployed once more. - They are the stars of their own soap operas. An overdose—with the secure knowledge that help is at hand—is often the easiest way to relieve the continued crises in their lives. The hospital is warm and welcoming, the staff sympathetic. In the world that I describe, where else can one turn? - for the abused women, the failure to perceive in advance the violence of their chosen men serves to absolve them of all responsibility for whatever happens thereafter, allowing them to think of themselves as victims alone rather than the victims and accomplices they are. - Far from being rare, it is nowadays almost the norm, especially among underclass men, whose fragile sense of self-worth derives solely from possession of a woman and is poised permanently on the brink of humiliation at the prospect of losing this one prop in life. - When finally she leaves him, as she almost always does, he regards it as an act of the utmost perfidy and concludes that he must treat his next female companion with even greater severity to avoid a repetition. - But why does the woman not leave the man as soon as he manifests his violence? It is because, perversely, violence is the only token she has of his commitment to her. - So convinced is she that violence is an intrinsic and indispensable part of relations between the sexes, however, that if by some chance she alights next time upon a nonviolent man, she suffers acute discomfort and disorientation; she may, indeed, even leave him because of his insufficient concern for her. Many of my violently abused women patients have told me that they find nonviolent men intolerably indifferent and emotionally distant, rage being the only emotion they’ve ever seen a man express. They leave them quicker than they leave men who have beaten and otherwise abused them. - The cause of criminality among the white population of England is perfectly obvious to any reasonably observant person, though criminologists have yet to notice it. This cause is the tattooing of the skin. A slow-acting virus, like that of scrapie in sheep, is introduced into the human body via the tattooing needle and makes its way to the brain, where within a few years it causes the afflicted to steal cars, burgle houses, and assault people. - A surprisingly large number of auto-tattooists choose for the exercise of their dermatographical art the chief motto of British service industries, namely FUCK OFF. - the study of a seemingly minor social phenomenon such as tattooing affords us a little glimpse into the Hobbesian moral world inhabited by a section of the population with whom we normally have little contact: they actually want to be considered psychopathic. Not their eyes but their tattoos are the windows of their souls. - The popularity of tattooing in some quarters seems to be growing rather than declining. It is a curious characteristic of our age that cultural influences now seem to flow from the lower social classes upward, rather than from the upper classes downward, so that middle-class people are having themselves tattooed in greater numbers than ever before. - one of the [tattoo] parlors has opened a branch in Spain, mainly—but, alas, not entirely—for the drunken British oaf market. - They dance the way Scotsmen go to bars: to blot out the memory of their lives. - Authority of any kind is experienced as an insult to the self, and must therefore be challenged because it is authority. The world is thus a world of permanently inflamed egos, trying to impose their wills on one another. - in the modern urban world, anyone who cannot concentrate is truly a lost soul, for the only communities in such a world are those which grow up around interests that people hold in common. Moreover, in an age of increasing technological change, those without the ability or inclination to learn will be left farther and farther behind. - The sour satisfaction of being dependent on social security resides in its automatic conferral of the status of Victim, which in itself simultaneously explains one’s failure and absolves one of the obligation to make something of oneself - I recalled the faces of the young men in the prison now accused of murder: their hard, glittering, expressionless eyes—young men who recognized no law but their own desire of the moment. - as one commentator wrote, any National Lottery may be construed as a tax on stupidity. In fact, it is as much a tax on hopelessness and impatience as stupidity. The poorest and worst-educated section of the population spends the most, both relatively and absolutely, on lottery tickets. - Life, in this view, is seventy years of tedium sandwiched between two eternities of oblivion. - Epidemiologists estimate that higher cigarette consumption among the poor accounts for half the difference in life expectancy between the richest and poorest classes in England—and to smoke that much takes money. - When every benefit received is a right, there is no place for good manners, let alone for gratitude. - a system of welfare that makes no moral judgments in allocating economic rewards promotes anti-social egotism. - egos inflamed by the fact that the inhabitants have been, and continue to be, treated so transparently by social policymakers as faceless, interchangeable, passive ciphers that the only way to assert their individuality is to behave anti-socially. I fight, therefore I am. - A cultivated manner, a refusal to swear in public, an intellectual interest, a distaste for coarseness, a protest against littering are the objects of mockery and obloquy: and so it takes courage, even heroism, to behave with common decency. - it is a truth universally acknowledged in the slums that there is nothing to be gained by individual effort, since the world is so unjustly organized. And in the absence of either fear or hope, only the present moment has any reality: you do what is most amusing, or least boring, at each passing moment. - nonjudgmentalism is at best indifference to the suffering of others, at worst a disguised form of sadism. How can one respect people as members of the human race unless one holds them to a standard of conduct and truthfulness? - The pretense by intellectuals—which, alas, has not been without its practical effects in the real world—that the police are but the executive arm of a hypocritical bourgeoisie determined to preserve its ill-gotten gains at the expense of the poor, is terrifyingly shallow when tested against the experience of people who suffer weak policing. - even the most liberal of university professors has now noticed that his students can’t spell or punctuate. - self-respect being radically incompatible with failure, the very idea of failure itself had to go. The only way to achieve this was to do away with education altogether—an experiment that could be carried out in full only on that section of the population least concerned about education in the first place, thus creating a now hereditary caste of ineducables.
