This is a decent read. Things look full of promise for Alex Cross. His new job with the FBI is prestigious and exciting. But no sooner has he gone in for orientation, when all heck breaks loose. An all-women team of kidnappers has been snatching successful, upstanding man and women right before their families eyes--possibly to sell them into slavery. The Alex Cross Series has been overall a good one, but there are times that Patterson does better writing than others. This one is pretty good. As usual the case started almost immediately and while Alex Cross now works for the FBI and has a new environment around him it still felt like good old times to be back in this series, even though I kinda missed his former partner and friend John Sampson who only made a short appearance this time. Alex's knowledge of the D.C. streets, together with his unique insights into criminal psychology, make this case one that only he can solve--if he can just get his colleagues to set aside their staid and outdated methods. With unexpected twists and whiplash surprises, this is another irresistible audio program. The story dealt with kidnappings of really beautiful women and a few men and human trafficking and had a good level of suspense. What bothered me most was that a lot of things happened way too fast and I sometimes had the impression that James Patterson didn't take enough time to thoroughly write some scenes (maybe because he is too busy publishing 8,323 novels per year). There were passages where Alex and his colleagues flew to a place, went on a mission and what felt like made it sometimes a bit hard for the reader to feel as if I a part of the investigation. Also it seemed to me as if Alex' and his team's progress was often based on luck and not on their skills which made the case appear a bit simple. I'm not very fond of Christine his former wife, but I love little Alex. So to see big Alex giving up his boy is really tough. However I had a good time listening to the book and it seems as if Patterson has found a new remarkable villain with the "Wolf" and I'm definitely making progress. Recommend.
