My aunt gave my mom this book, who gave it to me. It is more of a devotional than a Bible study. There is a Bible verse at the beginning of each devotion, but it is not studied as per meaning, context, or application, particularly. Some of the devotions do have to do with applying the verse, but others only seem tangentially related. I used that word tangentially not that long ago in a conversation and the person didn't know what I meant. It's a math term. It touches on one point which might be related, but then rushes off on its own rabbit trail. Not that the rabbit trails are bad. They're not. Quite a few are funny or interesting or comforting, worth reading. But they are not the inspired Word of God. The book made an observation about itself and other devotionals like it, which I thought was astute. It (W. B. Freeman?) said, "Even if we have a 'hearty breakfast' in the Word each morning, there may be times when the pressures of the day come to bear in late afternoon." That is when the author suggests reading this book. This book was not intended to replace an existing Bible reading time, but to supplement it later in the day. That's how I take most devotionals. Whenever I read them, I don't feel like I'm "hearing" the voice of God through Scripture. The voice feels different, the voice of the devotional author. And hearing the voice of God through Scripture is precious enough to me that I don't replace it, although I may read other things in addition to it from time to time. I especially liked the devotionals on conflict, because so few people in this society try to resolve conflict well, but it can be done. I listed some quotes from that section in the Favorite Quotes below. In addition to spirituality, this book talked about tea and tea-time quite a bit, as its title would suggest, both having tea individually and socially. In the social aspects of it, it reminded me of Dee Brestin's "A Woman of Hospitality" or Sally Clarkson's "The Life-Giving Table." I'd recommend either of those books if the topic interests you further, but I did prefer "A Woman of Hospitality." At one point, the author generalized something of all people, which is really only true of extroverts. It was about organizing your day due to your energy levels, and saying that dealings with people energize one. "Meeting with people requires less energy than attention to task and detail." No, meeting with people depletes introverts. Actually, if you were to turn that order of events on its head, it might be about right. For more information about Christian introverts, I'd recommend Adam McHugh's "Introverts in the Church." Favorite quotes: "Separate the wrongdoer from the wrong. Be angry at the deed, not the doer." "Wise enough to know that in some situations, saying very little is a better healing balm than empty words of sympathy." "to cut off the garbled state of our own preoccupations to give to people who want our quiet attention." "Better than words is the love of God and His never-ending compassion ... characteristics expressed through His willing-to-listen children." "You spoke a kind word to me and changed my life." "In most cases, your tranquil demeanor will help the other person to calm down. And practicing self-control in frustrating circumstances lengthens your own fuse - as well as diffuse strife." "Many persons have a wrong idea about what constitutes true happiness. It is not attained through self-gratification, but through fidelity to a worthy purpose." - Helen Keller "One of the greatest pleasures in life is a home-cooked evening meal." "I like me best when I'm with You." "Instead of returning anger with anger, kindness proves the best peacemaker." "It is nearly impossible to be a blessing to others when we are grossly undernourished ourselves."
