“History, Michio believed, was a long series of surprises that seemed inevitable in retrospect.” ― James S.A. Corey, Babylon's Ashes The above quote captures the spirit of this book well. It was an interesting premise for a history book, examining some of the major turning points in military conflicts and considering how victory was sometimes the result of things that on any other day would have been inconsequential. Just as a door can swing this way or that on its hinges, so the author speculates that history went this way instead of that way because of these events referred to as hinge factors. He writes: 'Some chroniclers wish us to believe that battles are won by valour and the brilliance of war lords, on whom they bestow the accolade of 'genius' when they are triumphant. They record the victor as being brilliant and the loser as not. And yet, there is no secret formula to the victorious outcome of a battle – except that much depends on who commits the bigger blunder. Or, to put no finger point on it, many battles have been decided by the caprice of weather, bad (or good) intelligence, unexpected heroism or individual incompetence – in other words, the unpredictable. In military terms, this phenomenon is known as: The Hinge Factor.' A barrel of schnapps is one example of a seemingly inconsequential random factor documented in the book, three misplaced cigars in another. The hinge factor at Waterloo was a handful of headless nails and a few hammers (for want of a nail, the kingdom was lost?) Sometimes the hinge factors are not physical objects but human interactions. A few heated words in the wrong place at the wrong time would be deemed inconsequential in terms of the amount of time they take up in the grand scheme of things and yet they were sometimes the thing that fundamentally altered the outcome of events. The book begins with the Trojan Horse in 1184 BC and documents seventeen such hinge factors, ending with the Gulf War in 1991. Unfortunately I found the premise of the book was far more intriguing that its execution. Ultimately the book failed to capture my interest. Three stars.
