At the beginning of Captain America: Civil War , the Avengers are in Sokovia to stop a bad-guy of the week from stealing biological weaponry. Faced with defeat and unwilling to be brought to justice quietly, the villain detonates a bomb hoping to take out Captain America and dozens of civilian bystanders. However, Wanda uses her telekinesis to divert the explosion, unwittingly sending the bomb into an office building, killing dozens more. The Avengers walk away without a scratch, while the innocents around them are decimated and left to pick up the pieces (literally) of their friends and community. A weird analogy for the Left Behind series, I'll admit, and yet one that perfectly illustrates the metastasized failure of the series. The Tribulation Force is now an elite group of underground Christians solely focused on battling the armies of the Antichrist. A known worldwide entity, they've become a thorn in the Antichrist's side as Satan indwelt in Nicolae's body seeks to tighten his grip on the Earth as God rains judgments upon humanities survivors. At this point, the Tribulation Force is totally on the offensive, moving around the world in tactical teams to strengthen the global black market for believers. Yet here we run into the major failure of this novel. Like the Avengers, Rayford and his plucky little gang swoop into an area, cause chaos, and leave behind a trail of victims in their wake. What's worse, although several acknowledge this, nobody gives enough of a shit to actually change the outcome. Sacrificing believers is okay, as long as it's not our believers. Sacrificing nameless Christians is God's plan, but if Buck doesn't get to abandon his family and run halfway across the globe, he can throw a hissy fit. It's really disheartening to see so many 'practicing' Christians turn to this series as some kind of blueprint for Christian belief. This series is so messed up, Moms for Liberty would be picketing the local libraries and school systems if it was called by any other name. I just don't know anymore.
