Agatha Christie's first novel and it shows, a somewhat convoluted story with too many red herrings and even an unneeded trial at the end, written by the bored writer during the First World War ( the Great War) no surprise when rejected by the publishers until 1920. Don't get me wrong this is a highly entertaining book for the mystery fan, though with a little more experience the eagle will fly. Now the murder case set in the majestic estate of Styles home of a wealthy woman Emily Inglethorp 70, she recently married a man twenty years her junior, no reason to state people are dubious of his motives and ardor. The lady is no old fool just the wrong man she selects and soon regrets but the factual cliche states love is blind. Mr. Alfred Inglethorp is unloved by relatives of the unblushing bride, her two stepsons John and Lawrence Cavendish especially, John's pretty wife Mary is acting rather in a puzzling way and a new will which changes the future for them but not for the better doesn't help his popularity. Hercule Poirot a Belgian refugee from the German invasion, one of the 250,000 living in England ( they were asked to go back home after the war) and grateful to Mrs. Inglethorp for her financial assistance. A well known detective in Belgium , short in stature eccentric in manners, a funny looking gentleman with the strange appearing mustache who the public here cannot take seriously . A poisoning in the edifice brings the situation to a boil, death is so final everything else seems trivial, still Inspector Japp from the renowned Scotland Yard in a rural atmosphere seems like the proverbial fish out of water, luckily Poirot an old friend is nearby to clear the picture as others mock the foreigner's abilities. However Poirot in his debut radiates magnetism the reader never tires of him or the many novels which follow decade after decade, the legend has become solidified like steel. Mr. Arthur Hastings a friend of Hercules as well as the family of Emily Inglethorp living at Styles Court and is the clueless narrator, a man always one step behind the great sleuth frustrated by his furtive behavior. He only learns the truth when the master investigator reveals it. Arthur an amateur with misguided thoughts has discovered a genius, and all his skepticism disappears, so do the quite impressed people at Styles Court. A promising beginning, which bears fruition... the final words.
