The hell was that? I picked this up—fortunately free from one of those little libraries from the side of the road—because Hoffman's voice, often lyrical and dreamy, usually makes my writing muse happy. This made the muse and every cell in my body angry. Apparently it's a retelling of Wuthering Heights . I've never read that book nor seen/read any of its adaptations. All I know about it, I've gathered from cultural osmosis. Near as I can tell though, March ain't no Cathy and Hollis ain't Heathcliff. The basic story is that for some reason, when March is a young girl, her father brings home an orphan boy, Hollis, that he picked up off the streets from the big city of Boston. Yeah, it makes no damned sense. Who does that? The kid is sullen and weird and March's older brother, a sullen and weird rich boy, picks on him. This, is supposed to be why Hollis grows up to be a psycho. March, meanwhile, insta-loves him and in time he...mostly he like fucking her because he's a teen boy. They have a passionate, elicit teen romance. He eventually leaves. She eventually marries a very nice man, moves to California and has a daughter. But she pines for Hollis. Oh, how she pines. When a family friend passes away, March returns to her hometown. Hollis has moved back years ago, and in revenge for a multitude of stupid slights, has bought the whole town and is the resident rich asshole. March instantly leaps into an affair with Hollis, dumping her husband and neglecting her daughter (who falls in love with her cousin). Hollis is vile. Not in a good way. I like anti-heroes. Heck, I once spent years writing a 200K fanfiction of MCU's Loki, a guy who blew up New York city. But Loki is smart and funny. Hollis has the charm of a soggy dog turd. Ultimately, we find out he once earned a living brutally killing horses, so, yeah, fuck that guy. No, don't fuck him. Run him over with a truck. Repeatedly. Amusingly, his end is in a truck, though he doesn't suffer enough for me. March is worse. Her only personality trait is longing for Hollis. No career, no hobbies. Supposedly she's a jewelry artist, but that's just a few sentences in the book. I'm not sure what she does when she's not fucking Hollis or ignoring her daughter. Given that her husband reminds me of my own spouse, I hated her extra-hard for cuckolding such a decent man. The only likeable characters in the book are March's daughter, Gwen, Tarot the old racehorse and Sister the terrier. I was really hoping Tarot would kick either March or Hollis (or both) to death. Oh, and compared to Hoffman's usual writing, the prose was tepid and pedestrian. Like she was phoning this shit in. I don't know what Oprah was smokin' when she recommended this book, but it must've been some primo grade stuff.
