Oh my goodness. Just about the only cool thing about this book is that de Hartog started research for this book while in a Nazi concentration camp. You want the book to be good for that reason. Unfortunately, once the book starts, you're left wondering when the good stuff will start. A lot of the book reads like a simple book report. There are end notes for everything with very little explanation of anything, making it seem as if de Hartog doesn't have any knowledge of the subject. When you read a non-fiction book, you want the author to at least persuade you into thinking that he/she knows what he is talking about. Yes, the book contains a lot of information, but without explanation of new concepts or major statements, you're left wondering whether de Hartog understands anything that he wrote. I don't question him, I'm just commenting on the style of the book itself. Also, far too much of the book has nothing to do with Genghis Khan. The final quarter of the book, or maybe the final third, covers Mongol expansion after the first Great Khan's death. Surely this has something to do with Temujin (Genghis's given name) in that he created the empire and its form that would later conquer more nations, but this book, by its title and by de Hartog's introduction, is supposed to be a reader-friendly exposition on Genghis Khan himself, not on the Mongol Empire in general. Maybe the final quarter of the book would be more acceptable if de Hartog had tied threads together, but he doesn't. And whenever the Mongols, in the de Hartog's coverage, are about to encounter a new tribe or nation, de Hartog then spends a significant amount of time giving that tribe or nation's history. Again, this wouldn't seem like such a big deal if that history were more connected to the story that de Hartog tells, but he doesn't connect threads. A lot of the time, too, de Hartog makes grand statements like, "This was one of the greatest campaigns in military history," or "He was one of the greatest tacticians ever," but leaves the reader to figure out why. de Hartog does tell you the background information that apparently should lead you to agree with his assessment but he never actually tells you why that information is so important or should lead to such conclusions. All in all, by reading this book you will probably learn some stuff about Genghis Khan and the Mongols if you are currently clueless, like I was. But even being clueless prior to reading, you'll finish the book wondering why you wasted your time.
