***Update: This re-read was just as fantastic as every other time I've read this book. Now that I'm (slowly) completing a chronological re-read of the series, I was dancing around shouting "Yes! Finally!" and reveling in the revelations of this book. In terms of series progression, it is as satisfying as its predecessor is angst-inducing. I'll likely return to it many more times over the years, it's simply one of those beloved books you circle back to again and again.*** I basically can't write anything about this book without what I consider to be spoilers, so I'll tell you about the series and my feelings for it instead. This is probably my favorite book series, not least of which because I started it as a child and it holds a certain aspect of nostalgia. In fact, it almost seems inappropriate to use it for my 2016 reading challenge because (1) It's not the first time I've read it and (2) I almost always listen to the audiobooks for this series. However, it had been so long since the last time I "read" it that I couldn't remember the plot or the ending, and I will definitely be listening to other audiobooks for this reading challenge so I decided to count it anyway. I just needed a good Amelia Peabody mystery. The reason I prefer the audiobooks is because I am not an expert in Egyptology, the geography of Egypt, or the pronunciation of Arabic names and phrases, so the books make much more sense to me when I hear the words pronounced correctly. Also, by this stage in my relationship with these books, I can't imagine the characters' voices any way other than how Barbara Rosenblat produces them... I hear them like that in my head when I do read the books, but it's much more fun to hear her do them, particularly because of the aforementioned pronunciations. (A side note: I highly recommend that if you listens to these audiobooks, make sure that Barbara Rosenblat is the narrator, because any other narrator is tragic and ruins half the fun.) This series follows a strong female lead during the British victorian period, although most of the series takes place in Egypt. It was written by a woman who lived just down the street from me, and although I never personally meet her, I always knew her as "that eccentric, reclusive author," which I can assure you only made her seem more awesome. There was also something wonderful to me as a child about a 70's era feminist with a PhD in egyptology who got bored being a stay-at-home mom and wrote mystery books to keep herself entertained. In retrospect, this series was probably one of my earliest introductions to feminism, all wrapped up in a Victorian era period piece where the main character thinks women in general-and herself in particular-far more capable than society gives them credit for. This is made all the more delightful by her endearing character flaws, including overestimating her own abilities and competence. In fact, the flaws of all the main characters: Emerson's temper and inability to recognize his limitations, Ramses' refusal to express his emotions and propensity to get into trouble, Neferet's impetuousness, and everyone's tendency not to confide in one another when doing so would resolve difficulties so much easier... it all just makes them more endearing to me. The series is at times predictable, but only in a way that makes the characters seem like old friends. In fact, the mystery in each book drives the plot, but the character development drives the series and is what makes me enjoy it so much. He Shall Thunder In The Sky is particularly good for bringing about some character development that I had been waiting for as well as some interesting and unexpected revelations. I do highly recommend this book (it's one of the better books in the series), but I would suggest that anyone interested start at the beginning of the series. Each book stands alone, but reading them in chronological (not publication) order makes it much more fun. *I read this as part of my 2016 Reading Challenge for the category "A mystery or detective novel"
