The first half of this book is great. The second half is both boring and disturbing. Let me explain. The first half consists of Patterson’s description of the title story, his battles with two man-eating lions in Tsavo. It’s really incredible that this happened; I thought that it was just a myth that lions could acquire a taste for human flesh. One suspects that Patterson could have been exaggerating, but the style of the book is so plain and direct that he comes across as honest, even humble. I know of few real-life adventure stories that can match this one. The second half is boring because there is no comparable adventure story. It is disturbing because it is essentially a collection of anecdotes from Patterson’s hunting expeditions. One should not judge people of former times by today's standards, so I will say nothing of Patterson as a man. I will say, though, that I was baffled and upset by the degree to which Patterson and his cronies loved to shoot wild animals. They couldn’t get enough of it. The book is filled with anecdotes like this. (This is a parody, not a quote): One fine day on the savannah, I came across a beautiful waterbuck. Not wishing to pass up this opportunity for a new pair of horns, I quickly took aim and shot. I missed his heart, though, and only managed to break its shoulder. It reared up on his hind legs in fear, so I shot it a few more times until it fell down. I was making my way to it when, out of the corner of my eye, I noticed two lions sleeping peacefully in the tall grass not far off. They didn’t present a threat, but one had a beautiful black mane, so I shot it in the face. The bullet failed to hit the brain, though, only lodging itself in the tongue, so the lion came charging down at me. Luckily, my gun bearer started running off, which distracted the lion, and gave me a good shot at its heart. Soon it was on the ground clawing and gasping for air. Soon after that, a lioness came bounding towards him, apparently not wishing to abandon her mate. I shot her a few times, just to scare her off. Then I plunged a knife into the lion’s heart. If anything, this book is an excellent window into the colonial era of East Africa. Again, I don’t wish to besmirch Patterson’s reputation. A quick glance at his biography shows that he was actually an extraordinary man. I’m just glad our view towards wildlife is changing.
