The Blue Flower A historical novel, set, in Jena, Prussia, and various other locations in the vicinity. The story takes place during the late 18th century with themes of : "…German romantic philosophy and inconvenient love …" ... the Guardian . com books… It's about Friedrich (Fritz) von Hardenberg (1772-1801), the Romantic era poet (Novalis), and his love for Sophie von Kuhn (1782-1797), a young girl whom he meets while he is training to be a manager of the family's Saxony area salt works. Sadly, Sophie died of a liver abscess as a complication of pulmonary tuberculosis. She had had to endure (three) operations without anesthesia to no effect (and with little to no understanding of the matter). Fritz also died at a young age, a few year's later, of cystic fibrosis. Fritz family did not approve of the relationship in part because of her lack of educational abilities and social status. She was also very young at the time (twelve years old): "... Friedrich, has entangled himself with a young woman of the middle classes." Sophie's bravery finally warmed her to them enough for Fritz's father to make a magnanimous, though rather empty, gesture towards her at what turned out to be the end of her life: "The Bernhard thought that it did take away from it a little." Jacob Dietmahler, Fritz's friend (studied together in Jena), open the story at a washday at Fritz's house in Weissenfels. As the "(almost)" Deputy Assistant to the Professor of Medicine, Jacob comes back to haunt Sophie in Jena with his lack of practical good sense (contrast the washing) and that of the medical profession, in their decisions about Sophie (in early untested medical practices): "... was not such a fool that he could not see that they had arrived at his friend's home on the washday." ...and ... "I don't question the Professor's (Stark) prognosis." (Jacob's father was a plasterer. His siblings have died from illness (two brothers (scarlet fever), a sister from consumption). By this time (washday), Fritz has studied at three universities (Jena, Leipzig, Wittenberg/law) and learnt about the salt business and met Sophie (but she is not in her final illness). The title's blue flower comes from Fritz's novel fragment: Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1800). Searching for the blue flower has symbolic meanings attached to it such as transcendence, yearning and passion "…intellectual creativity … what you want in life…". Penelope Fitzgerald's life is interesting in relation to the story too. The author had to make a big effort to prioritize her writing aspirations after spending her life looking after her husband (shell-shocked from WW2) and children. Her writing career and literary works are mirrored the book's story about the Romantic period with its military background and, more positively, its artistic innovations. The book's presentation of Novalis's attitude towards the women in his life (Karoline Just, Fredericke) is relevant to the author's own experiences of misogyny (negative comments by publishers and other authors). Penelope Fitzgerald maintains a sense of determination, practicality and positivity. Quoting various blogs about the book: "it's a plea for sympathy, for courage and for understanding" and it demonstrates "pity and kindness". "Her imagination might have been especially fired up by Italy, Russia and Germany, but she declared herself a typically English novelist because “most English people think life is not important enough to be tragic and too serious to be comic.” minorliteratures.com. The Romantic period began roughly around 1798 and lasted until 1837. There was the French Revolution and other social changes in people's work (industrialization and colonialism) and family life such as the role of women, education and medical advances. There was a growing awareness of the value of pursuing literary (and other) self-fulfilling goals that were not easily attainable. Conversely, the widespread destructiveness of European war maneuvers (Prussian military disasters). Additionally, the book captures the more ethereal qualities of the Romantic era's literature. Particularly evocative are memories of Schloben-bei-Jena ("through the pearly dusk which filled the main hall you could see the distant lighted kitchen at the end of a cavernous passageway" ... ... and the foreshadowing of forthright Bernhard's death: "that he preferred to live by the river." These are two books in the library cover the topic in further detail: 1. Magnificent rebels : the first romantics and the invention of the self by Wulf, Andrea, author. Edition: First American edition. Publisher, Date: New York : Alfred A. Knopf, [2022] 2. Jena 1800 : the republic of free spirits by Neumann, Peter, 1987- author. ......... Notes Born May 2, 1772, in Oberwiederstedt, Germany, toward the twilight of the Enlightenment, his schooling coincided with the tumultuous Storm and Stress period of German literature. Here he steeped himself in the works of Friedrich von Schiller, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and finally forged his intellectual maturity in the furnace of the Kantian or Critical philosophy. Above all, Novalis belonged to that extraordinarily talented younger generation of writers and thinkers who have become known in history as the “Romantic Circle.” This enormously influential group also included the brothers August Wilhelm and Friedrich Schlegel, Dorothea Veit, Ludwig Tieck, Friedrich Schleiermacher, Caroline Schlegel, and the young Friedrich von Schelling. Gathered at the end of the eighteenth century, their innovative literary talents generated an avalanche of essays, fragments, dialogues, speeches, and notebooks, whose revolutionary shock waves still continue to reverberate today throughout the literary, cultural, and artistic worlds. Wikipedia. ..... Father Freiherr von Hardenberg b. 1738 bought his house (in Weissenfels) from the widow von Pilsach. Director of the Salt Mining Administration of Saxony (1784). AT Weissenfels, bought the house in the KlosterGasse in 1786. Member of the nobility. Properties of Oberwiederstadt on the river Wipper in the county of Mansfeld (once a convent), manor and farm of Schloben-bei-Jena. Worshiped with the Moravian brethren. Seven Years’ War: Hanoverian Legion. Peace of Paris. Married, but in the 1769 epidemic of smallpox, Wipper, wife died. Moravian Brethren - dead, awakened, or converted. 1770 remarried, to Auguste (below). Schooling/work of his children: 1.Brethren of Neudietendorf - between Erfurt and Gotha, colony of Herrnhut … Moravians, refugees from persecution, had been allowed to settle down in peace … 2.Tutor from Leipzig. 3.Universities 4.Salt mine. ...... Mother Auguste Bernhardine (née von Böltzig) (1749–1818). Eleven children: 1.Charlotte (1771), plain. House of Maidens, married, Lausitz. 2.Fritz Hardenberg (1772), wide-eyed. 3.Erasmus (1775), stumpy… profound religious conversion … but I have not... 4.Sidonie, open-hearted. 5.Karl, easy going. 6.Anton, painstaking. 7.August Wilhelm Bernhard (1788), angel. 8. Benigna (born at Schloben) 9.Christof, baby 10. Unnamed 11. " ..... Uncle ...Wilheim (1728-1800), Lucklum, Duchy of Braunschweig. Governor of the Saxon division of the German Order of Knighthood. Sophie's grandfather. William von Kuhn had bought the Manor House of Grüningen and Nieder-Topfstedt, in 1743. William also acquired a patent of nobility. Sophie's father, mother and step-father: Johann von Kuhn’s wife was Sophie Wilhelmine Schaller. Their children are: George von Kuhn Hans von Kuhn Friederike von Mandelsloh. Christiane Wilhelmine Sophie von Kühn (1782-1797), daughter of Johann von Kuhn, In 1787, Sophie Wilhelmine Schaller (Sophie’s mother) married Herr Johann Rudolf von Rockenthien, formerly Captain in the army of his Highness Prince Schwarzburg-Sondeshausen. Rockenthien and Schaller are parents of: Jette, Rudi, Mimi and Gunter. ....... Fritz's writing: The young man lay restlessly on his bed and remembered the stranger and his stories. ‘It was not the thought of the treasure which stirred up such unspeakable longings in me,’ he said to himself. ‘I have no craving to be rich, but I long to see the blue flower. It lies incessantly at my heart, and I can imagine and think about nothing else. Never did I feel like this before. It is as if until now I had been dreaming, or as if sleep had carried me into another world …’ ‘What is the meaning of the blue flower?’ asks Fritz again and again. The meaning of the blue flower is hard to pinpoint, which is, ironically, the whole point. The blue flower is symbolic of a vague inexpressible yearning for the infinite, a Romantic emblem of love and striving. I started from D.H. Lawrence’s ‘fatal flower of happiness’ at the end of The Fox, having always wondered how DHL knew it was blue … blog notes. ...... Thoughts from Penelope Fitzgerald about the sensible women in the book: "Frau Leutnant Mandelsloh, the elder sister and counterpart of Sophie von Kuhn, Novalis’s young betrothed, and Karoline Just, the niece and household caretaker of Novalis’s teacher, Coelestin Just are the: ...voice of reason, logic and understanding against their more facetious male companions" … wisdom, insight … not passed over … Karoline and Mandelsloh are the only two characters who perceive its true significance. ... “art of using the sense world at will” ... an object of nature that he as subject transforms into a work of art through thought. …object is further suggested through Novalis’ treatment of the two women in the novel who convey the strongest sense of subjecthood, Karoline and the Mandlesloh… …brushes off their intellectual receptiveness … doting … what other voices have been silenced… love story… tragedy … It is the unabsolved failure of Novalis’ recognition of Karoline and Mandelsloh as equals. The tragedy is the intellectual rejection and silencing of their understanding of, and contributions to, Novalis’ ideas. … those who are overlooked … ... “Novels arise out of the shortcomings of history.” (The Blue Flower, exerted from Fragmente und Studien, 1799–1800) With The Blue Flower, Fitzgerald evidently suggests that the historical negation of women’s voices is ... Blog notes.
