THE LOVELY BONES by Alice Sebold earned 5 intense stars from me! My Tease… Heaven’s Inbetween is for “the watchers,” those souls who aren’t ready to leave behind their connections to Earth. Souls…who have unanswered questions or unfinished business. Who haven’t learned to accept their deaths. Fourteen-year-old Susie Salmon is a watcher. Although Susie knows that Mr. Harvey (whose house is in her neighborhood) raped and murdered her, none of the living know. At least Susie’s father and her younger sister Lindsey have growing suspicions about the loner who has a bird’s-eye-view of Susie’s junior high school and the adjacent sports- and corn- fields from his second floor window. Trouble is, the police have no evidence to implicate Mr. Harvey. All law enforcement knows is that the eccentric widower answers all their questions. In her Inbetween Heaven, Susie has her own questions, only she doesn’t know the answers. Should she spend her time watching Mr. Harvey, in hopes that he will be stopped? Or should she watch her family as they struggle to accept her death and move forward? Which focus will heal Susie so she can leave the Inbetween and transition to the Heaven intended to bring her peace? Thoughts… MESSAGE: For me, THE LOVELY BONES offers a spiritual message, which is remarkable since I don’t remember religion being mentioned once! The story, however, is much more than its surface. From my perspective, THE LOVELY BONES addresses the ancient question of where we (the living and the dead not resting in peace) should focus. Should we focus on plucking out the weeds (like vile Mr. Harvey) in our “fields” of existence? Or…should we focus on growing the corn or wheat or soybeans (which when healthy, will choke out the weeds)? This seems to be the very question character Susie Salmon struggles with. I can empathize with this internal conflict, as I wanted more than anything to have Mr. Harvey plucked from the Earth and thrown into burning Hell. To be frank, it was this desired outcome that compelled me to flip the pages. In fact, I actually wanted to take away a star from my rating because… I didn’t get what I wanted for a long, long time. Mr. Harvey lived on and on and even became secondary in the story. I started shouting to the author…WHAT ABOUT MR. HARVEY??? He’s still on Earth STALKING AND KILLING young girls and women??? DO SOMETHING! NOW!!! Years later, something FINALLY does happen to Mr. Harvey, but it feels more by chance than by intention. (The movie made it seem like a deliberate intervention, but I didn't get that from the book at all.) But then I restored the star because… this is a story of acceptance and finding peace, not on delivering retribution. Of knowing what you can control and what you can’t. About growing and finding peace despite evil lurking in cornfields or neighborhoods or parks or buses. Not sure about you, but this focus and practice are difficult to achieve. Which is why the message is so important. Which grows peace faster…growing goodness or weeding out evil? The answer is certainly worth thinking about! WRITING: The writing is outstanding. Even the simplest sentences carry emotional weight: “Inside, my sister’s heart closed like a fist.” HUMOR: No doubt, it is hard to interject humor into a story like this; however, there is some humor found: “Grandma Lynn predicted I’d have a long life because I had saved my brother’s life. As usual, Grandma Lynn was wrong.” OVERALL: This was an intense read that offered a surprising message. I highly recommend this 5-star read about finding acceptance and peace among the vilest of weeds. Note: This book contains triggers regarding rape and sexual violence toward children, girls, and women.
