To celebrate completing my 1000th book of the decade, I chose Agatha Christie’s first Hercule Poirot mystery novel for this reading slot. I am especially proud of this milestone because earlier in the decade when I was working full-time there was one month (September 2014) where I only read one book and two months where I only read two books (May and June 2012)! Agatha Christie wrote this novel in 1916, and it was first published in the United States by John Lane for $2.00 per copy in October 1920. It was first published in the United Kingdom by The Bodley Head in January 1921 and could be purchased for seven shillings and sixpence. Another historically significant fact is that when Penguin Books first began publishing in 1935, this novel was one of the first 10 books they published. Agatha Christie did not start out as a Master of the mystery genre, but she persisted and went on to solve some difficult literary problems with the genre via her books – literary problems that had even stumped the illustrious Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. (Specifically, the problem with introducing too many clues that end up canceling each other out). And, she knows her Shakespeare! The line from 1602’s Hamlet is, “Though this be madness yet there is method in it.” In this novel, one of the residents of the Styles estate asks in reference to Hercule Poirot, ”Is he quite mad, Mr. Hastings?” and Hastings replies, ”I honestly don’t know. Sometimes, I feel sure he is as mad as a hatter; and then, just as he is at his maddest, I find there is method in his madness.” For a debut novel, this one is excellent. It is well thought through, the writing is clear and the pace is brisk and entertaining. The characters are all interesting, too. At first I thought I might have to write them all down, but instead I just highlighted their first reference in case I needed to look back. I never had to – before the story is even a couple of chapters in, I knew exactly who all the characters were and what their relationships were to each other. I really had to pay attention while reading this novel. There are, indeed, a plethora of clues. Although Hercule Poirot’s busy mind is sifting them out as they appear, sorting them into mental cubbyholes, and weighing and measuring them, it is true that many of them cancel each other out. Poirot and Hastings (the narrator) are working together, yet Poirot doesn’t disclose all of his deductions to his friend; he tries to prod him into discovering his own deductions. So we have Hastings coming to certain conclusions and Poirot coming to other conclusions. There’s an entire ship load of red herrings in this story! I thoroughly enjoyed this story, and although I did guess the actual culprit at least once, I got there via a different route altogether – and it didn’t stop me from suspecting all the other people in the household of murder either. Agatha Christie, if you did in fact write this novel as a challenge to present a murder mystery that leaves one guessing until Hercule Poirot points his finger, you succeeded with me! One last note: while Agatha Christie and her contemporaries helped to open doors for many of today’s mystery writers (especially women), there were also earlier female mystery writers who opened those doors for Ms Christie and her colleagues. I hope to take this journey with Agatha Christie from novice to master and learn more about how she accomplished that feat.
