An occasionally muddled but always ambitious novel, _The Five of Cups_ is Caitlin R. Kiernan's "lost" first novel. The characters are interesting, despite the claims of those who would not represent or publish it that they are too immoral and unsympathetic, who drift through the novel in a non-chronological sequence of dreams and memories. A bit more narrative focus could have turned this interesting novel into a truly great one. Virginia is a vampire who was created by accident when the semen of the vampire who raped her entered her bloodstream and made her one of the undead. Her unlife is a very odd one, as she passes from self-induced crisis to self-induced crisis, with violence as the means to solve all of her problems. Which is fair enough, because if I was a predator of the living, a monster of the night, I would probably just do what was easiest too. Why risk death when you can end something quickly and relatively easily with violence instead? Virginia stumbles across a conspiracy surrounding a collection of letters regarding the Holy Grail and its supposed ability to allow vampires to transcend their accursed state to become something else. I wanted to see more of the details of this conspiracy, which remains mostly in the background to the events that transpire. A self-professed marriage between Arthurian myths and vampirism (both the splatterpunk and Gothic types), by way of _The Waste Land_, this book feels one draft away from fantastic. It does, however, present an intriguing insight into the author's fascinations and writing processes. Much of what is missing from this novel is passion, that indescribable connection with the text that catapaults you from page one to the end. This connection was only a spider's thread away, which is perhaps all the more a shame. The narrative arc could have been more precisely formed, to add that element of investment in the story, and I hope that in future we might get to see the author's final version of this book. On the plus side, the writing is rather poetic and flows well. Caitlin clearly relishes language and rejects the current fashion for sparse prose. Overall, this is an enticing book from Kiernan, and hopefully a promise of great things to come.
