I discovered this book on an "Accidental Pregnancy" shelf, a trope I used to be so into. For some reason, I wanted to read another accidental pregnancy romance novel. I'm so glad I added this book out of all the books (I didn't add any others) because it turned out to be such a fantastic story! I had never read LaVyrle Spencer before, so I lucked out too. I loved her writing style. Authors don't seem to write books in this style anymore... I just wish this book had been adapted for film/TV like her other works. The novel kept me entertained on my four plane rides to Tucson and back for my friend's wedding. This was such a poignant love story of class differences in the sailing world of 1895 Minnesota. Typically, I read historical romance set in England in the 1800s, not the U.S... I don't think I've ever read a book where the subplot is regarding sailing and building the fastest boat. I could tell the author had really done her research. A lot of the details regarding shipbuilding and sailing went over my head, but I still loved the story. The class difference between our hero and heroine felt insurmountable as if she were a queen and he a beggar. I knew this was a romance novel, so it would probably have a HEA, but I didn't see how these two would be together! (Also, the book was published in 1993 and the beginning read like a novel about the love between two people of very different classes, not as a romance novel. For instance, the omniscient narrator described the going on's of other people, namely family, in the heroine's household, especially as they got ready for bed.) Both resist their attraction, but Jens, who is a working-class immigrant and the older of the pair, tries his best to be decent and adhere to propriety. Headstrong Lorna cares less about their class differences and is used to getting her way, so she does a lot of the pursuing. I loved Lorna, though I would have #1 married Jens before telling my parents that I was in love with him and carrying his child, #2 not having done that, definitely run away with him when he discovered me at the nunnery. I probably would have also tried to plot my escape on the train ride to said nunnery. What didn't make sense to me was when Jens accused her of not marrying him the first time, but I don't think she ever received the letter addressed to Phoebe for her because her mom carted her away on the train beforehand. I thought to myself that if I had been first off, alive, and around to beta-read this book, I would have made a note of that. I liked how this book was published in 1993, the year my guy was born, and that the hero and heroine have the same age gap as us: 7 years. My library only had the large print version, so I read 744 pages. It's a long book--438 pages typically--but I wouldn't have had it a page shorter. I wouldn't have even wanted the choices I would have made differently than Lorna and Jens, which would have shortened the novel, because I enjoyed the extended frustration of them not being able to be together and how they battled their way to a HEA. I will definitely be reading more by LaVryle Spencer, and I hope everyone checks out this gem of a historical romance.
