Wright uses the format of a journey through Belize, Guatemala and into the south-east of Mexico to explore the world of the Maya. The Maya had a sophisticated city-state based civilisation that reached its urban peak in its so called Classic period, between circa 250 AD and circa 900 AD. New Maya states emerged after this period, but on a smaller, modest scale (at least as far as urban centres were concerned) until the Spanish conquest. Maya people, speaking a group of twenty related languages may form the majority population of Guatemala (or may not) and also live in neighbouring areas of Belize and Mexico. Wright's journey from one Maya city site to another allows him to explore something the archaeology of a civilisation that we are still learning about, and the fate of the Maya since the conquest. This is both a bleak story but also one of survival and adaptation in both cases. Temple I at Tikal The Classic Maya period was marked by great city complexes with monumental architecture using commemorative stone Stela to record events with a range of dates in the past and future greater than estimates of the age of the universe at the time this book was written. The Maya appear to have really liked significant dates, as in English days and months are named after gods, so too in the Maya calendar gods were associated with days, weeks and years, unlike the English system these were the same gods and it as held that each god naturally influenced the day, week or year that had their name hence their system allowed for super agglomerations of divine influence suggesting highly auspicious or inauspicious dates in the past or future. At the time this book was written, Maya calendar experts still maintained this system in the highlands of Guatamala. The population seems to have been very large and the jungle seems to have been largely cleared and turned over to agriculture. The whole edifice collapsed - environmental collapse intertwined with a political and social breakdown is the leading theory. This is all very interesting from a systems point of view. Despite this a sophisticated calendar system survived and was, perhaps still is, maintained as an oral tradition. Aspects of religious life and belief have survived, mostly syncretically interwoven with Catholicism - which conveniently also has a Holy Cross among its symbols this was easily understood as analogous to Maya belief in a sacred world tree something traditionally shown as a cross in their Art, but with the odd pocket of non-Christian belief in areas without extractable resources. As in Hidden Cities there is a political dimension to the Maya heritage, it's great for tourism but on the other hand the Maya are on the margins of what are still colonial states. A position that can be summarised as souvenirs yes, equal rights no. Power and wealth in the post-conquest and after independence relied on exploiting the labour of the native population - ie even in the twentieth century native people were legally required to work for free for 150 days for landlords or be classed as vagrants. The influence of the United States particularly since the 1954 coup in Guatemala has been particularly baleful, intensifying the pattern of Maya being warred over, obliged to serve as soldiers in feuding between those of Spanish descent and the use of atrocities to win over hearts and minds. The Maya conception of time has a cyclical element and the violence of the conquistadors seems to mirror the violence of later armies in Wright's account. Beyond the physical violence there is also the difficulty of preserving culture in the face of incoming evangelicals, a push for acculturation and the targeting of rights groups by death squads. The situation in Belize and Mexico, although the state sponsored violence is missing there is still the seductive pull of wealthier and more powerful cultures. But the reading isn't entirely grim. There is also survival, such as the groups in Mexico who still cluster about the Holy Speaking Cross which provided advice on how to maintain independence from Mexico in the second half of the nineteenth century, some traditional forms of worship and faith survive despite changes in Catholicism. Wright's attempts to make contact with individuals are limited because although he spoke Spanish, he didn't speaking any of the Maya languages. In that sense his observations were limited and one can feel the gap between him and many of the Maya he meets. The book works though as a geographical and cultural introduction. There are footnotes, an index and a bibliography. Writers and researchers are credited in the text. Wright's book is something of a sampler. There are threads to seize on to and follow further if you want to know more on the archaeology, the contemporary highland Maya in Guatemala, folklore or the lost world of Quintana Roo.
