A biographical collection of portraits celebrating Black Women who shaped America, strove for their dreams, and refused to toe the line in the face of adversity and discrimination. Their faces, and their words share with us a wisdom of life thoroughly lived. Their stories give us all a glimpse of the past on which we may contemplate, and take as inspiration for the future. An excerpt from the forward by Maya Angelou: ...This foreword does not mean to be an explanation of the Black woman's stamina. Rather, it is a salute to her as an outstanding representative of the human race. Here, in this book, educators, athletes, dancers, judges, politicians, artists, actresses, writers, singers, poets, and social activists dare to look at life with humor, determination, and respect... ...Despite their majestic struggle they are not larger than life. Their humanness is evident in their accessibility. We are able to enter the photographs and enter into the spirit of these women and rejoice in their courage and nearness. Interviews are in order as follows: Rose Parks Janet Collins Eva Jessye Bertha Knox Gilkey Alice Walker Cicely Tyson Katherine Dunham Barbara Jordan Toni Morrison Althea T.L. Simmons Maxine Waters Johnnetta Betsch Cole Norma Merrick Sklarek Gwendolyn Brooks Leontyne Price Althea Gibson Ernestine Anderson Unita Blackwell Jewel Plummer Cobb Clara McBride Hale Ellen Stewart Beah Richards Carrie Saxon Perry Charlayne Hunter-Gault Constance Baker Motley Oprah Winfrey Sonia Sanchez Georgia Montgomery Davis Powers Daisy Bates Marve Nettles Collins Lena Horne Willie Mae Ford Smith Coretta Scott King Jewell Jackson McCabe Mary Frances Berry Ruby Middleton Forsythe Jean Blackwell Hutson Anna Arnold Hedgeman Johnnie Tillmon Myrlie Evers Faye Wattleton Angela Yvonne Davis Betty Shabazz Queen Mother Audley Moore Harriet Elizabeth Byrd Shirley Chisholm Wyomia Tyus Ruby Dee Leontine T. C. Kelly Margaret Walker Alexander Rachel Robinson Gloria Dean Randle Scott Marian Wright Edelman Elizabeth Catlett Jackie Torrence Autherine Lucy Alexa Canady Yvonne Brathwaite Burke Dorothy Irene Height Sarah Vaughan Josephine Riley Matthews Niara Sudarkasa Wilma Rudolph Odetta Cora Lee Johnson Eleanor Holmes Norton Ophelia DeVore-Mitchell Sherian Grace Cadoria Priscilla L. Williams Leah Chase Elizabeth Cotten Marian Anderson Winson and Dovie Hudson Maya Angelou Septima Poinsette Clark I am a black woman tall as a cypress strong beyond all definition still defying place and time and circumstance assailed impervious indestructible Look on me and be renewed --From "I Am a Black Woman" Mari Evans
