ENGLISH: Although I usually like Hudson's short stories, I've found the plot of this novel absurd. This is a love story in the jungles of Venezuelan Guyana, spoiled for me a little from the beginning by the narrator's references to "the woman I had loved" before finding his new love, a teenager who is looking for her lost people, who apparently speak a language similar to bird chirps. The novel is absurd because of the way the romance ends. In her fruitless search for her people, the narrator's beloved insists on returning alone along a path that took them three weeks of travel in the opposite direction; and when, as a result of her foolishness, she's killed by the Indians, the protagonist decides to blame God for not having saved her, rather than herself for her stupidity, or himself for having been unable to stop her from committing that madness. As Mark Twain seems to have said, there are many scapegoats, but the most common is Providence . The end of the novel is, in addition, somewhat gruesome , with the protagonist dragging a small bag with the charred bones of his beloved across half of Venezuela . ESPAÑOL: Aunque los relatos cortos de Hudson me suelen gustar, el argumento de esta novela me parece absurdo. Se trata de una historia de amor en las selvas de la Guayana venezolana, que me estropean un poco desde el principio las referencias del narrador a "la mujer que había amado" antes de encontrar a su nuevo amor, una adolescente que anda buscando a su pueblo perdido, que al parecer habla un lenguaje parecido a gorjeos de pájaros. La novela es absurda por la forma en que acaba el romance. En su búsqueda infructuosa de su pueblo, la amada del narrador se empeña en volver sola por un camino que a la ida les costó tres semanas de viaje; y cuando, como consecuencia de su insensatez, la matan los indios, el protagonista decide echarle la culpa a Dios por no haberla salvado, en vez de culparla a ella por su estupidez, o a sí mismo por haber sido incapaz de impedirle cometer esa locura. Como parece que dijo Mark Twain, hay muchos chivos expiatorios, pero el más frecuente es la Providencia . El final de la novela resulta, por añadidura, bastante truculento , con el protagonista arrastrando por media Venezuela un saquito con los huesos calcinados de su amada .
