What in the fragenackle hell did I just read? Beware.... I am spoiling the hell out of this book...... I picked this up because it seemed like an interesting May-December romance. The book starts out fine for about oh... 2 chapters. Then as I read on I had a series of 'What the fuck...?' moments. First WTF - Hero thinks heroine is a hooker because she is 23 years old and has money enough to own a nice car and her own home. Yeah, a woman can only own nice stuff if she is a hooker. Second WTF - H&H are on a date after which supposedly they'll end up going home and getting it on. But the heroine grows increasingly cold and distant as the night goes on. We find out later it is because she had her period and didn't know how to tell the hero he wasn't gonna get lucky that night. Third WTF - Heroine is a gorgeous model. Hero is a doctor. She has gyno appointment at the hospital where he works. Apparently her vag-innards are so gorgeous they make grown ass men doctors nervous and blushy. Fourth WTF - Heroine is a virgin. That is fine. But despite being the tomboy athletic sister of three older brothers in a big rambunctious family, she has never seen or felt up her own lady parts apparently. Fifth WTF - According t the hero, only anti-social losers are still virgins at the age of 23. This is not said ironically. Sixth WTF - Hero offers to wear a condom. She wrinkles her nose because that would be "crass." Seventh WTF - Heroine asks the hero to marry her. He is afraid of their age difference and him being her first etc. etc. He says no. She gets mad and tells him he has no right to "make decisions for her life." Um, what? Eighth WTF - Several Months after their break up hero sees heroine in a magazine visibly pregnant. He dashes off to see her and finds her six months pregnant, drunk with empty wine bottles in the garbage and ashtrays full of cigarette butts. The book made pains to let us know the heroine never drank before, even socially, was a health nut and was 'super smart.' But apparently the hero breaking up with her was enough to turn her to drinking and smoking while pregnant. Ninth WTF - Hero is a doctor and makes literally NO COMMENT about her drinking while pregnant. He feels more upset about the fact that post break up she is no longer wearing sexy lingerie but instead is wearing white bras and granny panties. THIS IS NOT A TYPO. He closed his eyes in despair when he saw her post-break up underwear. But yet feels no concern about the fact that his unborn kid might be affected by the booze his stupid gf is quaffing. This was written in 1985 there is just no excuse for this level of stupid. I listened to this on audio and deleted this book from my device with a quickness. The narrator was the best thing about it.
