Excellent book. Dalrymple (a pseudonym) is a British doctor (prison doctor and a psychiatrist in slum hospitals) who has worked in various slum, inner-city, and third-world conditions for decades. And he's a good writer. A great essayist. This book is made up of twenty-two essays describing the patterns of thought and worldview(s) of those in the "under class"--a class neither poor nor politically oppressed; yet, they live a "wretched existence nonetheless." Dalrymple obviously has a knack for the sociological. But what's unique about this book is that it combines the impersonal data so common to sociological analysis and puts a concrete face on it, warts and all. Dalrymple bases his social commentary off of his experiences with thousands of patients. Thus, rather than meeting liberal social theory with conservative social theory, Dalrymple offers an in-your-face, real-life, heavily empirical picture of the class of people that is ultimately the product of elite, progressive, liberal factors. This book shows, if with a bit of overkill, the utter failure of liberal social ideology. When leaders from third-world countries in Africa come to England to hang out with Dalrymple and comment on how sad and pathetic a life the under class lives while not even close to living in the kind of poverty these leaders are familiar with, you know things are bad. Suicide attempts, crime, mess, poor education, crude, crass and violent behavior (esp. domestic violence), rampant pre-marital sex producing illegitimate children, rather than the product of economics, racism, poverty, etc., are actually the outcome of the philosophy of a culture of elites looking for victims. This book provides a depressing, albeit necessary, look at the worldview of the underclass and the people and mindset responsible for creating it. Thomas Sowell says of the book that it is "A classic for our times. It is as fundamental for understanding the world we live in as the three R's." Liberal social philosophy--and I say this quite apart from any alleged theological reasons--is bankrupt and dangerous (those who want it stated theologically: It doesn’t help promote the peace of the city we are exiled to as we await the promised land to come at the eschaton), Dalrymple helps explain why.
