Bill and Cliff Dawes were brothers who had just closed their family's textile plant. Bill met his wife Elena on a trip to Europe when he was 22. Elena was 20 and an orphan who had been left plenty of money. Their housekeeper was Emmabrown and had been with the boys from the time they were babies. Bill and Elena had a 14 yr. old daughter, Charlotte. It seemed to her that the fought all the time. Cliff was 38 and marrying Claudia who had an 18 yr old son, Ted. Claudia had hoped that Cliff could be a father to Ted but that wasn't working out. Cliff didn't really like Ted although he tried. Elena wasn't happy in the small New England town of Kingsley and after Cliff's wedding and a couple months after the closing of the plant, she told Bill she wanted to go to Florida for a couple of months. Charlotte went with her and found out that Elena was cheating on her father and returned home. Bill went to see Elena in Florida and returned home alone. Charlotte began spending time with Claudia partly because Claudia seemed to enjoy having a girl around. Charlotte went to see Claudia one weekend but she and Cliff were out of town. Ted was home and they ate lunch together. He asked her to come back on Sunday and they would take his dogs for a walk. Charlotte agreed and returned on Sunday afternoon. They took the dogs for a walk and when they returned home, Ted gave her wine to drink. When he thought that she was drunk enough, he raped her. She didn't understand what had happened. She knew that he had hurt her. Ted told her that nothing had happened and to keep quiet. She had screamed but no one was there to hear her and she had no one to talk to about what happened. A couple months later she was having sharp pains in her abdomen and she had missed two periods. She knew something was wrong and took the bus to a neighboring town. She saw a doctor there who confirmed that she was pregnant. His nurse had looked in her book bag and found out her real name. The doctor called Bill and told him that Charlotte was pregnant but something was wrong and she needed to see an OB/GYN as soon as possible. Bill called Elena and she flew home. He talked to Charlotte after she got home and Charlotte told him what Ted had done. Bill called Cliff and Claudia and insisted that Ted be sent away, immediately. But Ted had already gotten himself in trouble for taking things to far with another girl in the neighborhood. He had raped two other girls and broken the nose of one of them. It was the daughter of the town's bank president. Ted was indicted and couldn't leave town. Charlotte was taken to Boston and had surgery for a tubal pregnancy. She was told that she would be able to still have children in the future. Elena told Bill and Charlotte that she was going back home to Italy. She wasn't yet asking for a divorce but they knew she wouldn't be back. Bill told Elena that he would take her to the airport. It was a few years later when Elena asked Bill for a divorce after telling him that she had met someone else. Ted left the house one day and was never seen again. He had packed his bags and forged Claudia's signature and taken money out of the bank. This caused a lot of financial problems for both Cliff and Bill due to the loss of the bail money. They leased the plant to some people who they didn't really trust and let garbage pile up on the property. They were supposed to clean it up but kept postponing it and paying the fines. Charlotte went away to boarding school for a year after the surgery. Ted was gone and she returned home after the year away. Claudia stopped Charlotte on the road one day and spoke to her. They agreed to work on their relationship and eventually began to spend time together. Charlotte had Claudia to lean on during her adolescent years and learned how to cook. She became interested in architecture through Claudia's book collection and went to college and grad school to become an architect. Charlotte didn't have much to do with men. She was still scarred from her experience with Ted. She met a teaching assistant and tried to have a relationship with him. They tried to have sex but she couldn't get past the memory and he didn't have anything more to do with her after one bad night. Charlotte was disappointed. She met someone soon after and they were together for 3 and a half months. He told her he was waiting for her to make a move when she was satisfied for their just being friend. He told her that it was time to take the next step in their relationship she told him that she wasn't ready and he also left. She decided to concentrate on her work. She did that and did a good job working for Pauline and Rudy. Charlotte went home one weekend to see her father and came upon an idea to build a business community/strip mall on the property containing the plant. The garbage people would have to be let out of their lease and removed from the property. The lot would have to be cleaned up. The problem was they had to get the owners to quit collecting the garbage and give up the last 9 years on their lease. The company was most likely owned by mobsters. Claudia had a bad heart and it was causing her problems. She was still constantly aware that Ted might get caught and return home at any time. This was a constant concern. She didn't know whether to be happy or sad should that happen. She knew that her son had cost her family a great deal. Ted's father had been killed by mobsters when he was still a young boy. Claudia knew who killed her husband and he was in town as he was involved with the company that Bill and Cliff had leased the plant property to. She went to see him and he agreed to leave the premises. Claudia returned home after speaking with him and went for a walk. She had a heart attack and died while on that walk. Charlotte had met a guy named Roger by then. He was interested in her and noticed her at lunch time sketching one day. She was working on the design for the mini-mall she wanted to build on the plant property. Roger worked for an investment company nearby. He had seen her at a party hosted by her bosses. He used his interest in the sketch as an excuse to approach her. They cautiously approached a relationship and took it slow. He knew that something was bothering her and convinced her it was safe to talk to him about it. She told him about the rape and he was patient with her and eventually she was relaxed enough to sleep with him. Charlotte felt that with him their relationship had healed her. Roger convinced Charlotte to let him work on getting financing to use her plans to build the place in Kingsley. They began working on the project and there was a problem. The investors wanted to drain the marsh around the property. Bill was adamant that it not happen. Roger and Charlotte along with Cliff tried to convince Bill to allow it. They got nowhere. Charlotte was convinced to take some time off by Roger. He convinced her to go visit Elena in Italy. Charlotte did and for some reason ended up telling her mother about the problems she was having with her father and the property. Elena told Charlotte that Bill didn't want the marsh drained because of Ted. The morning that Bill took Elena to Boston for her flight to Italy, they saw Ted. He was carrying a suitcase and they were convinced he was running away. Bill stopped and chased Ted into the marsh. Ted went in to far and went into an area that was too deep to come out of. He drowned there in the swamp. Elena knew about it and ran into the swamp in enough time to keep Bill from being drowned too. They were convinced that because of what happened with Charlotte that no one would think it was an accident so they never told anyone. It was a secret that Bill was keeping inside and having to live with. He hadn't even told his brother and it had severely crippled them financially. Now Charlotte understood her father's actions about not draining the marsh. She promised not to tell anyone, not even Roger. She returned home and went to see her father. The lack of continuance of work on the property in Kingsley was bankrupting Roger. He and Charlotte separated because he knew that she was keeping something from him. He didn't think they could go any further in their relationship if she didn't trust him. She felt awful but her blood ties to her father were stronger than her ties to Roger. She went home for Christmas and there was severe flooding. A lot of damage was done and Ted's body was washed up. Bill told Cliff about what had happened to Ted. Cliff told him that he would have been mad if Claudia would have still been alive. With her gone, Cliff told Bill that he understood his actions. They kept a close eye on the progress of what the officials were going to do with the body. They determined that Ted was escaping and drowned in the marsh because he was taking a shortcut to get out of town. No one was ever charged with his murder. Roger had heard about the flooding and had come to see Charlotte. He told her that he loved her and wanted to marry her. She told him the story that Elena had relayed to her about Ted. Now that his body was recovered, they could begin work on the plant property project. This they did. Charlotte and Rogers relationship was back on track. Bill and Cliff just might be able to hold onto their individual houses now.
