I heard of this book as it is on Wesley Banks '100 best dog books of all time' (2022). I put off reading it because of the ugly cover. As I was making my way through the other books on his list, (I think this makes like 57 out of the 100), I decided to tackle this one. I saw some people rate it pretty high and there is even a review from Nicholas Sparks saying 'Quite simply, this is one of my favorite novels of all time, and one that I've reread at least a dozen times.' So I was pretty hopeful. I let that hope push me past the first 4 chapters that I didn't find that interesting. Ultimately, the book never went anywhere that was that interesting to me. As the summary tells you, this book is about the (end) cycle of life stuff. It says, "The beloved bestselling story of an elderly man mourning the death of his wife and the mysterious white dog who helps ease his grief." Not sure where the 'beloved' comes in, but it is about an elderly man and includes a mysterious white dog. If you really like dramas, you may really like this book. It has very rich details on him and his thoughts, and his children's attempts to take care for him. I get this, as I am getting pretty old, and my father is getting even older still. It does make me ponder my father, my wife, and ultimately my own ends, but still not really a topic that is that exciting for me. The dog to me was mostly hype. I don't want to spoil the mystery by giving much away here, but to me also didn't go somewhere that greatly interesting. The author had some fun playing with the mystery though, but the book overall didn't really do enough with a dog to make it a 'dog' book I would recommend. The idea of a ghost dog is fun though. Here is one passage that I found fun: “I seen ghost dogs,” she asserted. “Them dogs don’t bark. Don’t never know where they be hiding. You be looking at a ghost dog and you blink your eyes and they gone. Ghost dogs always coming around when somebody passes on. Babies, your daddy’s gone changed on account of that ghost dog. Where that dog now? That dog ain’t nowhere around. That dog with your daddy. That dog done took Mr. Sam off somewheres.” So if you like richly detailed dramas you may really like this book. I found it similar as something like The Story of Edgar Sawtelle which also had rich detailed writing but I didn't care to where it finally ended, this book could be for you. But if you are looking for a good 'dog' book, there is a lot more I would recommend.
