I read this parenting book and started using the techniques in it right away. My husband was really busy--it was just me and the kids. So I decided that for three days I would follow this book and see how it went. Then I could either toss the ideas or convert my husband to them. I have to honestly say that things in our home changed over night. The husband has been converted, and we aren't going back. Here are some things I gleaned from this book: First and most importantly, consciously noticing all of the good things my kids did and ignoring all the bad behavior I could automatically changed the way I saw my kids. I felt so much more love and appreciation for them. If I find myself getting grumpy with them, I have learned to catch them doing something good instead of descending into a spiral of negativity. And I feel like I've stopped trying to control them and truly realized that I can't, and I really don't want to. I can control myself, and I can reinforce the behavior that I want. Secondly, I could really see the truth of Latham's idea that the behavior that is reinforced/noted/attended to is the behavior that gets repeated. When I started really praising my kids for putting plates in the sink, for playing nicely together, for doing what I asked right away, these behavior truly did increase. It's so true that we nag about and punish and talk about bad behavior and rarely notice the good. Switching that around has been more powerful than I imagined. Thirdly, I much prefer this parenting/discipline method to any others I've read about/seen. It intuitively makes sense to me, and is not hard to implement. We've honestly been much happier and calmer as a whole family because of this book. I'm starting to feel like an infomercial...but my kids really have been playing like best friends; I don't stress about discipline techniques or wonder what to do in a given situation; my husband and I both feel really good about the techniques in this book and have had at least five conversations about how great our lives are now that we've read it. And as an added bonus, the author's example conversations between parent and child are very real (i.e. not at all sanitized) and occasionally hilarious.
