besides the hopis in arizona, the tiguas of yselta del sur (southern el paso) texas are the only pueblo ind'ns not in new mexico. during the pueblo revolt of 1680, hundreds of people from isleta pueblo accompanied the retreating conquistadores to the spanish stronghold of el paso. accused of being traitors by all other pueblos, these people (now known as tiguas)claimed they were forced. adding to the confusion,when lincoln re-verified the spanish crown's land grants to the pueblos, texas was part of the confederacy. the tiguas lost federal recognition and had their reservation eventually reduced to 27 acres from many thousands. by the 40s, anthropologists pronounced the tiguas extinct but their descendants hung as as best they could, losing much (but not all) of their traditions. by the late 1960s after protracted legal battles, the tiguas were awarded federal recogntion to much controversy. eickhoff spends much of the book unconvincingly defending the tiguas, not only their (forced?)retreat to el paso but why subsequent leaders informed the spanish of plans for a number of other indi'n revolts, notably of the piros, tompiros and mansos of southern new mexico. pueblo memory spans centuries and the 19 new mexico pueblos still consider them traitors and a bunch of mexicans falsely claiming ind'n rights. the debate continues as does the culture of the tiguas which is a mix of pueblo, piro, manso and mexican indi'n traditions. i've visted yselta del sur, made friends and seen dances and there's no doubt their dance regalia and traditions contain puebloan influence but drastically unlike the new mexico and hopi cultures. on a side note, a group of tiguas in the 1880s moved to tortugas (las cruces) new mexico. lacking federal recognition, the tortugas carry on a similar mixed tradition. eickhoff presents the convoluted story but jumps back and forth from facts to opinion to some eroneous history. he repeats himself continually which gives the impression of slipshod editing. still, its good to see the factual evidence presented but poor execution mars the book from beginning to end.
