Having just finished the first draft of my second novel I did what I always do after a draft: take a little time to consider my craft (and not look at the book). So I pulled this puppy off my stack of books on writing. I've read a lot of such books, and this is one of the better ones in it's category. They fall into a number of broad groups: books on specific components like plot or character, books on sentences, books on editing, books on selling your books, books on summarizing your books, windy pontifications on the nature of creativity, and this type, the bit of everything, with a dose of personal experience thrown in. Lessons is a lot like Lawrence Block 's Telling Lies for Fun & Profit . Both cover a bunch of the big areas quickly like plot and structure, and also include the author's personal perspective on his career (Morrell's best known for First Blood , on which the first Rambo was based) and the writing business. It does not focus heavily on sentences or editing. There were a number of interesting insights. He has a technique for getting past sticky points in your story construction I might try (next time it happens). There were also some interesting technical thoughts on the structure of scenes and chapters. He has a perspective on selecting POV that I hadn't come across, which was interesting. Although he is slightly dated in his opinion of first person stating that he feels it always needs a reason why the narrator is telling the story. This used to be the case, but in the last few years the rise of first person (particularly in YA) was sort of negated this. A good chunk of the book is about his career, optioning books to Hollywood etc. This was amusing as well. He started in the early 1970s so he's a product of that different era in publishing. The book was written in 2002 and while none of the writing advice is dated, the advent of ebooks and changes in the market are shifting the business side. Still, good writing is still good writing, and even writing style itself doesn't change all that fast. Books I've read by authors whose prime was the 1950s still have plenty to offer. Last weekend I read The Postman Always Rings Twice , published in 1934, and that hardly seems dated. So if you like books on writing and plan to read many, I'd check Lessons out. While that doesn't sound like spectacular praise, I do like this book. Many writing books I read are total drivel. This one was worth the time, and that says something. Some of my favorites are:
