3.75 ⭐️ New challenge–try to keep my Inuyasha reviews short. I'll admit I was first underwhelmed by this volume, but I think that's because I have a fondness for how the anime adapted it. But upon a second read, it still hits all the same beats and iconic moments while accomplishing its storytelling goals. I love human Inuyasha and the Peach Man does provide another noteworthy, perhaps pivotal, Inuyasha and Kagome development. Obviously we've seen and continue to see Inuyasha's growing affection for Kagome, but after he put it into words (to a degree) in the last volume, we now see more of how it affects him outside of the "I'm fighting and have to protect Kagome" arena. Though we do also get more of that. Compare this volume to InuYasha, Vol. 4: Lost and Alone and the Thunder Brothers and you'll certainly see a difference. Less denial and no "ew Kagome." There is also an expansion of previously established themes. Inuyasha refuses to drink the elixir made from humans even though it would restore his strength. As Kagome says: "Inuyasha...your heart is human." There are lines Inuyasha is not willing to cross, and despite how he tries to hide it, he cares about people. The Peach Man is not a demon but another human overtaken by the desire for power. He reflects Inuyasha's own struggles, which are appropriately expressed when he's forced to be in human form! (Look at that purposeful mind behind the story) "I'm a half-demon...and I hate the frailty of the part of me that's human...I can sympathize with you wanting more than anything to be stronger...but this...this only proves your weakness!" Human vs. demon. What is good, what is evil? Does being human make one weak or strong? This all feeds into the question of what Inuyasha wants for himself and his own feelings about humans, demons, and hanyous. "Back when I first met Inuyasha...he said he wanted to become a full demon using the Shikon Jewel. But...there was a time too when he was going to become human...for Kikyo. I wonder...which does he want now?" Inuyasha declares: "I want to become a full demon, of course." But Miroku comes in with the real questions, connecting Inuyasha's internal struggles and desires with the themes of soul and identity that Kikyo and Kagome have already established. "Tell me this, Inuyasha. When you become a full demon with the help of the Shikon's power...Will you still be who you are?...Have you seen anyone perform heroic acts with a shard from the Shikon Jewel? Then might that not mean, that in exchange for gaining the power of the jewel...the bearer loses his soul?" "I don't recall ever saying that I wanted to become a good demon anyway!" "Yet you hope to protect Lady Kagome. When the Shikon Jewel makes you into a full demon...might you not find yourself slaughtering and devouring Lady Kagome and Shippo?" If Inuyasha became a full demon, would he still be Inuyasha? Does Kagome present a division within him and complicate his desires and goals? Can he be a demon and protect/care for her? Interesting that like Kagome's own confrontation with her soul when confronted with Kikyo, Inuyasha thinks: "My soul...my soul is mine!" blaming the evil of the demons with shards of the Shikon Jewel on their character without the jewel. Along with this, we also get another instance of Inuyasha being willing to die "as long as Kagome's alive," which does make it seem like the issue that has presented would result in Inuyasha choosing Kagome over becoming a full demon. And we get another reminder of Kagome having the special sauce ("That monster cannot be defeated by a mere bow and arrow" "I've got to find a way! I will find a way!" "...! From the bow and arrow are emanating...a power of some sort...this maiden is...") I've said before that Rumiko Takahashi is very good at creating episodic stories and seemingly presenting the same formula while really slightly changing it, ever gradually pushing the development further. But yeah. It feels like we're doing a dance with all the same steps. Almost all the same steps–the same ones with the slightest change. It's kind of a Ship of Theseus situation, with each chapter or arc changing only one thing about the formula so that we're going piece by piece. From one chapter or volume to the next, things can feel extremely similar, but further down the line, perhaps they will be more unrecognizable. Piece by piece, inch by inch! I think it is a skill, and an especially useful one for a serialized story, but I am not reading it in its original format. And sometimes very impactful conversations, like the one Kagome and Inuyasha had at the end of the last volume, feel a little neglected like we're resetting the pieces and ignoring some of the development to maintain the formula and episodic nature of the story. I think that conversation and development does impact how we move in this volume, but it's a more subtle impact, which can make it feel like a lack. Thus this feels like a 3.75 instead of 4-star read. And this all before we get the introduction of Sango! A demon slayer is a perfect addition the set-up we've been given, especially a demon slayer from a village where the Shikon Jewel originated. From her and her village we learn that Kikyo, of course, was given the jewel to purify it "but she, ultimately, died in a battle over the jewel's possession" and that "all [the demon slayer village] can do for now is gather the shards into [their] village and guard them...until another who possesses the power to purify the jewel appears." Maybe it's just knowing some spoilers about where the story eventually leads from the anime, but this line really stood out to me in a couple of ways for its potential foreshadowing. First, it emphasizes Kikyo's tragic fate was because of a fight over acquiring the jewel, which makes it seem like the jewel itself has a negative energy around it. Yes, Naraku or Onigumo were actors whose actions with regard to the jewel are to blame for Kikyo's fate, but it feels like there is more to the story. Kikyo was put in her restrictive position because of the jewel itself, Naraku isn't to blame for the circumstances he came across. It is like Naraku and the jewel in tandem are to blame. The second big thing to note is how the demon slayers believe the jewel must eventually be purified again, which is a big arrow pointing at Kagome and her spiritual powers. Not to mention her being the reincarnation of the first priestess who purified it... Sango and the demon slayers give us more information about the jewel and Inuyasha and crew get more information about Sango and the demon slayers. Hearing about her and the shard she recovered leads a couple of men to observe "'Is he a demon?' 'He acts like one...'" about Inuyasha, and so we get a continuation of our human vs demon, identity, what makes a demon a demon etc themes. Sango herself even tells her brother, Kohaku, that "as father's fond of saying, the fearsome demons...are the ones that wear a human form." And also perhaps humans that appear like demons? With a seemingly mindless horde of demons showing up again later, we also get more depictions of different types and levels of demons. Almost like they are being presented as comparable to humans, with there being a range of good to evil within the species, although demons are different in that there really are different types with more major ones seemingly being able to think more rather than acting on instinct. That doesn't mean they are better in character, just look at Sesshomaru. Or our fellow half-demon foil to Inuyasha, Naraku. Speaking of Naraku, we get more of his puppet mastery. And here is where the anime and then the manga confused me with regards to his plans and the degree to which he's making it up as he goes along. Sango and her fellow demon slayers are summoned to the castle of Kagewaki Hitomi to take out a demon. We've seen a glimpse of Naraku with the appearance of Kagewaki previously, so this always begs the question of: is this Kagewaki really Naraku in disguise? When does Naraku kill and take on the form of Kagewaki? I've seen others assert that by this time, Kagewaki is already dead and the Kagewaki we see is actually Naraku, but I don't think that makes sense. Here's what I got: Naraku needs a body, he is incomplete. Kagewaki presents the perfect vessel–he's sickly and in a position of power. Naraku doesn't bother to kill Kagewaki because he's already dying. Maybe he is involved in the spider demon that kills and possesses Kagewaki's father and causes the tragic slaughter of all the demon slayers that come to the castle with Sango, maybe not. I think Naraku likes chaos and would get enjoyment out of that plot, but I don't think it directly benefits him or makes sense to a degree that would make it its sole instigator. If anything, it gets rid of Kagewaki's father so that Kagewaki gains more power and influence. My whole interpretation of all of this relies on Sango and how she appears dead but then isn't actually dead. It seems too convoluted for Naraku to "almost" kill her to such a degree just so he can position her against Inuyasha. Rather I think a convenient outcome fell into his lap. So I'm saying Kagewaki is the real Kagewaki for this first bit with Sango! He finds that Sango is the sole survivor of the slaughter and Naraku recognizes that he can utilize that. So then he carries out his whole "slaughter of the demon slayer village right before Inuyasha shows up so we can pin it on him and then indirectly inform Sango of this so she goes after Inuyasha" plot. I suppose Naraku could have learned Inuyasha was looking for Sango's village and then came up with the whole "draw Sango and the best slayers away from the village" plan, but Sango's almost death throws this into doubt for me. Unless he wanted to make her reliant on him when he "saves" her as Kagewaki. I don't know! Can you tell this lack of clarity bothers me? I think the way it is presented pokes a small hole in Rumiko Takahashi 's skill as a storyteller/writer. I love some good ambiguity but when it comes to an "all-knowing, all-seeing puppet-master villain," I think it is rather convenient when things are kept vague to make them look smarter and more capable. Confusion and rant aside, the spider demon is a nice depiction of Naraku's puppet mastery ways. The horror elements really come out in the slaughter of the demon slayers, and poor Sango! Her village being slaughtered too–it's extremely tragic. Tangling her up with Naraku, the jewel, and Inuyasha again makes her a great addition to the growing main cast. This introduction also showcases Sango's ability and intellect and kickstarts her arc regarding her brother. The idea of how "the Shikon Jewel came into being" is planted with more lore headed our way in the near future. Much of this Sango arc made me drift towards a 4-star rating, but the Naraku and Kagewaki of it all keeps this volume at 3.75. I don't think that was much shorter than my prior reviews... (is it a review or me working through my thoughts and feelings?)
