“…this aircraft is in a very dangerous condition. It’s got a very serious fatigue trouble in the tailplane. You must turn back to England at once.” - Theodore Honey, p57 Not a bad way to begin a story- with an aeroplane about to fall out of the sky. If you heard someone say here is a novel centred on metal fatigue, that might not be terribly compelling, but metal fatigue which might kick in at any moment with a devastating effect on a select group of passengers whom we have got to know quite well – that is another story. The bespectacled research scientist Dr Theodore Honey, a specialist in metal fatigue, is flying to Canada in a Reindeer aircraft, to investigate the earlier mysterious crash of the same type of aircraft, which stacked into a mountain in the wilds of Labrador. Suddenly realising the danger, mild mannered Dr Honey has expressed his apprehensions to the nice stewardess Marjorie Corder and to Monica Teasdale, a famous, much-married American film star, an erstwhile favourite of Theo’s and his late wife. Miss Teasdale, though seriously past her best years, is still a magnetic presence. Despite Theo’s warning, the pilot, Captain Samuelson, flies on to Canada but heeds the scientist’s words by cutting the middle engines. It emerges that the pilot of the crashed plane was a long-time friend and colleague and Captain Samuelson doubts the crash was due to pilot error. When it is clear that the current flight will resume, Honey takes matters into his own hands and disables the plane by raising the landing gear, while the plane is on the tarmac. Bent plane. With this surprising and uncharacteristic act the unassuming and unlikely hero draws attention to himself and his cause with far reaching personal and professional consequences. Both the stewardess and the actress fall for him in their way, the stewardess wants to care for him and create something more worthwhile in her life, the actress yearns for solid domestic happiness which might have been hers had she said yes to the home town boy rather than seek the brighter lights. In this way Shute supplies a pattern of incompleteness in his characters lives which by the end of the book is remedied in good part. Dr Honey lives in a world of domestic male incompetence which can only be remedied with the installation of a good woman; who will it be – stewardess or actress? Even Dr Honey’s boss Dennis Scott (our narrator) has a wife, but no child – life isn’t fulfilled until the family is created. All of this would be faintly risible without Shute’s sincerity and essential goodness, and we should acknowledge that his attitudes and understanding reflect the time he lived in. What he does excel at and we see this throughout his work, is his understanding of hierarchies and bureaucracies, realms with which Shute was exceedingly familiar: in this case the research institution, air safety and air force officialdom and the world inhabited by aviators and aircraft designers and builders. Shute has an unerring eye for how men (almost always men) have to manage research, ensure safety, contend with business pressures and deal with professionals, bureaucrats and the public. Witness how Dr Scott goes out on a limb to back his scientist, who is decidedly eccentric, if not weird, without any substantial technical evidence, when balancing the need for the safety of passengers against the imperatives of aircraft manufacturing and running a passenger service. A deeply human and quite exciting story. A final word on character names: Shute is good at this: as David Lodge points out in The Art of Fiction authors decide what to call their characters, often to telling effect: Theodore Honey is pure and sweet, cannot be altered or improved, he is just what he is; the straight forward narrator Dennis Scott is solid and commanding; the difficult and forceful designer is E P Prendergast, just initials and a surname which connotes bluster and tumult. As for the actress and the stewardess, who is going to win their way into the affections of Dr Honey, an American whose name half spells tease, or someone called Corder, ie one who ties a knot? Great fun. I am not biblical enough to know whether Samuelson has any significant meaning, but it would not surprise.
