This Smithsonian Handbook guide is a great introduction to identifying and appreciating fossils down to Family level if not Genus. The introductory chapters were interesting and the preliminary glossary of terms helpful, but because there is such profound species richness in our geological history, this is an introductory guide. For instance, this would help amateur collectors realize they've found a crinoid rather than an echinoid, but then they would need to consult a more specialized guide or a subject matter expert to get a better sense of what Genus or species they might have on hand. But this never markets itself as the ONLY guide you'll need, so I don't see this as necessarily a negative. I conducted undergraduate work on identifying and organizing marine invertebrate fossils (primarily trilobites, brachiopods, crinoids, and echinoids) for my university's Museum of Biodiversity, and I would have LOVED to have this guide on hand! DK Publishing is renown and trusted widely for a reason. I especially appreciated having the geological range, modern fossil distribution, artist's depiction, fossil occurrence estimation, and habitat blurb included for each Genus entry. I'm glad this guide exists and that I own it, but I only rate it 4 out of 5 stars overall because it could have been significantly improved. There were 3-4 times when the artistic depiction could have been more detailed or representative of the Genus being described. It was not clear why the Genera were arranged the way they are in the guide within each group's section: i.e. Why Kingera, then 2 Genera from different Orders, and then Cancellothyris, when Kingera and Cancellothyris brachiopods are both members of the same Terebratulida Order? This happens many times throughout the guide, so the organization choices are unclear. I wish this guide did a better job of showing how the featured Genera were related to one another, and a sparse cladogram at the beginning of each group section could have easily accomplished this. Similarly, though I liked the Geologic Time Chart (pp. 14-15)'s wedge design, cladogram lines, and list of Geological Time Periods, the non-standardized placement of the group names and representative figures were confusing and thus made the chart difficult to read. Not a good resource to flip back and forth when assessing different Genera entries. I used my laminated bookmark of the "Geologic Time Scale 2020" product by the Geologic TimeScale Foundation, and I recommend this resource to all those interested in this topic. A long and perhaps nit-picky review, but it's because I care about this topic and its presentation so much!! This is a great introductory guide for all those seeking to learn more about our world's fossils--even if you're not digging or collecting them! This broadened my worldview and deepened my understanding of Earth's historical biodiversity. This may just be THE most important book I read this year. I'll definitely be reading other publications in the DK Smithsonian Handbooks collection.
