No Highway builds an absorbing, suspenseful story around the unlikely basis of scientific research—which takes on a much stronger immediacy when it casts doubt on the safety of an airplane. The trouble is, the theory suggesting the aircraft are unsafe comes from Theodore Honey, an untidy, eccentric scientist whom few take seriously. One of his superiors, the book's narrator Dennis Scott, believes he may be right, but convincing higher officials poses a difficult problem. When Honey is sent to Canada to investigate the wreckage of one of the aircraft which crashed, he finds that the plane on which he is traveling is near the possible danger point and tries to have it grounded. The aftermath of this incident, Honey's relationships with a stewardess and a fellow-passenger he met on the threatened plane, and the involvement of the narrator and his wife with Honey and his motherless young daughter Elspeth, form the rest of the plot. I read this novel after having watched and enjoyed the 1951 film adaptation No Highway In the Sky . It's a case, I think, where book and film are both very good on their own and complement each other well even though they differ in some particulars. In the book we get much deeper into the hearts and minds of the characters, and many are much better developed than the constraints of a film allowed. I found it curious how the film's casting, in a physical sense, was totally wrong, and yet still managed to pull off the portrayal of the characters so I felt I recognized them when I read the novel. The one I appreciated much more in the book was Monica Teasdale—her reflections on her simple American roots and what direction her life might have taken had she not become a famous actress are very moving, and naturally not something translated to film with the foreign glamor of Marlene Dietrich in the role. Jimmy Stewart's Theodore Honey was also played a little more broadly comical, whereas in the book Honey is rather more pathetic and troubled. In the film the doubts of Honey's sanity seem to be based more off his absent-minded personality, where the book gives him a background of more intricate issues such as his interest in spiritualism and apocryphal religious theories and prophecies. It seems more reasonable for people to doubt a man's sanity because he believes he can predict the end of the world from the angle of the Great Pyramid than because he tries to unlock the door of the wrong house. The first-person narration is unique: the narrator relates events he witnessed, but also the parts that took place in his absence, with so much detail that it's practically third-person. I've only encountered two authors that used this method, Shute and Max Brand. You don't want to let the amounts of technical language put you off; even if it's Greek to you, you can just go with the flow and gain a basic understanding from the context, for it is after all a vital part of the story. It's written in such a way that I found it fascinating, even though most of it was beyond me. The film's main weakness, a rather abrupt ending, is not present in the novel, which is much better rounded off and concluded (the part that Honey's spiritualist dabblings play in the resolution is certainly eyebrow-raising, but somewhat amusing). A good read.
