This was a thorough textbook-like book on how to parent in a positive way. I liked many of the ideas Latham shared, and I did appreciate the statistics and studies included in the book. Really, Latham is able to address parenting issues from infancy through the teenage years, and he does a great job. There are lots of role-play scenarios to guide you through situations like potty-training and tantrums, to sibling rivalry and tattling, to driving privileges and curfews. Here are a few of the little gems that I'd like to remember: "Be slow to pay attention to annoying age-typical behaviors that are sure to fade with time." "If what you are inclined to say or do is not likely to make things better, don't say it and don't do it." "If the condition of a child's bedroom is creating a rift between a parent and a child, it is better for the room to be left a mess than for the relationship between the child and the parent to be a mess. This is not to mean that parents should make no effort whatsoever to teach their child neatness, orderliness , and care for their immediate environment. But in the long run, it isn't how neat, orderly and careful children are with their bedrooms or bathrooms that determines how neat, orderly and careful they will be with their own homes as adults. That is determined by the model set by their parents. As children grow into adulthood, they tend to model the behaviors of the adults who were prominent in their formative lives as children- usually their parents." "Children will engage in junk behavior over which we as parents have zero control." (Regarding teenage non-serious experimentation like dyeing hair.) "Ignore those behaviors over which you have no control and place the emphasis rather on building relationships between you and your children." "We can't expect our home to be pleasant if we are unpleasant, out of control, and reactive. We must also get one thing clear immediately: if we are going to wait for our children to somehow naturally "shape-up" in order for things to get better, we will be waiting forever! Giving children the responsibility to frame a happy, positive environment in the home is like putting the fox to guard the hen house. Creating a happy mood in the home is our responsibility as parents. By first controlling our own behaviors, then by effectively applying selected skills, we can have a remarkable effect on improving the quality of life at home." His 9 "Important Rules of Parenting" are also very helpful: 1. Seize opportunities to have frequent positive interactions with your children. 2. Clearly establish and communicate your expectations. 3. Clearly establish the consequences for compliance and noncompliance. 4. Ignore behaviors which do not threaten the basic quality of life, limb and property (which include most unacceptable behaviors). 5. Attend to inappropriate behavior in an unemotional, precise and directive way. 6. Do not question a non-compliant child about his behavior, or ask him to explain his inappropriate behavior. 7. Use the inappropriate behavior of one child as a cue to you to attend to the appropriate behavior of other children. 8. Smile and laugh, talk and touch- a lot. 9. Assess behavior analytically and treat it clinically. Overall, I'm glad I read this book. It has given me a lot to think about and a few things to try.
