Well-organized and useful This guide book, while not the most stimulating read, is clear, comprehensive, and easy to use. If you and your partner are planning a massage, it would be a good idea to refer to this book to brush up on the basics and find a few moves to try out. The best feature of this book is the clarity of the instructions. Each move is clearly described and has paired bare-bones text with well-chosen photographs in order to be as instructive as possible. There is little discussion of abstract ideas (energy flow, chi, etc.) and a focus on the physical. The book is not entirely devoid of whys-and-wherefores, however, and has a few well-placed paragraphs focusing on the reasoning and theory of massage. These paragraphs are not jarring because they are outcome-focused and relate directly to the menu of massages in a given chapter. Although not as useful as a video or, best of all, hands-on instruction, I finished this book with a good understanding of what each massage was meant to look like and achieve. Another great feature is the comprehensive organization of the book. By breaking down the chapters by the physical area being massaged, Lacroix has successfully grouped related massages together as well as created an overall program that could be followed right out of the book or mixed-and-matched to suit your taste and comfort level. When it comes to guides, I certainly favor this organizational strategy. It is clearly easiest for the beginner: the target market for this kind of book. Everything about this book is designed for ease of use. The volume is small, perfect for a night-table, and easy to navigate. It is not inconceivable that it could be referred to mid-massage (not ideal, but better than nothing...). The photos are not step by step instructions but they capture the critical moves and/or confusing areas, allowing a user to flip to the massage or hold they want easily. Although certainly not a complete course, Lacroix's tiny volume achieves much in terms of educating non-professionals in safe, satisfying massage. I'm sure there must be better instructionals available, especially online and incorporating video, and there is no argument to support this book in place of classes and/or experience; however, if you and your partner are looking for an easy entry into massage that is low risk, this book is a good way to go.
