Many people have never experienced what Alex Cross has, or came close to it. When Alex decides to retire from being a homocide detective, but an interference with a childhood friend of his, John Sampson, comes along with a case Cross knows he can not refuse. Cross agrees to take the case. This will be his last case. He doesn't realize how dangerous and complicated the case turns out to be until he has dug himself in so deep that there is no turning back for him or Sampson. Sampson explains to Alex that his friend from war is introuble, he is being charged with murder and John is highly convenced that he didn't commit it. He knows that his friend would never be able to commit a murder. They started investigating. Alex knowing many people, he gets help from them by getting him classified information. Once he saw a few little piece of evidence that didn't match up with everything else, he knew that there was something wrong. He noticed that Johns friend must have been set up. He looed further into it and then realized that many other people were in the same situation as Samopsons friend. Alex and Sampson both go to talk to other people whos family member had been framed. They both found dolls that all looked the same in each persons house although the person who knew the men being framed had no idea where they came from. Getting more and more evidence didn't help much. All of the men who had been framed were sentenced to death or dead, including Sampsons friend. Alex and John still don't know who is commiting the murders and framing these seemingly inoccent men, or why. Along with this life treatening case, Alex also has personal issue going on. Whch just makes thing more complicated for him. Nana Mama, his grandmother, who has been taking care of him and his kids for a very long time and was more like a mama then a nana to him, was getting to be very old and sick. He wouldn't know what to do with out her, and is afraid he will have to find out. He also started seeing a woman, name Jamila, who he seems to like very much along with his family. The only problem is she lives all the way in California while he lives in D.C. It is very difficult for Alex to balance everything out, especailly since he keeps finding himself in life treatening situations.
