Being an avid Fantasy reader, my forays into other genres are quite sparse, but when I step away from my beaten path, I highly enjoy what I’m reading for I’m even more picky than is the case when reading fantasy. One of my all-time favourite non-fantasy series has to be the Stephanie Plum-series by Janet Evanovich. Throughout the past years, I steadily worked myself through the first half of the series. Most of the novels were highly enjoyable, one or two fell a bit flat. The latter group can welcome another member, however, cause Visions Of Sugar Plums wasn’t really my cup of tea. This book is a Plum Holiday novella, the Christmas one this time around, but for Stephanie it’s all but Christmas. Things are going wrong all over the place and to top things off, there’s a strange man in her apartment. That man turns out to be Diesel, the male lead in this novel and he is some kind of supernatural being. Together they try to save Christmas, or something like that. Note how vague my summary of this book is? That is because this book was vague. Like in all Plum-novels, there is some mystery, this time it’s got something to do with elves. Normally, I would have liked this, but the supernatural twist made it all weird. Clearly, I’ve got nothing against the supernatural, but for eight books, this world was one without magic. When you suddenly introduce these kind of things, you get me confused, even though your main character is confused as well. In some way or another, the whole addition of the supernatural felt really contrived and it didn’t really feel like it belonged it this world. Which it doesn’t, really, or at least that is my opinion. When it is used to get out of a situation that would be certain death otherwise, you lost me completely. It doesn’t help that nothing is explained, at all. Remember how I described Diesel as a supernatural ‘being’? Well, I don’t know what he is. Witch, troll, powerful human,… I just don’t know and that’s the problem here. Some kind of magic is added to the world Stephanie lives in, but you never get an explanation as to why it is there, apparently all of a sudden. The ending is also very abrupt. It is a novella, so it is way shorter than a regular Plum-novel, but that doesn’t mean you don’t have to work your way towards the ending, as a writer. Here, it was just rushed and when I got there, I was so disappointed. This wasn’t what I wanted it to be, at all. I’ve read in some other reviews that the events in this novella aren’t touched upon in the other books, which probably is a good thing. I am pro pretending this never existed in the first place. Mind, it wasn’t terrible, but it was clearly below every Stephanie Plum she’s ever written. I’ve got the other Between the numbers – Plum Lovin’, Lucky and Spooky – but I have slightly higher hopes for those seeing as they are regular Plum-sized. Still, I think that Janet Evanovich does non-supernatural best. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
