This is a scholarly biography about one of the world's most amazing men. Born into a minor clan of the Mongols, illiterate throughout his life, he nonetheless survived several brushes with death in youth and went on to create a huge empire that stretched from Korea and Manchuria in the east to Southwest Asia and Iran to the west. He conquered northern China and adopted many Chinese administrative and intellectual structures from them. Though absolutely ruthless (executing all town inhabitants where any resistance was displayed - many, many times), he was tolerant of various religious practices and was usually willing to deal in negotiations with adversaries. What he did not understand was that killing everyone and burning down the town lost him a great deal of long-term wealth. He also established legal and administrative systems that would last for several generations. The reading is difficult for several reasons. First, the biography begins before Temujin's birth (Temujin was his birth name) and extends well past his death to emphasize his legacy on Eurasia. Second, there is a blizzard of names of people, places, tribes, etc., that we sometimes meet just once, then never again. The place names may be found in one of 5 maps, but not all are on the maps as they may be small locations, and their exact locations may be lost. Knowledgable Britidh readers will be familiar with many locations, less so Yanks as our global reach was pretty short until just recently; we will know Baghdad, Kabul, Mosul and a few more. Lovers of Oriental rugs will recognize Tabriz and Bukhara, but many other locations are just words. There is a good References Cited section, along with a bibliography and a list of other allied books to read and a useable index. It is a great book if you already know something of the man and have already studied maps of this huge area. Otherwise start with another book, perhaps Harold Lamb's old biography. Also, photocopy the 5 maps and have them handy as you read along. I enjoyed the book but became lost in the blizzard of unknown names and places.
