This contains 2 books into one. The first part of the book is called "Hot Rocks" and is written by Nora Roberts. The 2nd half of the book is called "Big Jack" and is book 17.5 in The In death Series by J.D. Robb who is actually Nora Roberts. In the first half we have a woman named Laine Tavish who is the proud owner of an Antiques Shop in Maryland. Laine has worked extra hard to change her name and become an honest and successful business woman. Laine was not always Laine. growing up she had been Elaine and she had moved from city to city with her parents because her father was a thief and a con artist. Her mother finally left her father and they settled down to a normal life. A life where Elaine changed her name to Laine because she did not want to be associated with Jack O'Hara. However dear old dad decided to do a big time diamond heist which brings a killer, an old associate of her dads and a PI named Max to her door to find out where these diamonds are. Of course Laine has no idea where the diamonds are, but that doesn't mean a thing to a killer. I really liked the story, but the insta-love crap between Laine and Max had me rolling my eyes. When I say insta-love, I really mean insta-love (insert huge eye roll here). In Book 2 we are introduced to Laine and Max's granddaughter, Samantha Gannon. Samantha has written a book about her grandparents and the diamond heist that happened at the turn of the century. There were a portion of the diamonds that had never been found. Coming back from a book tour she walks into her apartment to discover her friend and house sitter had been killed while she was away. Homicide detective Eve Dallas and her crew are on the case of the murdered house sitter. They eventually find out that the murder occurred because someone is searching for those missing portion of diamonds. As always, I love the camaraderie between Eve, her husband Roarke, and her team. Although she is a little prickly around the edges, I like her style and her dedication to the cases she takes on.
