This book tells the tale primarily of four characters and their twisting relationships. They are bound to each other by want and desire and suffer for their wanton desires physically and emotionally. As each is toyed with, he or she toys with the others and the erotic dance continues throughout the entire novel. We are first introduced to Tristan and Claire. Tristan desires Claire and unashamedly does anything he can to get into her good graces. He humiliates himself by doing anything she asks from watching her son, to cleaning house, or even making her bed while she is out on a date with a lover. He is the lover that cannot and never will be as Claire has placed him in the "friends" category. She rewards his faithfulness to her; by allowing him long lingering glances of her legs and thighs as she prepares herself for other men. He tortures himself by watching, hoping that at some point, she will give herself to him. However, Claire feels that she is showing him how special he is, how special their love for each other is, by allowing him these glances of her nether regions that he deeply and desperately longs to touch and cannot. What she sees as deep companionship, he sees as an excuse to pursue what he cannot have. So, he suffers quietly and occasionally loudly, as she prepares herself for the possibility of love making with another man. The other man is Paul, a powerful and domineering man and lover. He has certain expectations on the role of women in his life and sees to it that they meet his expectations, one way or the other. They will obey or they will suffer the consequences. If they don't, he withholds his formidable cock and instead uses the hand quite effectively on lady's ass. Rachel has become his sexual maid and she offers herself up to him body and soul. Paul is her lord and master and treats her not as a lover, in line with her demotion, but as the domestic help. Paul has taught her exactly what is expected of her and should she fail, she experiences the stinging rebuke on her bare bottom. But, only after she has presented her ass to him in the proper way and begged forgiveness. Rachel, while her bottom is being warmed quite furiously, continues to believe that she will become more than his maid doing her duty to her lord and master. During a night out on the town, while Tristan baby-sits her son, Claire meets Paul. She falls slowly under his spell and soon he has captured her panties for a souvenir. While Claire is spreading her legs for Paul in a hotel room, Tristan is happily pleasuring himself while reading her romance novels; content with the knowledge that she has touched the pages and felt her heart quicken at the scenes in the books. Eventually, she returns home, her desires aroused and tells Tristan all about it. Claire slowly begins to fall under Paul's erotic domination spell. But, Claire is rather confused at the power he has over her, as well as her awakening desires, so she confides all in detail to Tristan. He tortures himself by listening as he sits on the bed, watching her prepare her legs for another adventure with Paul. He holds himself barely together, thanking her for the view, as he hopes to see her golden mound. He delights in hurting himself with what he cannot have and lives for the brief glimpses of her unshod body that she allows him. The fact that she allows him frequent looks does not mean his place in her universe is elevating at all. As in Rachel's relationship to Paul, Tristan is confident that if he continues to give himself freely without reservation, Claire will become his. Despite her concerns over Paul's increasing demands, Tristan actively pushes Claire closer and closer to Paul like a moth to a flame. Repeatedly, she suffers exquisitely detailed punishment at Paul's hands and cock after having failed him again and again. Always, she is drawn back for more and more. Her desires for Paul increase and at the same time she reveals more and more skin to Tristan, torturing him in much the same ways as Paul is torturing her. The parties come closer and closer together as their individual worlds shrink. Eventually, their worlds collide with erotic force and the characters are left changed forever. Show more
