The story of Max, the brother of bubbly Deedee from the first book, and Jamie, Deedee's friend and newspaper owner. Jamie's newspaper is struggling and she had to accept a silent partner in order to keep the doors from closing. What she doesn't know is that Deedee had a hand in the partnership, and that the mysterious investor is none other than Max. Max is smart and charming, but Jamie refuses to be charmed, since she is a supposedly happily engaged woman with a stick in the mud who doesn't understand her at all. Max's reason for visiting is not just about the newspaper, however. His brother in law, who is running for mayor, has been receiving threatening notes and is starting to worry about Deedee's safety. Max, who loves his sister despite their vastly different personalities and age gap, is determined to discover who is behind the threats and uses his considerable resources to do so. One of those resources is the AI he has installed in his nearly indestructible vehicle that is basically a colorful character herself. Jamie and Max have teamed up to investigate what seems to be an embezzling scandal within the officials of the town, while dodging attempts on their lives by people with guns, bombs and aligators. If they come to be a bit attached to one another, who's to blame them, with all that chemistry between them and the danger they go through together. Despite their attraction, however, the two don't cross the line, and when they finally solve the mystery that sees Jamie's future mother in law in the mastermind role, Max is ready to leave and let her get back to her life. Jamie isn't happy to remain with a man who suspected his mother's wrongdoings and did nothing about them, however, and uses that as an excuse to break off their engagement . Light and fun, if slightly dated. Jamie and Max's story continues in Full Speed , where they are on the hunt for one of the corrupt officials involved who escaped capture. Previous book review: ✦ Full House ~ ★★★ (08/10/2016)
