I have read Mr. Dalrymple's articles in The Spectator (of London) and other journals, magazines and newspapers of a conservative bent since the 1980's so while there may be many stories which I have not read before in this book there is nothing new in Dalrymple's arguments that he has not said a thousand times before. I was going to denounce this work as a Jeremiad, then I revised it to a Dunciad before crossing that out as well because Mr., or should I say Dr., Dalrymple is not indulging rhetorical fireworks. He would not be comfortable amongst the leering, jeering mobs at a Trump or Tea Party Rally or even the milder grotesqueness of the current UK conservative government's party conference. He is not going to set up a whole cosmology of hate on the strength of one street pedlar (see Mein Kampf for young Adolph's Vienna encounter before WWI which was his foundation stone for hating) nor would he have ever allowed his writings to appear in Der Surmer. You could be sure that, had he been alive at the time, such a publication would have never entered his home let alone his hands. Let me be clear, Dr. Dalrymple is not a hater and certainly not a racist of any sort - he is far more horrible, he is like Claudius dripping drop by drop insidious poison in the ears of the body politic so that it fills its veins and corrupts every organ and limb. You must understand that Dr. Dalrymple would never himself utter an unkind word or commit a prejudiced act. He is a 'Man-of-the-World', of 'Experience', a 'Doctor', he speaks of what he knows through observation, he is 'sensitive', even 'sympathetic', to the sufferings he sees. But all of that gives him the knowledge, indeed the right, to speak out because there is a 'Problem'. Spineless and cowardly politicians and ivory tower liberals have refused to 'Face Facts' and realise that we are 'Nurturing in our Bosom' a cancer which will destroy us. It is necessary to 'Strong', to 'Take Hard Decision' to recognise 'Ugly Truths'. He would never advocate cruelty, he has no unkind thoughts or feelings and passionate rhetoric suffused with ugly words and threats revolts him. But sometimes a 'Father' needs to discipline his 'Children' and do things which 'Hurt Him More than Them'. The problem is with the work-shy, shiftless, indigent, profligate, dirty, lazy, uneducated, problematic poor, dark, coloured, Black, Asian, Gypsy, scroungers, the Jews, Catholics, Gays, bleeding heart liberals the remaining Trade Unionists, the dissidents, those who don't love their country and praise unreservedly everything in its past, the smarty pants intellectuals sneering at 'Decent People' at their cocktails parties or wherever the louche and morally vacuous gather. Be assured that Dr. Dalrymple may be talking about the 'under class' but that is an elastic term, once one group is separated out as distinct the process is easy to expand: First they came for the Communists And I did not speak out Because I was not a Communist Then they came for the Socialists And I did not speak out Because I was not a Socialist Then they came for the trade unionists And I did not speak out Because I was not a trade unionist Then they came for the Jews And I did not speak out Because I was not a Jew Then they came for me And there was no one left To speak out for me (by Pastor Martin Neimoller) Because what Dr. Dalrymple does is demonise the poor, it has been his life work to explain to all the comfortable upholstered, protected and supported people why it is essential to remove all those props and supports that were created, mostly in the post WWII years, to banish forever the horrors of the unemployed and hungry, of barefoot children and unequal or more often non existent access to education, healthcare and opportunity. It is extraordinary that throughout history benefits, estates, subsidies, pensions, etc. have poured forth from a golden cornucopia onto a tiny percentage of the population and was accepted as the natural order. We haven't had a century of largesse aimed at the masses and, since its beginning there have been persistent and continuous denunciation of mollycoddling. Dr. Dalrymple is a firm believer in people, well poor people, pulling themselves up by their bootstraps and believes in the 'Market' as the all powerful decider of people's fate, well poor people - its not like when bankers mismanaged the economy 2008 that they should suffer, it would be unfair to deprive them of their bonuses even though it turns out that the profits those bonuses represented payment for were illusory. The poor don't need subsidies or support, businesses do, private schools disguised as charities do, but not some unmarried mother and even less her children which we all 'Know' are basically feral and bound for a life of petty than major crime. The criminalisation of the poor, like the poor themselves, has always been with us, You only need to go back a century to find Britain's 1912 political and Anglican elite attempting to introduce a bill which “(would) prevent...the survival of the socially unfit” and was illustrated by the strapping Eton educated sons of the elite in contrast to poor specimens emerging from Britain's slums (far to many unfit even to die for their King and Empire). Thanks to a campaign by the Catholic Church and the not yet Catholic G.K. Chesterton this revolting early eugenic legislation was defeated (this one of the few occasions I can unreservedly admire the Catholic Church - its aim may have simply been to ensure a steady supply of altar boys for priests and others to diddle - but whatever its faulty intentions its consequences were worthy). What is so foul about this book is its gentle anecdotal reasoning - I prefer my hate and scorn to be open and honest. Dr. Dalrymple may not stand with the braying yahoos salivating with delight at the thought of withdrawing from milksop agreements like the European Convention on Human Rights so 'refugees' and others can be thrown into the ocean but his words give comfort and support to them. He may imagine that he, and men like him, are 'using' the vulgar demagogues but do I really need to point out the number of times such men have been horrified to discover how little control of the monsters they nurse? So be warned, all of you who see the world as 'Them' and 'Us' - and confidently see yourself as one of the 'Us' - how secure are you really? How secure are your children or grandchildren.? The Moloch of privilege is reducing what was the 'working class' to status less than that of serfs or slaves and are fast devouring the middle classes and reducing them, bit by bit, because greed is insatiable and: "They smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the mess they had made..." (F. Scott Fitzgerald 'The Great Gatsby') That may be all our futures if we are not careful - the temporarily indispensable humans needed to ensure the smooth running of the elites untroubled existence. But we will be there only as long as we can do something a machine cannot do. We will be the underclass, perhaps the last underclass and maybe that will ensure our survival because the haves always need have-nots to feel morally superior too. I will conclude by quoting Yeats: "I have spread my dreams under your feet; Tread softly because you tread on my dreams." My dreams are not Dr. Dalrymple's, he might not intend it but his are my nightmare: "If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face— forever..." (George Orwell 1984).
