Caroline McHugh has this amazing talk on TEDx called ''The art of being yourself'' and it is truly inspiring if you have ears to hear to what she is saying about the EYE concepts of ourselves: what the world thinks of me, what I want the world to think of me, what I think of myself and the actual talk of my soul. I do a lot of affirmative psychology workshops and speeches like this help people to embrace themselves more, to see the uniqueness and individuality and full potential in all of us while being part of the human community. If you ask anthropologists what our uniqueness as species is, the inevitable answer would be, our overwhelming connection with each other. This is the core of us humans; there are other four core statements besides connection, but our need to feel worthy and connected with other people is the one which I am referring now. But psycho armour is made of collective habits which we begin grasping when we become adults and in psychotherapy it is crucial to go one level at the time since our monkey brains love to chatter a lot of nonsense which we believe, since we do believe that all our physical, emotional and psychological reactions are us. Which is very far from the truth and very close to it in the same time. When you start working on yourself; not just kidding yourself that you are working, you come to the most astounding revelations; raw beauty of awe which life is. The secret and poignant bliss of being present, of worthiness and having the right to be whoever you are just because you breathe and struggle. Majority of people like to numb pain because on the level of our mental plateau, pain reminds us of something where we did not excel, it reminds us of our mistakes. And a mistake is not a mistake at all. A mistake is a label which we give to our expectations and experiences after we live them. When we want to undo them, when we feel like we didn’t do our best although this is exactly what we did. In any given moment we are truly doing the best we can. And later our biggest task is not to get scorched with pain because it causes us to suffer and suffering hurts deeply. It confuses us, it atrophies us, it disconnects us and it completely misbalances our abilities to grasp things as they are without the emotional projection of our so called ''failures''. The truth is, majority of us doesn’t know how to go deep within and find transformative stillness in hurt and pain - which we often find and use when we are feeling joyous, uplifting, grateful and happy. And yet, the pain is a road sign to discover yourself while your head is heavy, while your limbs are tired. When the numbness clears the fog from your wounded thoughts, you are ready. There is this suffocating sentence which is very difficult to grasp for people who have just started working on themselves and it is: pain is inevitable and suffering is optional. In psychology suffering doesn’t have any value. And it is very galaxies far away difficult to grasp this if you like your wounds and if you treat them as part of your life which give you dark power. Most people don’t realise this since they cling to their suffering so much because they simply don’t know how to be anything else but their past. This book on self-esteem has inspiring tasks and the results are living a more fulfilling and satisfied life. Grounded life with opportunity to see the world, your world, your inner world and the lull of your soul so much clearer. The main question is always, what is your favourite flavour of shit sandwich? Because if you don’t start now, when.
