I liked and didn't like this book. There were some definite things about his logic that I didn't agree with. For example he doesn't agree with any type of coercion he thinks that natural consequences should apply. In the book he talks about a possible violent child, he doesn't think that you should do anything but state that you will call the police if the child becomes violent and then only defend yourself and ask the child to go to his bedroom until he calms down. Well if the child becomes violent and the police do come what, the police will use the threat of violence (guns, batons, etc) to get the child to come with them. Isn't that coercion? Another example of a young child who bites his mother the author states that the mother should just walk away therefore depriving the child of any attention, not practical and in my experiance doesn't work, what if you are at the store or a thousand other places that it isn't safe to just leave a child. I feel age appropiate discipline would work better at least in my case. He defintely states that "physical violence" isn't Christlike and that it may solve something temporarly but only makes things worse in the long term. He quotes several scriptures to back that up. I agree most of he time but believe that at times more than just ignoring the behavior is needed. There are several scripture references to "violent" acts such as when Nephi cut off Labins head to save a nation. Now don't think I am in any way advocating killing of any kind, just pointing out what I feel are his problems with his logic. What I liked is I believe that everyone can become a better parent work on showing more love kindness and charity to different members of are family. He kept the book very Christian instead or LDS and I thought that was great and hope other people are inspired to be better parents by following Christ's example. He advocated more prayer always a plus. One thing I have tried to implement each night from reading this book is to tell each of my kids how much I love them and then recognize something they did that I thought was good such as put away their toys and tell them thank you. I would and plan to read it again since it did contain huge amounts of information. I also would recommend it. Last the dialogue between charactors in his examples are really really cheesy and I think would just upset a already upset teenager more but that is just my opinion since I don't have teenagers. Happy parent reading!
