Many years ago when I was a schoolboy in primary school I remember our teacher telling us tales of lions that stalked the workmen involved in the building of the Uganda Railway making away with a victim despite the best efforts to stop them. At some point the construction was halted as most workers fled the Tsavo area chosing not to be dinner for lions no matter what the pay was...The abiding question I had from then was why the lions could do that easily and we know even the communites who lived around that area had the knowledge to build better shelter, I found the answer in this book. The desire to read this came from a recent visit to the Nairobi Railway museum. I had mostly gone there to witness the bloom of Jacaranda trees in relatively quiet environs, the tall majestic trees in a purple hue standing guard for a wall lined up with the most beautiful graffiti compilation of various artists, it was a beautiful sight, on a whim I chose to go to the actual museum. It's an interesting place with locomotive engines from various eras, wagons from bygone years and the building had an interesting collection of artifacts including some claws from the actual man eating lions. This piqued my interest and I went looking for this book. The book served its purpose, it was a retelling of the tale by the actual man who killed the lions. A measured tale that was devoid of embelishment and which at some point downplayed the actual danger Patterson was actually in. This was in the late 1890s ,early 1900s and the guns relied upon to hunt these apex predators were not as powerful as their modern cousins requiring the gunman to get very close to the intended target for his shots to prove lethal. One misfire or gun jamming would have rendered the hunter being the hunted and on some occasion Patterson escaped through a stroke of pure luck. In addition to learning about the tale of the killing of the lions I also learnt about how the Kenyan landscape was in the previous millenium, how the tribes interacted with each other and how they handled the coming of the white man, that part was equally fascinating as the lion hunt itself. This is one of those niche reads, something has to lead you here and I am afraid my recomendation alone might not be sufficient.
