For full disclosure, I grew up within an evangelical tradition, and I thought I knew quite a bit about the Roman Catholic Church, the Reformation, etc. - but I must admit that I truly did not fully grasp the depth and scope of several Catholic doctrines until reading this book. To say that reading about some of these doctrines was eye-opening and jaw-dropping would be an understatement. To be fair, now that I have read about Catholic doctrines from the perspective of a Protestant author, I suppose I do need to add one or two books written by Catholic authors to my to-read list in order to achieve a balanced perspective. I found this book to be incredibly helpful, and I would highly recommend it to others. For my own future notes: Page 34 - Catholic crosses typically depict Jesus on the cross while Protestant crosses typically depict the cross by itself. Pages 42-43 - “Most of us have heard the Jewish term shalom and know it means "peace." But shalom means much more than that. Shalom is a full, rich term that speaks of wellness, health, a rightness of relationships. It does not mean merely the lack of conflict—it goes far beyond that. Shalom, for example, would never describe a cease-fire in wartime. In a cease-fire, shooting might break out at any moment. The uneasy calm would not qualify as shalom. In the same way, if our relationship with God is such that it might break down in the next instant, resulting in enmity between us and God once again, we do not have biblical peace.” Page 45 - “The viewpoint that best defends its claim to authority rules the day. Note the words of the Council of Trent (1546)…The Roman Catholic Church claims the ultimate authority to interpret Scripture.” Pages 46-47 - “Keating is correct: the basis for our belief in the inspiration of the Bible does directly impact how we go about interpreting the Bible. If we believe the Bible is inspired on the basis of accepting the claims of authority made by the Roman Catholic Church, then we will obviously interpret the Bible in light of the teachings of Rome. From the very start, an external authority exists outside of Scripture that will determine what we "find" in Scripture. Rome's authority, then, becomes the foundation upon which all else rests. Immediately we note circular reasoning: Roman Catholicism claims the final say in interpreting the Bible, yet it also points to Bible passages as the basis of its authority.” Page 59 - “The doctrine of sola scriptura, simply stated, is that the Scriptures alone are sufficient to function as the regula fidei, the infallible rule of faith for the Church.” Page 64 - “The Greek term used here, theopneustos, is most expressive. It is literally translated as "God-breathed" (as in the NIV), and it does not refer to the idea of taking merely human words and breathing something special into them. What is more, the text says it is the Scriptures, not the writers themselves, that are "God-breathed." Paul is here referring to the origin of the Scriptures, and insists in the strongest terms that they come from God himself. The foundation of Scripture, the fountain of divine revelation, is God the Almighty.” Page 66 - “We see here, then, that Paul teaches the man of God is thoroughly or completely equipped for every good work. Now, what does it mean that the Scriptures are able to fully equip the man of God if not that they are sufficient for this task? If I am a store owner who can fully equip a hiker to hike the Grand Canyon—if I have the resources and abilities to provide everything he needs in the way of supplies, hiking gear, shoes, maps, food, etc.-does it not follow that I am a sufficient source of supply for the hiker? If he has to go next door to another shop for a few more things, and then to a third shop for some things that neither mine nor the other shop had, then none of us are sufficient to equip the hiker.” Page 66 - “Rome teaches that Mary was bodily assumed into heaven.” Page 67 - “When engaged in debate with the Sadducees in Matthew 22, the Lord drew their attention to a passage of Scripture…This passage is often cited as evidence that the Lord was willing to base an argument on the words of the text. He was assuring us that God takes care of the Scriptures and protects them from wholesale corruption, and indeed the passage does indicate this very thing. However, we should not miss the importance of the introductory phrase the Lord uses: "Have you not read (i.e., in the Scriptures), What was spoken to you by God..?" The Lord Jesus Christ held his hearers accountable for reading the Scriptures.” Page 68 - “He launches a counterattack against these leaders by pointing out how they nullify the command of God by their own traditions, specifically in this case with reference to the corban rule, whereby a man could dedicate his belongings to the Temple and not support his parents in their old age. The Lord Jesus holds this traditional teaching up to the light of Scripture and finds it wanting It is vital to realize that the Jews viewed the corban rule as part of the "tradition of the elders." To them this was a divine tradition with divine authority. They did not simply view it as a "tradition of men," but as a concept revealed by God and passed down into the body of those teachings entrusted to the elders of the faith.” Pages 74 - “Here is the three-part view of authority found so often in Catholic writings: the Scriptures, tradition, and the Magisterium (the Church's teaching power). Since the Magisterium defines the extent of the Scriptures (by defining the canon), claims sole right of interpretation of the Scriptures, tells us what is and what is not tradition, and defines doctrines on the basis of this self-defined tradition, in reality we see that the only one of the three "legs" of this system that is not defined by one of the others is the Magisterium itself. Because of this fact, the reasoning behind the often repeated Protestant assertion that the Scriptures are not the ultimate authority in Roman Catholic teaching is clear.” Page 91 - “Now, Roman apologists may well say, "See, you've proven our point! You need an infallible interpreter to tell you what the Bible says because you are a sinful person, and you need a sinless, perfect guide to tell you what to believe!" Aside from the fact that such a concept is absent from Scripture, and is in fact countermanded by Scripture (did not the Lord Jesus hold men accountable for what God said to them in Scripture?), we need to observe that Rome has hardly solved the problem of fallible people. Once Rome speaks, the fallible person must still interpret the supposed infallible interpretation. As noted in the previous chapter, the element of error remains, no matter how much Rome may think it has been removed. Indeed, beyond the problem of interpreting the infallible interpreter, you still have the fallible decision of following Rome's claimed absolute authority rather than Brooklyn's, or Salt Lake City's, or Mecca's, or whoever's. That remains a fallible decision, and the longing for those infallible fuzzies that come from turning your responsibilities over to an infallible guide remain as unfulfilled as ever.” Page 95 - “Some have replied that our Jewish man living fifty years before Christ couldn't infallibly know that Isaiah and 2 Chronicles were Scripture. Yet, as we have seen, Jesus held men responsible for the Scriptures and their teachings (Matthew 22:31). To say that such a person did not need to have an infallible knowledge, but only a sufficient knowledge-based upon the overall acceptance of God's people and the internal consistency and integrity of the Scriptures as a body—is to say nothing more than what Protestants say about all the Bible.” Page 96 - “The first thing we note is that this is a command to stand firm and hold fast to a single body of traditions already delivered to the believers. There is nothing future about this passage at all. Does Paul say to stand firm and hold fast to traditions that will be delivered? Does he say to hold on to interpretations and understandings that have not yet developed? No, this oral teaching which he refers to has already been delivered to the entire Church, not just to the episcopate, not just to the bishops, but to everyone in the Church at Thessalonica.” Page 118 - “The rock of which the Lord speaks is that common confession made by all who are part of the Church: Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. This is seen, I believe, in the fact that while the Lord is addressing Peter directly, He changes from direct address to the third person, "this rock," when speaking of Peter's confession. He does not say, "Upon you, Peter, I will build my church." Instead, you have a clear distinction between Peter, the étos (Petros), and the demonstrative pronoun preceding nétpa (petra), the confession of faith, on which the Church is built. This statement is followed by the promise to give the keys of the kingdom of heaven to Peter at some time in the future, so that what he binds on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever he looses on earth will be loosed in heaven. I emphasize this is a promise, for the verb is future in tense. I Yet when we see this authority given in Matthew 18:18, it is given not to Peter alone or even primarily to him. It is conferred on all the Apostles, using the exact same language! regarding binding and loosing. If someone wishes to say that Peter receives the keys in distinction from the other Apostles, as their superior, they are also forced to admit that the actual giving of these keys is never recorded for us anywhere in Scripture, a strange thing indeed for something supposedly so fundamental to the constitution of the Church.” Page 123 - “The terminology used of the Pope reveals how deeply this desire is found in the heart of humankind. For example, the Pope is called the "Vicar of Christ on earth." A vicar is a substitute, as in the term vicarious. The Pope functions in the place of Christ as the earthly head of the Church as Christ is the heavenly leader. This idea at first sight provides a sense of security and assurance. But when one considers it in the light of biblical teaching, one is struck by the fact that the "Vicar of Christ" on earth, according to the Lord himself in John 14 and 16, is the Holy Spirit, not the bishop of Rome.” Page 126 - “Roman Catholic theology separates sin into two main categories: venial and mortal. Theologian John Hardon defines venial sin: An offense against God which does not deprive the sinner of sanctifying grace. It is called venial (from venia, pardon) because the soul still has the vital principle that allows a cure from within, similar to the healing of a sick or diseased body whose source of animation (the soul) is still present to restore the ailing bodily function to health. On the other hand, mortal sin is: An actual sin that destroys sanctifying grace and causes the supernatural death of the soul. Mortal sin is a turning away from God because of a seriously inordinate adherence to creatures that causes grave injury to a person's rational nature and to the social order, and deprives the sinner of a right to heaven.” Page 129 - “Sacraments, then, are "channels of grace," the means by which the grace of God is applied to individuals. According to modern Roman Catholic teaching, the Sacraments number seven: Baptism, Confession, Holy Eucharist, Confirmation, Holy Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction.” Page 138 - “Note just a few of the available statements from the past: Pope Innocent III (December 18, 1208): "With our hearts we believe and with our lips we confess but one Church, not that of the heretics, but the Holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, outside which we believe that no one is saved." Pope Pius IX (December 9, 1854): "It must be held by faith that outside the Apostolic Roman Church, no one can be saved; that this is the only ark of salvation; that he who shall not have entered therein will perish in the flood." Page 148 - “One other item needs to be addressed to avoid confusion. I have often asked classes, "What is the biblical difference between the terms "righteousness" and "justification"? Often the responses center on seeing "righteousness" as a moral attribute, and "justification" as a legal thing. In reality, there is absolutely no difference at all between the two words as they are used in the Bible. In fact, there are not two different terms in the New Testament that are translated as the two words "righteousness" and "justification." There is only one term which is translated by both of these words. To be righteous is to be justified; to make righteous is to make just, and so on.” Pages 156-157 - Martin Luther’s illustration of a dunghill covered in snow to explain the difference between justification and sanctification: “Luther was trying to explain how we are both justified and sinful at the same time. The dunghill is still a dunghill: but it is covered over with a blanket of pure snow. In the same way. the believer is not changed subjectively by justification, but is covered over with an "alien righteousness," the "righteousness of another," that being the righteousness of Christ.” Pages 161-164 - The Catholic view of the Eucharist is jawdroppingly surprising. Page 184 - “In more concrete terms, which have been carved out of centuries of the Church's reflection on revelation, there exists purgatory, in which the souls of the just who die with the stains of sins are cleansed by expiation before they are admitted to heaven. They can be helped, however, by the intercession of the faithful on earth…In discussing the sacrifice of the Mass, the Council of Trent said, “Wherefore, according to the tradition of the Apostles, it (the Mass) is rightly offered not only for the sins, punishments, satisfactions, and other necessities of the faithful who are living, but also for those departed in Christ but not yet fully purified." Pages 187-188 - “The "treasury of merit" is a concept that developed long after the time of the Apostles and eventually became a source of great corruption in the Roman Catholic Church. The concept is that Christ had "excess merit"-beyond that required to bring about the salvation of humankind. Consequently, this excess merit goes into the treasury and is available through the Church to be given to those in need of it. It is important to realize that it is not only Christ's merit that is in the treasury. Mary, likewise, had more "merit" than was required for her salvation; therefore, her excess merit goes into the same treasury, adding to the superabundance of Christ's merit. But this is not all. The saints also had more merit than they personally needed to enter into heaven, so their excess merit is placed in the treasury along with that of Christ and Mary. The treasury of merit presents a mixture of the merit of Christ, that of the Virgin Mary, and of the saints. As the document puts it, "The merits of the Blessed Mother of God and of all the elect ... are known to add further to this treasure. " An indulgence, then, could be likened to a "withdrawal" of a portion of this merit and the application of it to the "account" of the person obtaining the indulgence.” Page 193 - Catholics see 1 Corinthians 3:10-15 as a passage that teaches the concept of Purgatory… “What is judged is the type of works the Christian has done. Sins and their punishments are not even mentioned. It is works that are judged and put through the fire, yet Rome teaches that it is the person who must suffer in order to be purified from the "temporal punishments" of sin. The point of the text is that if a person's works withstand the judgment, the person receives a reward. If not, the person suffers loss—not punishment—yet is saved, "but as through fire." The passage does not say the person goes through fire, is punished, or suffers to make atonement for sin. It simply says that the Christian's works are judged for their own merit, and if those works are found to be made of wood, hay, and straw, the works will be burned up and the person will receive no reward.” Page 201 - In response to the Catholic doctrine that Mary was sinless: “Here Keating stretches the bounds of serious exegetical integrity past the breaking point. This can be seen by examining the term in question, the perfect passive participle "kecharitomene." Does the term carry within it an entire doctrine unknown in the rest of the New Testament and unheard of by the first three centuries of the Christian Church? Or are modern Roman Catholic interpreters reading into this term a tremendous amount of material that was never intended by Luke? First, let's look at the root meaning of "kecharitomene," the Greek word "caritoo." Bauer's A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature defines the usage of "caritoo" at Luke 1:28, "favored one (in the sight of God)." No lexical source that we have found gives as a meaning of caritoo "sinlessness." The term refers to favor-in the case of Luke 1:28, divine favor, that is, God's grace. The only other occurrence of caritoo is in Ephesians 1:6, "... to the praise of the glory of His grace, which he freely bestowed (caritoo) on us in the Beloved." If the bare term caritoo means "sin-lessness," then it follows that the elect of God throughout their lives have been sinless as well.” Page 208 - “Saints are not given latria, according to Rome. This would be doing just what the Protestants say Catholics are doing worshiping the saints. What, then, are Catholics doing when they "venerate" the saints? Saints are rendered dulia. What is dulia? Robert Broderick defines it as follows: Dulia is the special worship, generally called veneration, given to the angels and saints because as friends of God they share in His excellence. Dulia is differentiated from latria, though, according to Broderick, both are forms of worship. Latria is a "higher form" of worship than dulia. Therefore, when the Bible speaks of worshiping God alone, this refers to latria. We are, however, allowed to give dulia to others. Hyperdulia is the highest form of dulia and is to be given to Mary alone. Broderick says, Hyperdulia is the veneration proper to the Blessed Mother alone; it is the highest form of veneration short of adoration.” Page 212 - Includes a Roman Catholic prayer to Mary that proclaims that she is more powerful than all hell together and that our salvation is placed in her hands. Page 213 - Pope Leo XIII said, “Thus as no man goeth to the Father but by the Son, so no man goeth to Christ but by His Mother.” Page 216 - “St. Anselm, to increase our confidence, adds, that "when we have recourse to this divine Mother, not only we may be sure of her protection, but that often we shall be heard more quickly, and be thus preserved, if we have recourse to Mary and call on her holy name, than we should be if we called on the name of Jesus our Saviour," and the reason he gives for it is, "that to Jesus as a judge, it belongs also to punish; but mercy alone belongs to the Blessed Virgin as a patroness." Meaning, that we more easily find salvation by having recourse to the Mother than by going to the Son.” This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
