When fishing for book recommendations some time ago I've stumbled upon Life at Bottom: The Worldview That Makes the Underclass by Theodore Dalrymple. Now, having read it I wish I had bought and read it immediately instead of postponing it for almost a year. The book is a collection of essays dealing with the British underclass. The main theme or theory of the book is that the underclass is the underclass not because of economic factors, oppression or lack of opportunities but mostly because of its worldview. The author not only contradicts the current liberal dogma but attacks it fiercely. The "poor" of today live in times of incomparable wealth, even the poorest of the poor have a roof over their head, food and access to entertainment. They don't lack material wealth yet live in moral squalor. Each article tackles a facet of the British underclass - the broken families, the battered wives, the entertainment, the living arrangements, habits so on and so forth. The author is a doctor and while his evidence is mostly anecdotal it is also exhaustive: having interviewed thousands of people. The articles are told from the perspective of the author but are written about his patients which share a particular predicament or exhibit the same worldview. While the underclass existed as long as civilization itself its recent influx can mostly be traced back to social degeneration stemming from liberal social theories. Battered wives and broken families, the author says, originate in the liberal idea of free love, the sexual revolution and lack of morals. Nobody is as progressive in this regard as a typical representative of the underclass. The women have multiple children, each with different man; the men father children to different women. All cheat on each other. Far from being the paradise liberals imagined it to be the living arrangements of those people are more then wretched. Human beings are unfortunately just humans and untested social theories can have grave consequences when made into flesh. When sex is freely given it is worthless. The family unit doesn't exist and human relationship are reduced to their basest forms. The men don't see themselves as worth anything and knowing the nonexistent value of sex they resolve to violence as a means of an ego boost and a way of keeping the women attached to themselves. The women are battered but stay in toxic relationships because it's the only thing they know (better a known wife-beater to an unknown one). The women see men as an avenue for fulfilling their urges. And in all of this the children are witnesses to daily violence which births new pathology. I've only summarized one aspect of the life of the British underclass but the book is a full frontal assault against the common ideas that predominate in the current intellectual climate - that crime is born out of poverty, that poverty is due to exploitation, that the welfare state is a positive influence, the denial of personal responsibility and the belief in social determinism. The author suggests that academic ideas like those infect the lower classes through the osmosis of media and popular culture with disastrous consequences. One example that stuck in my mind is how criminals implicitly absolve themselves from responsibility by the choice of language that they use - donning the passive voice and using phrases which make them seem simple victims of happenstance ("the knife went in", "my mind went"). Life at the Bottom by Theodore Dalrymple goes to my personal list of most shocking books ever written and I'm hoping to get more of the author! The depressing content of the book is contrasted against the dry-wit of the author which makes the stories even more abhorring. While the topic is sombre, it is an all in all great book, one which I can't recommend highly enough.
