An interesting book. Windschuttle seems to be making the broad argument that there is objective, historical Truth that can be found through the traditional historical method. Despite not having a direct definition of what this "traditional historical method" was, I think I managed to stitch together that the traditional method is more focused on: primary sources, letting the sources create the theory (instead of allowing the theory to inform the reading of the sources) and a general belief that what the authors of our primary source documents actually happened. I assumed this was the base for any kind of history, but according to Keith this is not so. Keith embarks on a 300 page journey into what was the liberal left of the historical field in the late 1990's largely to prove that their theories are wrong and his is right. He begins by painting a broad - arguably too broad - understanding of several of the current trends in historiography; these include Structuralism, Post-Structuralism, Post Modernism, Marxism and Critical Theory. All of these theories are deficient for Keith. He spends the rest of the book explaining why, using books written by modern historians espousing said views as the majority of his sources. While I disagree with the majority of the current historiographical trends - as does, and probably to a far greater degree than I, Keith - I don't think it would be wise to through out the baby with the bath water. While I don't believe that Keith would deny that all history has been written from the cultural viewpoint of the author and that it is well and good as a historian to find these viewpoints and unpack them, he certainly does make it seem like he does. In any polemic it's hard to give ground to the other side - who wants to read a book that agrees with the bad guys when you could write them off as the villains they are and champion the cause of justice and truth - but that makes for, in my opinion, poor argumentation and use of our, so highly praised by Windschuttle, rational abilities. Unfortunately, Windschuttle doesn't give us a last resort for our rational abilities either. After "wrecking the libs" for 300 pages Keith doesn't give us the method to replace theirs. He operates under the assumption that he already told us, which he didn't. As I said prior, I had to piece together what his vaunted traditional method was. Maybe I just skimmed over that bit but perhaps a chapter at the end would have been nice to wrap it all together with the correct viewpoint of history, which Keith so fervently claims to hold. I once read somewhere that if a demon is cast out and finds his old home lacking anything to replace him, he'll come back with seven more and the demoniac will be in a worse place than before.
