I’m giving this book 4 stars. Goodreads says that’s a score that means I “really liked it”, but I’m actually pretty conflicted about it... Not that Tales of Pain & Wonder was bad—far from it; it’s just that it was, at times, a very frustrating read. As with the previous Kiernan work I read, The Drowning Girl , I felt left out of the narrative(s) in a way that I don't think Kiernan was hoping the reader would be left out. As much as I like Kiernan's writing style and world-building, particularly the frequent allusions to Goth subculture, those aspects of the collection, sadly, were not enough to sustain my interest for 20+ stories. Some stories were pretty good ("Anamorphosis", "Bela's Plot"); some were just OK ("Tears Seven Times Salt", "Glass Coffin"); some went directions I wasn't expecting ("Breakfast in the House of the Rising Sun", "Paedomorphosis"); but a lot of them were just sort of... 'there'... not necessarily "bad", but not the kind of stories that I felt showcased Kiernan's full potential. In fact, I was almost considering quitting the book altogether (or at least putting it away for a while and then maybe returning to it later), until I came across one story about half-way through the book, "Postcards from the King of Tides", which was downright brilliant . After that the stories generally grow considerably in quality, but, sadly, they never reach the same height as "Postcards". So why am I giving this book, which I apparently only kind of enjoyed, 4 stars? Because I feel like on the whole I still saw what Kiernan was going for with this collection. I really wish I had known about the alternative reading order before I started reading the book; not that I think reading the stories in their chronological order would have made that much of a difference in and of itself, but had I known earlier that there was some kind of throughline (however loose and fuzzy that throughline may be), it might have made some stories which I now read as just filler pack on an extra layer of significance. Still, as with The Drowning Girl , there is enough in Tales that leaves me thoroughly convinced of Kiernan's capabilities as a writer, even if I still can't shake the feeling that she has more to offer...
