Ronald Wright has crafted a comprehensive review of the Maya using a clever title that covers the author’s journey through (then 1985) contemporary Maya realm, reaching into recent (100+ years) rebellious past and back one thousand plus years of the time of the ancient Maya while capturing the notion of the Maya concept of Time. When I first read the book in 1991 I thought it the best Canadian book ever written. It may well have been so at the time. However I found this second read through (in 2019) a bit of a slog. It shouldn’t have been as from 1991-1995 I visited most of the places mentioned in the book (save Bonampak, Cozumel and Uxmal) but did not relish the revisitation. To be sure Wright savours and shares his encounters with unusual characters where ever he goes. One marvels on his recapturing the nuances of those happenstances in his retelling. One encounter near Bonampak: “Len told everyone we were doing ARCHAEOLOGY. From the way he delivered the word (normally a dusty sound) you could tell he equated it with safari, serendipity.” Len was surprised how many tourists got that far: “They’re willing to go through all that pain just to see some ruins.” At Uxmal some visitors say to the waiter, pointing at Wright’s dinner “We will have what they’re having.” Five minutes later there is frantic gobbling followed by a gringo scream. Wright presents the duality of Maya beliefs: “…war and peace, life and death, heaven and underworld, good and bad were all in the nature of God.” (page 172) To make it clear of the hazard of being Maya in Guatemala, after reaching Mexico from his sojourn through Guatemala, the author writes: “…it seems now, after a week away, a microcosm of all the ugliness and beauty in the world; of stupidity and wisdom; evil and good – endless Manichean opposites, and darkness with the upper hand. Things may not be wonderful in Mexico, especially for Indians, but almost all the people I’ve met here – the weavers and writers, the Chamulas who cleared off the land, the Maya officials and policemen, the liberal bishop – if this was Guatemala these people would be dead.” (page 256) Wright sums up the Maya world view: “The Maya regard a ruined city the way we regard a parked car. It’s desolation is temporary; it has an owner or owners; it is capable of life in the future as in the past.” (page 320)
