Novelization of the movie, the one with Sean Bean and the train and Arecibo. The Soviet Union has fallen and Russia is in anarchy. Someone steals a stealth helicopter from the French and it is spotted near St. Petersburg. James Bond is sent to look into it and ends up in the gulag, fighting with old KGB guys and Russian thugs. He steals a tank, jumps a train, and eventually takes a Piper Cub to Cuba. As this is a book based on an action movie there are an enormous amount of splosions and crashes and shootings and not much else. Since Bond is always in action it is easy to picture him as his regular self, and only rarely are you reminded that this is snarky Pierce Brosnan Bond. He is far more in the Roger Moore mold than the Sean Connery, but from the book it could be any of them. Some bit of fun with a book being written in 1995. The Goldeneye is a space EMP satellite and there is a lot of Hollywood computer science involved. At one point Bond's girl in this one can save the world if she can just get a 14.4 modem and 428 k of RAM. While Bond has an industrial grade laser in his watch that can cut through steel. Makes sense. Then there is the elephant in the room. This book marks the retirement of the Admiral from the office of M, and his replacement is the most grossly incompetent and egregiously ill-placed person imaginable. And it is not going to be a surprise to anyone because the very first thing this new M does is call James Bond a misogynist and useless Cold War dinosaur. Misogynist, OK, but this is the guy that has literally saved the entire human race more than once, undergone torture numerous times, saw the love of his life killed before his eyes, and never once wavered in his loyalty or dedication to duty to Queen and Country. Who the hell are you, lady? What have you ever done to be talking to this guy like that? I'll tell you who she is, so SPOILERS! This is the M that has one of her hand trained operatives, 006, turn traitor. She also gets MI-6 headquarters blowed up. And she gets kidnapped. Eventually she even gets dead. Vice Admiral Sir Miles Messervy, KCMG, would have had an aneurism if it had even been hinted that there was the barest possibility that even one of these things could happen on his watch. It doesn't matter how well Dame Judy Dench can act, this character is irredeemable. Gardner does a pretty decent job of fleshing out a bare bones plot, mostly concerning the state of Russia during the Yeltsin years. James Bond only gets one moment of his usual introspection, but he does get a good breakfast. Gardner is still completely attached to the ASP 9mm with the Glaser rounds, but Bond does get to drive an Aston Martin instead of a Saab so it's not all bad. I believe it may be the only vehicle in the entire book that he does not destroy, which becomes a running joke throughout the novel. Overall, decent Bond book, but clearly made from a movie script.
