I wish I can write This Is Not a Review, but I don’t have Markson’s talents to pull it off as he did with this extraordinary second installment in what would turn out to be his “Notecards Quartet” of four novels, which are in fact not novels at all (so far I read the first Reader’s Block and this one) yet they leave a trace in this reader’s mind perhaps even more powerfully than a conventional novel would. If it’s not a novel, then what else is it? In Reader’s Block , there were only two “characters”—Protagonist and Reader—now there’s only one, the Writer, so let him speak. It’s: Nonlinear. Discontinuous. Collage-like. An assemblage. Self-evident enough to scarcely need Writer's say-so. Obstinately cross-referential and of cryptic interconnective syntax. Here perhaps less than self-evident to the less than attentive. (p. 128) Why would a novelist choose to write a “novel” that is not a novel? If readers are “attentive”, they can indeed find the answer among Markson’s dispersed “notecards”: You can actually draw so beautifully. Why do you spend your time making all these queer things? Picasso: That’s why. (p. 156) Writer has actually written some relatively traditional novels. Why is he spending his time doing this sort of thing? That’s why. (p. 164) Markson defies every single conventional norm of novel-making as there is no plot or characters except for “Writer”. The entire book consists of a series of fragments with anecdotal references and literary quotations among which we periodically encounter the thoughts of Writer about the nature of the book we are reading. The Writer muses that, if he “says so”, this is “an epic poem”, “a sequence of cantos awaiting numbering”, “a mural of sorts”, “a continued heap of riddles”, “a polyphonic opera of a kind”, “a disquisition on the maladies of the life of art”, “a kind of verbal fugue”, “a treatise on the nature of man”, and, as it turns out, most movingly “even an autobiography, if Writer says so”. And the Writer was right in every way that he said so. To pick up on its musical structure (“a polyphonic opera”, “a verbal fugue”), the referential fragments are certainly not random, as it might superficially appear. The rhythm and dynamics of their appearences are noticible through their periodic recurrences, either as counterpoints or continuing the same thread of sub-themes (or, musically speaking, “melodic threads”) and sometimes through their consecutive repetitions. Substantively, their content ranges from trivial or obscure coincidences in the lives of writers, artists, composers, opera singers… to those poignantly linked to the overarching death theme which is the Writer’s main obsession. There are many other obsessions as sub-themes, but they are always tonally hued in melancholy. Among many, there is the neglect of (posthumously famous) people during their lifetime, born and/or died in poverty, disparaged by the fellow writers/artists, buried in an unmarked grave, … And, as in the fugue to which the Writer at one point likens this book, their dark, melancholic tonality is even more accentuated when contrasted with counterpoints with rhythmic/periodic enumerations of the instances when fame is already achieved during the lifetime, or being admired by the fellow writers/artists to the extent that they are even pallbearers at their funerals, and other juxtaposing circumstances. References, sometimes cryptic and at other times overt, to Jewishness, Strand bookshop, baseball, or lines from opera arias also clearly point to the autobiographical nature of the writing as these were Markson’s well-known real-life obsessions… which leaves us with a sense of sadness that, taking a cue from his referential fragments, he (Markson the Writer) wrote this book at the time when he felt deserted as a person, neglected as a writer, while stricken by various ailments to constantly ponder about his own mortality and the circumstances of his death, how, why, when… and, though Markson violates all the norms of novel-writing, there is the coda/denouement for the Writer and, as he heralds it from the very beginning on p. 4, it is “with a note of sadness at the end.” Sigh. Indeed. I can’t remember when a conventional novel left me with so much melancholy about its main “character” and its author as did the inimitable Markson and his Writer.
