i feel bad giving these books such low reviews. i rated the julie books low in part because i disliked the character so much & because i think presenting the 1970s as a historical era is kind of bizarre & insulting. i like josefina & i think her era of 1820s new mexico is genuinely interesting. or at least, it has the potential for interest. my problem with the josefina books is that that potential is never really realized. all of the historical characters have a "school book" about the education available to them in their historical moment. because josefina lives on a rancho outside town & pretty much never leaves it, she doesn't really have an education. she & her three older sisters are all illiterate. their aunt dolores can read & write, & she impresses them by showing them the letter their father wrote to their mother, proposing marriage. they respond with interest, & dolores asks their father if she may teach them to read & write. he agrees to allow it if they are interested. josefina spends a chapter wondering if learning to read & write would be a betrayal of her mother, who never learned to read or write (her father read the marriage proposal letter out loud to her). josefina is worried that learning to read & write will make her forget more of her mother's words. when she shares her concern with dolores, dolores shows josefina a book she started keeping when she moved to mexico city. it is full of poems, songs, & sayings that josefina's mother liked. dolores explains that if josefina becomes literate, she will be able write down & reread memories of her mother & keep them close to her in yet another way. that seals the deal & josefina agrees to lessons at the end of the book. but there's nothing in here about how the lessons are conducted. i think this is also the book where a big storm happens. it causes flash flooding & hundreds of the rancho's sheep are killed. mr. montoya is pretty distraught because it took decades to build up the flock. he doesn't know how the rancho will recover. dolores saves the day by observing that they have a lot of wool left over from the last shearing. she suggests teaching the girls how to weave & everyone working their asses off to weave as many blankets as possible to trade with the nearby pueblo indians for more sheep. josefina's vain sister francisca isn't pumped about this because she thinks they already have enough chores on the rancho, but eventually everyone agrees to the plan. josefina enjoys learning how to weave. i wish i was more into these books.
