Like me, most people know something of Princess Diana’s disaster of a marriage to Prince Charles. At the time Diana agreed to co-operate with Andrew Morton on a book about her life, she was at a very low ebb and feeling sad, lonely, and unhappy. The book was partly created from transcripts of taped interviews between Diana and Morton. As a member of ‘The Firm’, as the Royal family were known, she was never allowed to express her unhappiness publicly. She was unhappy with her life, her public image as an empty-headed, ‘clothes-horse’, and most of all, miserable in her marriage. She was trapped in a gilded cage. She couldn't escape and simply obtain a divorce easily. She couldn't go anywhere without being followed by the paparazzi. The book follows the chronology of her life, beginning with her dysfunctional childhood. Her later eating disorder and her distressing life appears to have led to a psychological sense of being a victim. Married into royalty at the tender age of 19, she was unworldly and naïve. It seemed to me that she saw in Prince Charles, 14 years her senior, a kind of ‘father-figure’. Morton implies this. As I continued reading, I felt that Morton was a little in love with Diana. He certainly sympathised with her and the book is biased in her favour. To what extent I don’t know, for who really knows the full truth? When the book was published in 1992, the establishment dismissed it as being a pack of lies. Eventually, as we know, Charles admitted his infidelity with Camilla Parker Bowles. In her Panorama interview, Diana openly shared the harrowing details of her bulimia. Overall, I liked the book. It did expose the shocking truth about the Royal marriage and affected many people’s perception of the Royal Family. The book portrayed the innocence of an immature girl, who fell in love with a prince. Sadly the prince reverted to a frog, smooth, but slimy. I think that for Diana, ‘letting it all out’ for this book was a catharsis. It may have helped her to mature and become more confident. Sadly, the story ended so abruptly. Morton touches on this in an addendum to the book in the edition I read. However, this was added shortly after her death and he therefore did not focus on all the issues which have surrounded the circumstances of her death since that time.
