I read this book for the podcast I’m currently listening to called “American Girls” by Allison Horrocks and Mary Mahoney. Oh, Josefina… While I totally didn’t mind what was going on in this Josefina book (“Josefina Saves The Day”), I found a lot of different parts of this book to be weird, uncomfortable, and unnecessary. Let’s talk about what I liked at first… Well, for starters, I liked that we finally got out of Josefina’s town and we got to explore more in her world, in Santa Fe, where at this point in the “Felicity: An American Girl” series, it felt like Felicity had already ran around all over Williamsburg. It finally felt like something was happening in this book, even if it wasn’t that much. In comparison to the last book, that did have a lot of drama going on with the fucking rattlesnake at the end, I was definitely more bored in the book prior than this one. This one was just done better throughout the entire thing, while the last one had nothing going on - dragging the reader by - till the last chapter (the snake bit was also so predictable, while I didn’t feel like this one in Santa Fe really was at all [despite the comparisons to how it’s exactly the same from Felicity’s Save The Day book]). Furthermore, I liked that the kids got to have some fun (like the fact that Tía Dolores and Papá were going to let them trade their blankets for whatever they wanted), got to meet some new characters (like Patrick O’Toole), and just overall got to experience a different type of life… With that said, that’s really all “Josefina Saves The Day” was able to offer me. What I didn’t like? Well, thanks for asking. The first thing I didn’t like was the fact that the girls didn’t really get to enjoy one of the first times they got to be sort of selfish. They got these blankets to trade for whatever they want and instead Josefina convinces her sisters to use the trade to better her father’s life. Sweet, right? Of course. But it’s gotten to the point where I just feel sorry for Josefina. She’s so kind and caring for everyone and, while that’s very heartwarming, she’s missing what it’s sort of like to just be a kid. While Felicity was constantly a kid, needing to grow up, and struggling with caring for anyone else besides herself. Second, I did not like sort of touched on sexual assault/harassment/predators/pedophiles multiple times. It talked multiple times about how Sante Fe wasn’t safe, women weren’t allowed to go out without a servant in the day - but especially at night. Of course, one of the only times Josefina is rebellious (I COULD NOT BELIEVE SHE HAD DONE WHAT SHE DID AT NIGHT) - which was also extreme and very unrealistic because out of all the things for Josefina to do, this one was extreme in the sense of how much she could have gotten hurt and how could have Peter known that Josefina would have found that piece of paper in the rain only slightly ruined???? - and in the process of her being rebellious, she’s close to getting kidnapped or abuse by incredibly older, adult men who say things like ‘two senoritias!’… Gross! Ew! Finally, the last thing I hated during this book was obviously all the sexual tension between Tía Dolores and Papá. It’s everywhere. It’s where Papá has asked Dolores if he has told the girls the news (which did end up being about the trading blankets, but STILL - THE NEWS!!!) and Dolores giving trading advice to Papá when he doesn’t know what to do between Josefina’s news and Abuelita’s worried opinion on the situation and then the end!!!! WHERE THEY ARE LOOKING AT EACH OTHER OVER THE VIOLIN GIFT FROM THE SISTERS AND THEN JOSEFINA WAKING UP IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT TO SEE TÍA DOLORES STARING AT PAPÁ PLAY WHILE EVERYONE ELSE IS ASLEEP IN HER DOORWAY!!!!!!! I CANNOT!!!! I SWEAR TO GOD, VALERIE TRIPP! SO HELP ME GOD IF THEY GET TOGETHER. HOW DARE YOU DO WHAT I THINK YOU ARE ABOUT TO!! Of course, the next book is literally called “Changes For Josefina” and honestly what other change could really occur besides a new stepmother???? It’s not like a ton has been going on in Josefina’s time besides Americanos coming in this last book… If it’s nothing in Josefina’s external life that’s changing than it must be something in her internal, personal life and IF IT IS HER DEAD MOM’S AUNT HOOKING UP WITH THE DAD… I WILL GAG. PLEASE. STOP THE CRAZY TRAIN I AM ON!!!!! And so, with that, that is my review of the fifth Josefina book. Lord, help me… When it comes to this next one, if I think what’s happening ends up going on… Save me!! Send help!! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
