It was just after 8.00pm when I knocked on the door of one of those brick and cement-rendered bungalows that have a narrow frontage but stretch back further than a family tree… City of Light opens in 1979, with DC “Snowy” White of Fremantle Homicide, and sometimes player for a local AFL team, attending the scene of a young student, the body decapitated - the hallmark of a serial killer known as “Mr Gruesome”, whose earlier targets were prostitutes. Snowy is assigned to the Perth Police taskforce team, and befriended by Dave Holland, who warns him that the police force at that level is politicised – with the politicians in the pockets of the big end of town. Snowy’s investigative skills leads to several clues, some unconnected, others bring results, and raises the spectre of police corruption. When a suspect is apprehended the taskforce celebrates – only for the suspect to hang in his cell. Meanwhile, media attention shifts to the search and rescue efforts for the son of a prominent business identity and his friend, lost at sea in a yacht in the Indian Ocean. The story moves to 1986. Snowy, now a PI – gains jobs through contacts and “favours”. In the wake of two sailing syndicates vying to defend Australia in the America’s Cup, Fremantle is “gentrified” and big-scale developments are mooted. Dave Holland is on a taskforce following the money trail – with loans shuffling between corporate entities. ‘…by the time we think we know how somebody stands, the whole situation has changed again…union officials, public servants, credit societies - all hustling to get a piece of the action on dodgy projects with other people’s money.’ Author Dave Warner captures the mood at both ends of the social spectrum. A decade earlier, it had been decided that a low valley of banksias, black boy and undistinguished scrub out the back of Fremantle was the perfect place for a new State housing project. The suburb was just that little too far inland for the old Fremantle Doctor to reach, and in the raging gut of summer, everything in the small flats fermented, the food, the pets and the people. It was the perfect place to incarcerate the so-called detritus of the City of Light. Whereas - Dalkeith was ‘old’ Perth wealth. Here judges and company directors snoozed to the sound of their reticulation, and the driveways never contained fewer than two imported cars. Most of the city’s private schools were under a gallon of fuel away. His PI cases takes him further afield and as a city dweller, Snowy has problems adjusting to WA’s vastness and isolation. I turned off the two-lane onto a single-lane blacktop that dipped and rose like something out of Streets of San Francisco . Thick bush overhung the white road posts bearing down on me as I drove. A couple of potholes tested my suspension, and I was thankful when I took a final turn off the blacktop onto a red gravel road where the ride was uniformally bad. The final part of the story, set in 1988, takes us full circle to a "copycat" killer of “Mr Gruesome”, and a financial meltdown. In October 1987, world stock markets crashed. The tidal wave caught the City of Light under-prepared and over-extended, a flabby lifeguard fresh off the all-day lunch. The entrepreneurs who’d borrowed to buy the companies of their mates, who’d borrowed to buy their mates’ companies, which owned nothing but what they had paid too much for, were either wiped out or on the respirator… It is hard to do justice to a book with so many shady characters, and where so much is at stake. If I read it again I would take note of the body count – well into double figures, only one I recall of natural causes. While peppered throughout with clues, the author had me as blindsided as Snowy as to the real story. On the downside, my eyes glazed over at - " the morning was as crisp and clear as a marching girl’s uniform ". This his debut novel, published back in 1995, I was unsure whether Dave Warner was trying to impress his mates or was having ‘a lend’ of the reader. But as winner of the Premier’s Book Award 1996 (no mention of literature) and I had enjoyed Clear to the Horizon and River of Salt by the same author, I decided to persist and was glad I did. The denouement was a classic. Verdict: a good read – if you overlook the ocker humour and occasional f-bomb, but I am glad I read some of his later works first.
