Goldeneye is the original name of James Bond novelist Ian Fleming's estate on Oracabessa bay on the northern coastline of Jamaica. The estate is located in the Oracabessa Bay Fish Sanctuary, established in 2011 to protect the area's marine ecosystem. It is adjacent to James Bond Beach. GoldenEye was the second and final Bond film to be adapted to a novel by novelist John Gardner. The book closely follows the film's storyline, but Gardner added a violent sequence prior to the opening bungee jump in which Bond kills a group of Russian guards before commencing to the famous opening Bungee jump. John Gardner was not the first author to write a continuation novel for James Bond but he is easily the author who wrote the most 007 books including Ian Fleming. Whose 007 he transplanted into the eighties and continued to write his stories until 1996 with Cold which would be his last 007 book. Gardner wrote two novelizations of EON movies one starring Timothy Dalton and this one with Pierce Brosnan. Both stories fall within the EON series while Gardner's 007 books are a continued timeline both of these movie books are not fitted in that timeline. Anyhow this book/movie opened the Brosnan era and renewed the 007 Brand after 6 years of not being on the big screen. It rejuvenated the movie series easily and his fifth movie never happened due to illusions of grandeur by EON who with Daniel Craig wanted a more grown up and an emo-Bond in their movie. Funnily enough both Goldeneye & Casino Royale were directed by Martin Campbell who twice introduced a new 007 in their easily best movie of their reigns. This story starts with 007 on a break in the South of France were he witnesses the theft of a prototype helicopter an opening that finds a continuation with this particular flying machine near an Nuclear accident that is possibly tied to a criminal organisation Janus. Bond it send to investigate and find one of the two possible survivors to find out what really took place in Siberia. He finds himself at odds with a former 00 and friend who has taken it up on himself to avenge the fate of parents and country-men/women. In doing so he needs to get rid of 007 which he knows is going to be a serious job even for him. An easily readable novel in which Gardner mostly sticks to the script but does add some of his bookish flavor in descriptions of St Petersburg or the South of France that would be applauded by Fleming himself. This book is no great literature and certainly not the best Gardner has written for the 007 series but is fun. And with the movie playing in the back of my head while reading you find that Gardner has delivered a decent job. Perhaps only for 007 fans, but I found this hardcover and found myself tempted to ignore it but the fanboy won and within two hours I had finished this particular read. Just an complement to my 007 book collection.
