Never Give Up! is about Ron Heagy’s story about overcoming the issues of being a quadriplegic and his journey about coming to terms with being paralyzed from the neck down. He was once considered a Big Man on campus, a person with an ego larger than his muscles and one with a charismatic personality but his life is changed after a terrible diving accident and he is commissioned to come to terms with a new lifestyle. This book illustrates how Heagy struggles with the repeating theme of guilt of burden. He explains this when he attempts to commit suicide by drowning himself; but, after his dad saves him, he realizes that he is loved and that is why he is given the support that he is given. I would recommend this to anyone and especially to people which are struggling with depression because Ron Heagy is essentially dealt a deck of cards with in return puts him through depression but he learns to accept his paralytic lifestyle and learns that being paralyzed does not have to ruin the fun in life. The style that Heagy writes in allows the reader to understand the impact of every situation and every moment to the fullest. I really do enjoy how much effort has been put in to describe just what it is like to be a paralyzed person and especially because I am an average built guy it is easy to put myself in his place. If there is anything I dislike, it is the amount of enduring sad feelings that come out mostly because I am sympathetic and I can emotionally feel all the sadness and depression that spills out of the story of Ron Heagy. Overall, this is a wonderful story and I would recommend a good five star rating because the structure of being in the moment of every story, the storyline, and the overall message which are significant and inspirational making the read a very fun experience. Also people whom are religious would also enjoy this because as he states that even though God has given us obstacles, God has also given us gifts we need to overcome those obstacles. I would say that if a school was willing to commit to let students use books on the side of Christianity and religion.
