A 5⭐️ rating because it is a window into the understandings of its author, MK Gandhi, a man who has modeled for us all the power of the combination of a humble, self-effacing spiritualism and a commitment to focused, nonviolent political action that contributed mightily to the removal of imperial, colonial rule in his homeland of India. Although Hindu, Mahatma Gandhi is one of those few figures recognized as saintly by an audience reaching far beyond those sharing his particular understanding of ‘truth.’ The Way to God is a small collection of essays capturing words and writings of Gandhi (99/pages in the edition I’ve read) The collection is intended to “reveal the heart of his teachings on love, the soul, meditation, service, surrender, and prayer.” Per Gandhi: God is not a person or being outside of ourselves, but rather is a mysterious force pervading everything that exists or had existed (p.32). God is truth and love; ethics and morality; fearlessness; the source of light and life; and much, much more (p.35). God permits life and death, belief and unbelief - “So great is his infinite love and pity that he allows man insolently to deny him, wrangle about him, and cut the throats of his fellow men.(p.37)” God has many names, associated with many human traditions. “Man can only conceive God within the limitations of his own mind. … One need only remember that God is the force among all the forces. … the vital force or spirit, which is all-pervading, all-embracing, and therefore beyond human ken.” (p.38-39). God is truth and love - to be felt, emulated, by humans in pursuit of their self-realization, which requires service to truth and the community (-ities) in which one lives. “Truth” cannot be imposed, humility and restraint are required. Achieving faith in this Truth benefits from deep meditation, continuous spiritual practice, prayer, songs, reading, sharing the pursuit with others, performing lifelong service. Gandhi’s vision is grounded in his own history, yet calls across secular boundaries to others seeking truth using different idioms. The spirit of his history and being continues to provoke and to inspire.
