"She Said Yes" was one of those books that i had a hard time putting down.It is one of the most amazing stories to come out of the shooting at Columbine High School. A 17 year old girl by the name of Cassie Bernall was one of the 13 killed along with Rachel Scott, and 11 others. Like most teenage girls, Cassie Bernall didn't really tell her mom much about her life once she turned 17. She thought what her mom didn't know wouldn't hurt her, but that turned out for the worst when Cassie Bernall died in April 1999. After Cassie died, her mother, Misty Bernall, found multiple letters written to and from one of her friends. These letters weren't what you would most often see. Her mother knew of these letters being sent, but didn't know what they were about. One letter, written by Cassie's friend, told about her being upset with her parents, and how she didn't like one of their teachers. Mrs. Bernall found that letter and decided to read it while rummaging through Cassie's old room. Like any mother of a deceased child, she read the letter, and later found out that at one point Cassie was told that she should kill her parents and the teacher they both did not like. But it didn't start out like this, Cassie moved from school to school, because of multiple reasons; grades, friends, or just because she wanted to. When Cassie arrived at Columbine High School, she had just taken the path to follow the devil. One of her greatest friends then, Cassandra, somehow convinced Cassie to go to her Sabbath School. In the end of this class, Cassie was changed. We had taken the privilege from Cassie to go out with her friends, and one time it wasn't her who asked to go somewhere with Cassandra, but it was Cassandra herself. She wanted to know if Cassie could go to this camp with her, only for three days, but that would be a huge step of trust for us to take with Cassie, but we agreed. When we picked Cassie up from the church parking lot the day she got back, the people that surrounded her were not the people we wanted her to be with, but just the opposite of that. We didn't expect a change, but Cassie did change those three days. Cassie was back to her normal self. And that is when it all went downhill. Cassie was then held at gunpoint with others around her, but they decided to go to her. With her newly-found faith, Cassie was asked if she believed in God. She Said "Yes". As you can see this book in it's self is a very inspirational and encouraging message. I highly recommend you to read "She Said Yes"! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
