Set mostly in a small town in Minnesota in the years leading up to and immediately following WWI, this 1949 novel was praised by the New York Times as "an interesting example of a trend towards greater maturity in teenage books." Sarah is a gifted intelligent girl who spends the first half of the book trying to live up to her dying father's last words: "Sarah's got to be something, something grand. An artist maybe..." In the second half (having finally come to the painful realization that painting is not her thing), she develops her extraordinary talent as a pianist which was hidden in plain sight all along. By the book's end, when life takes some unexpected turns, she's wondering if she'll be able to use the musical talent that she's spent most of her life refining. Sarah is certainly nothing like the "malt shop" novels that were the more common fare for teenage girl readers circa 1949. The early 20th century backdrop and semi-rural Minnesota setting will probably bring the Betsy-Tacy series to mind for some readers, but Bro (an odd name!) has a far more serious tone than Maud Hart Lovelace, and the novel reads almost as though it were intended for adults. I was more reminded of Madeleine L'Engle 's works, minus the fantasty elements. Sarah has a warm and loving extended family including a grandfather who's a pastor, as well as various other adults in her life who are improbably accomplished, and abstract discussions about God, politics, the latest scientific discoveries, and not least, classical music, are standard fare for young Sarah as she navigates the challenges of growing up. I found it all a little over-earnest, and in that respect, it reminded me (in tone more than in content) of yet another mid-20th century work for girls, Up a Road Slowly . I've wavered in my rating, I'm not sure if it's likely I'll ever reread this, but I'm rounding up from 3.5 because I enjoyed all the offhand references to the now forgotten books the various characters read which are generously sprinkled throughout, including The Winning of Barbara Worth , Queed: a novel , When Knighthood Was in Flower , and Adventures in Contentment . Show more
