The Dream Trilogy is about three woman who will have to face turmoils and changes in their lives. Each woman are different and deal differently with challenges, but they can always count on each other to tackled the problems. Margo Sullivan is the daughter of the Templeton's housekeeper but grew up with them as if she was family. Margo has always had high aspirations. She wanted to travel and see the world and become famous. So that what she did when she left her home at eighteen to become a model. A decade later, Margo come back at Templeton House after wasting her fortune and a scandal. Harvard graduate and lawyer Josh Templeton is not happy to learn about Margo's misfortunes but he's happy to see her for more than a brief visit. In love with the woman he likes to call Duchess since they were teenager, he never let his feelings showed, considering it preferable to wait for the right time. Josh and Margo were like some kind of frenemy, always bickering but in a friendly way. But Josh has always been a man who gets what he want and this time he'll make it clear that she's want he wants and the once friendly squabble will turn into passionated banters. This novel is one of the oldest book I own (the pages even began to turn yellow!) and after rereading it for the third time, I still see why the Dream Trilogy is my favorite Nora Robert's series. It's so sad that her latest work doesn't give me the same feelings of contentment but at least I'll always have these ones and it makes me happy :) It's interesting to realize Margo was not a perfect heroine. She's pretty stubborn and also a little selfish at the beginning but her pride is what helped her hold on and find new purpose in life instead of feeling sorry for herself. Seeing a main character growth is one of the thing that makes a story better, after all. And despite her shortcomings, she was a loyal friend and a dreamer who work for what she wants. An other thing I really liked was the not always easy but beautiful relationship between the heroine and her mother. Josh was a nice guy with just a little bit of an edge to make things spicy and the romance between him and Margo had different layers that were so fun to discover.
