I was first introduced to this book by a dear friend a couple of years ago, and it had a profound effect on me and how I think about my children, react to my children, interact with them, and control myself. I'm still learning the concepts it contains. It is a book that is appropriate no matter the age of your children. I keep going back to it again and again. I love Dr. Latham's non-violent, loving, philosophical and practical approach to the behavioral issues that parents face in their children and themselves. He says, "Parents are often looking for a quick fix, something that will turn a monster into a dream child overnight and with a bat of an eyelash. That's not what I'm talking about in this book. I'm talking about a gradual, methodological, systematic approach to organizing an environment that will reinforce children for behaving well. But as parents, we must be honest about our motives. We must first accept as fact that in the course of growing up, children will behave in ways that annoy us. Most of these behaviors are simply age-typical, garden variety, weed behaviors that go along with growing up. They are just part of the territory, the heat of the kitchen: leaving a mess, sibling rivalry, moodiness, mouthing off, messy bedrooms, poor eating habits, sloppy and even bizarre dress and grooming, seeming carelessness and selfishness, refusal to comply, and the list goes on. Typically, such behaviors are less important than how we as parents respond to them. An appropriate response would put the behavior in a proper perspective without doing damage to the child... As parents we must realize that children are in the process of becoming civilized. Our job is to civilize them, that is, teach them how to behave appropriately within the society of human beings. To judge children's behavior using adult standards is both inappropriate and unfair. (This is addressed in detail in Chapter 4, On Being in Control.) Parents who get angry a baby for crying are the ones who are behaving inappropriately, not the baby. Parents who strike a child for accidentally spilling his milk at the dinner table are behaving far less appropriately than did the child. For an adult to scream and holler at a screaming, hollering child is an example of an adult abandoning civility; hence the adult is behaving far less appropriately than the yet-to-be-civilized child. As parents, therefore, we must be very careful that we understand the behavior the child is exhibiting before we respond to it, ten respond to it in a mature, scientifically sound way. Love, kindness, patience, understanding, and so on are all wonderful qualities parents should possess." Below are just some of my favorite quotes from the book. (All are quotes from Dr. Latham except where noted.) "Unless what you are about to say or do has a high probability for making things better, don't say it - don't do it. An ounce of "don't say it" is worth a pound of "I didn't mean it." If you are patient in one moment of anger, you will escape a hundred days of sorrow. -Chinese Proverb "First we must control our own behavior. Next we must control the environment in our home. After we've done this, the children control themselves." -Louise Latham "You are not controlling kids. You are making it easier for them to behave well." -Louise Latham "Children are more at the mercy of their external environment. They respond impulsively, quickly, and often highly emotionally to stimuli in their environment." "Don't be so interested in 'right' behavior that you ignore the feelings of your child." "Don't become emotionally involved in altercations between your children." "Forcing a child to apologize...regardless of the provocation, may simply teach the child to deny his feelings or find another and less acceptable means of expressing them." "Do and say to your children only what you want done and said to your grandchildren," This is a practical, valuable manual, filled with real-world behavioral scenarios and examples of appropriate and inappropriate parental responses. I think it is the most valuable parenting book I've ever read.
