Electrifying essays by a conservative thinker who has seen the urban poor up close in the UK's worst slums -- and is terrified by what the future holds! I'm giving this book five stars, not because I agree with all of it, but because Theodore Dalrymple is a brilliant writer and a master of persuasive logic. He's a distinctive voice among the daredevil conservative thinkers who rule the sky in that flamboyant Flying Circus of political commentary known as NATIONAL REVIEW magazine. Please understand that I've been a liberal all my life, like my parents before me, but I read this magazine from cover to cover every two weeks because these guys are smarter, funnier, sexier, and better educated than any other magazine staff around. The only left-wing equivalent might be THE NATION, but putting Katrina Vandenheuvel up against Rob Long, Mark Steyn, or even Jonah Goldberg is like asking Margaret Dumont to go one on one with Groucho Marx! What makes Dalrymple unique among this company of heroes is that he is actually a working English physician who served for many years in hospitals located in or near England's worst urban slums. He's seen the needle and the damage done. He's seen gang violence, street violence, ethnic violence, domestic violence . . . and it's all here. All of it. The only question is, can you really blame all this stuff on the Welfare State? And on pop music? And on pretty female celebrities who always seem to turn up wearing sexy new clothes at movie premieres? And on members of the royal family wanting to pierce their navels? Theodore Dalrymple is a well-meaning man of tremendous courage. But he's also a hopeless fuddy-duddy. More than half a century after the birth of rock music, he's still sighing and moaning because someone, somewhere, may enjoy the Beatles more than Bach. (Guilty as charged, m'lud!) But is it really such a slippery slope from enjoying a fun, vibrant, irreverent celebrity culture and just randomly stomping on your girl friends, one after the other? Most of Dalrymple's insights are not new. Everything he has to say about the modern educational system was said much better in an essay called "Screwtape Proposes A Toast" by the late, great, C.S. Lewis. The vanished joys of working class life in England were poignantly expressed years ago in the classic rock songs -- yes, Teddy, there is such a thing as classic rock -- of the Kinks! Want to get sentimental about Blackpool holidays? Ray Davies has been there, done that, and is going back for more. ("I go to Blackpool, for my holidays/Sit in the open sunlight." AUTUMN ALMANAC, 1967.) There are so many problems with Dalrymple's treatment of sexual violence, and violence against women. He keeps insisting that the whole cause is a modern culture that encourages the poor to believe they can have all the sex they want, whenever they want, with no consequences. Damn those celebrities and their endless celebration of pleasure! (Blame the Beatles part 567.) Problem is, there are millions of well-educated, well-mannered, decent people who love the culture this man loathes, who don't go out on the beer and bash people. Dalrymple has no explanation for that. He's worked with hundreds of battered women, which is to his credit. But what really comes across is not that he wants them to be "free" but that he sort of wishes they could all go back to wearing the veil, or living secluded in a harem. Except that would mean they'd be just like the Pakistani women he writes about. And he never gets tired of pointing out how unhappy their lives are! At the end of this book I had the impression that this is a man who is tormented by a whole variety of sexual and emotional hang-ups he cannot identify and will not acknowledge . . . but he sure can hate the welfare state. Physician, heal thyself!
