This is one of the more unusual fantasy/ historical/ classic type novels one could ever encounter. Set in the exotic forests of Venezuela, it is a unique classic romance and adventure. The basis for the plot is the narrator, Abel, being given a proposal to go to a different setting after fleeing a desperate revolution on an island. He travels though a place named Paraguarí, supposedly notable for its riches, in the hope of changing his fortunes. He later makes friends with one of the tribe and its leader. Later, upon exploring this location, he finds a forest that is forbidden by the tribe, one where an enchanting and melodious sound enthralls him: “After that tempest of motion and confused noises the silence of the forest seemed very profound; but before I had been many moments it was broken by a low strain of exquisite bird melody, wonderfully pure and expressive, unlike any musical sound I had ever heard before.” One enjoyable aspect of the novel is how the author captures the mystery and aura of the forest and nature and its vividness through such lyrical prose. Abel’s quest to identify the source of the harmonious sounds emanating from the forest coincides with the local’s superstitions about a girl who dwells within it and is thought to the “Daughter of the Didi.” Eventually, Abel discovers a forest girl named Rima, who lives with her “grandfather” and Abel quickly becomes enraptured in the mystery encompassing Rima. The novel’s title seemingly embodies the majesty and beauty of Abel’s experiences with nature and the forest and with Rima (“…those green mansions where I had found so great a happiness”). There is a deep conflict, however, between those who had initially taken Abel in in this region and the place with Rima he now call home. Those two forces come into play in the novel’s second half. The one downside of this novel comes from the rather antiquated viewpoints from our narrator. I suppose these were unfortunately a product of its time. Overall, however, Green Mansions is a captivating classic story that fuses the genres of fantasy, adventure, and romance. I heard there is a film adaptation out there with Anthony Perkins and Aubrey Hepburn that I might check out.
