One of the positive things for me when I am in a book slump, is that it allows me to re-visit books I have already read. A while back, this book was donated to my Little Free Library Shed. Interestingly enough, it was a Doubleday Dolphin Master Mass Market Paperback that originally sold for 95 cents. In considering this book, I remembered it vaguely as a classic, one referred to a lot in reference to how to view the world. And, it wouldn’t be uncommon to find some of Whitman’s quotes offered on Facebook. So, when it was donated, I couldn’t help but open its pages and explore again this man and his words. As I read, I became more curious about the intention of his message. Whitman self-published this collection of poetry in 1855, and continued to edit and expand it until his death in 1892. The cover of this book, is also the same as the original first edition, which includes an engraving by Samuel Hollyer that depicts Whitman in work clothes and a hat with his arms by his side amongst grass. Many surmised the figure represented an American working-class man of the time. His writings feel like a celebration of individuality in relation to society and nature, and of America. It also exposes Whitman’s philosophy of life and humanity, where nature has an important place in the forefront. And, he presses on the importance of our role as individuals within nature. “I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love, If you want to find me again look for me under your bootsoles.” Whitman was known to be fairly unpopular during his lifetime. People saw Whitman’s characteristics as self-centered, egotistical, and one, who as a loner would defy conventions. Even so, within a century, his words apparently defined American poetry. Even if what he presented didn’t rhyme or follow conventional rules for meter and line length. What was particularly interesting was that the first 28 pages of the book was an essay on his beliefs for America. It was clear that he saw himself as a voice for the marginalized while promoting democratic ideals. I wonder what he would think of today’s politics? As I continued reading, knowing there was some familiarity to the experience (having been exposed to his poetry in high school and college), I was reminded that his poems were not an easy read. (I am attracted usually to traditional poetry – rhyming or in cadence.) And, at times, I found myself not sure what he was trying to say. I just concluded that it must be a journey into his mind, where he evoked random thoughts of what he perceived to be important. Still, I couldn’t help but feel from the words he wrote that he must have been a lover of life, who truly believed his role was to change people’s views – maybe even our lives by his words. And, in those moments of understanding, I felt he probably was leaving us readers time for reflection. “I exist as I am, that is enough, If no other in the world be aware I sit content, And if each and all be aware I sit content.” “I celebrate myself, And what I assume you shall assume, For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.” Let us…Pause. Reflect. Discuss. Whatever our experience with this classic, I believe Whitman wanted humanity/readers to know that we too are natural wonders.
