Wonderful book. Dad recommended it to me when I asked him for parenting advice. It was fun to read, knowing these ideas influenced the way I was raised. I recognized many of my Dad's 'tricks' as I was reading -although tricks is the wrong word. Dr. Latham presents a very positive, matter-of-fact approach to parenting. The skills he presents are simple. We've been trying to implement his ideas in our home and have found some success. Some things I learned . . . the basic premise of the book is that behavior is reinforced by attention - particularly parental attention. By paying attention to positive behaviors in the home - those positive behaviors are strengthened. By ignoring inconsequential, age-typical, 'garden-variety' 'weed' behavior and by correcting when necessary in an appropriate manner - letting consequences do the 'talking' - a positive environment is created in the home that fosters relationship building and growth. I'm trying to think of an example how these ideas have helped me these past few weeks as I've been reading. Well just today - I had asked Allison to clean the floor in the bathroom where she made a mess. She sat by the bathroom with the spray bottle and rag and whimpered and whined for several minutes. I ignored the behavior for a few minutes while I thought about what to do - and then I went over to her with a timer and set it for 5 minutes. I informed her that the bathroom needed to be cleaned up in 5 minutes. If the bathroom was clean when the timer rang - she earned the privilege of watching a movie that afternoon. If the bathroom was not clean in 5 minutes that meant that I would clean it and that privilege of watching a movie would not be hers. I had her repeat back to me what the consequences were - and it made me smile when she effortlessly used the word 'privilege' - and later today she even used the word 'behavior' when contrasting her own 'good' behavior to Carter's 'bad' behavior in the bathroom . . . (we'll have to still work on the tattling) . . . . anyway - she immediately perked up and smiled when she heard the ticking timer and was anxious to work.
