Published in 19748, this is an enjoyable and suspenseful mystery novel that doesn't involve any murders, but does involve some science and technical aspects (this is more my type of thing). It's almost cozy. The themes of the novel include the tangles of bureaucracy (some of these people need a smack! or at least in a Reindeer aircraft that has been flying about for several months), attitudes to safety, conflicts of interest between management and professionals, Cold War diplomacy (the Russians are being difficult and suspicious), single parenthood, and clairvoyance (the automatic writing was an odd addition to the story). The story revolves around whether or not the tailplane of the new Reinderr aircraft are subject to metal fatigue after a certain number of flight hours, and thus breakage and the resultant plane crashes. The novel is narrated by Dr Dennis Scott, an aeronauticist recently appointed head of the structural department at the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), but mostly revolves around the eccentric, nervous, single-minded and unimpressive in appearance, widower, single father, but very meticulous scientist, Theodore Honey. Sent to Canada to examine the debris from a previous plane crash, Honey soon finds out the plane he is flying in is one of the Reindeer aircraft, and that it has done more flight hours than expected. Honey must now, somehow, convince the pilot to turn around before the tailplane falls off and they crash. Honey's method of averting disaster is met with outrage and consternation in some quarters, but was actually pretty amusing. While all this was going on, mild domestic drama ensures on the other side of the Atlantic where Honey's childcare arrangements fall through. I really enjoyed the interactions Honey has between the various characters, and how differently their perceptions of him are. I also liked how various people went out of their way to help Honey, even when they were half-convinced that he was crazy. Nevil Shute was an aeronautical engineer and had dealings with government officials on some of his projects. While 'No Highway' is fictional, I suspect it is fairly realistic and based on Shute's personal experiences... and interestingly enough, the de Havilland DH.106 Comet (the world's first commercial jet airliner) failed as a result of metal fatigue several years later, in 1954. This was my first Nevil Shute novel, and it will not be my last!
