I had hopes for this book. I regrettably however, only looked at the title before reading, thinking it would be a detailed testimony on what life is like in the slums. Instead, I was given to empty, and often times pretentious, rhetoric by a British gentleman who appears to be bitter over the apparent end of the British aristocracy. He woes over the foolish underclass—who, according to him, chose their condition completely out of their own volition— and their partying, their self-delusion, their tattoos, their sense of entitlement, and use of indirect language and first person passive sentences. But he doesn’t put all the blame on them; for that, he leaves to the “liberal elites”, who have filled the minds of the underclass with notions of sociological and economic determinism. And what evidence does Theodore Dalrymple bring for his case? Absolutely nothing. No statistics, no references, nothing— except a misrepresentation of Steven Pinker and his work on linguistics. No, for Dalrymple’s case, all he brings is anecdote, which would be only barely convincing if it weren’t peppered with numerous fallacies of false dichotomy, over-generalization, and straw man. It’s also worth noting that much of his accusations that crime was on the rise in Britain were actually statistically false according to the British Crime Survey (Measuring Crime for 25 Years, 2006). According to this source, trends of violent crime, vehicle crime, burglary, and overall trends in crime, have been falling since 1995, one year after Dalrymple wrote his first essay in this collection, “The Knife Went In”. With this in mind, it seems obvious that this man has a conservative agenda. For who in their right mind, except in the name of ideology, would say such asinine things? According to Dalrymple, the poor not only freely chose to live the way they do, but they did it because they’re selfish, bored, or foolish in believing the liberal elites (or at least, Dalrymple's poorly characterized version of the liberal elites); they allegedly don’t dare help themselves, because that would force them to give up their worldview of the welfare state. I will posit a question for the reader however: What seems more likely? And furthermore, what seems more elitist? To say that the condition of the poor— and the rest of society— is being influenced by certain factors (whether it be capitalism, racism, family life, education, and/or society’s value of education)? Or, to say that the poor are a self-centered, high-culture-ruining, populace that shouldn’t be given government aid? Regardless, Dalrymple contends the latter, and continues to remark on how these evidently insolent, gullible masses just can’t seem to get over their own egos and stop being poor. In the end, if one really wants to hear what this man has to say on poverty, they’d be better off finding the nearest conservative tabloid. It will give about the same effect, and be just as convincing, though the writing may not be as good.
