What a fabulous start to yet another of my favorite NR series!!! Daring to Dream, the 1st of the Dream Trilogy introduces three “sisters”, who, whilst not by blood, have a strong and loving bond, growing up together in the beautiful Templeton House overlooking the Big Sur and we are taken on a journey with Margo Sullivan, the beautiful and passionate daughter of the Templeton’s housekeeper, has always dreamed of fame and glamour and being more than just the “housekeeper’s” daughter. The story begins with Laura, the sweet and lovely Templeton “princess” getting married, Kate Powell, her sensible and no nonsense cousin is now a qualified CPA, and Margo is leaving to seek her fortune and fame. [image error] [image error] [image error] and the fabulous Margo... [image error] [image error] Ten years later, Margo is now a famous model, living the glamorous life of the rich and famous in Milan. The world she has created for herself comes crashing down in a big way. Her reputation in tatters, her wealth stolen by one of her lovers, she has no other way to turn to but home. She’s filled with shame, guilt and remorse but with the help of her two close friends and family, especially Josh Templeton, she soon begins picking up the pieces of her life. Together with Laura and Kate, she opens up a shop, using her personal belongings as the first consignment for stocking the shop. This is such a wonderful family tale….friendship, love, loyalty and looking after each other when the times are not only good but bad as well. One may feel that Margo is a bit of a self-centered and selfish person but somehow that didn’t come across to me. She’s a loyal and steadfast person, loving and caring and damn…just good fun!!!!!!!!! I absolutely fell in love with her. I so could understand that Josh had been in love with her for years and being the patient kind of man..never mind beautiful and gorgeous as well….that despite Margo’s bad, very bad behavior towards him at times (which made me want to smack her..); he was determined to show her that the two were meant to be with each other. I loved her relationship with the Templeton seniors – when Susan Templeton says: “Do you know what’s always worried me about you, Margo? Your self-esteem.” “Mum always said I thought too much of myself.” “No, on that Annie and I have always disagreed, and we disagreed rarely. Your self-worth is too tied up in your looks. You were a beautiful child, dazzlingly beautiful. Life is different for children with dazzlingly looks. More difficult in some ways, because people tend to judge them by their beauty, and then they begin to judge themselves by that same standard.” “It was my only skill. Kate had the brains, Laura had the heart.” “It makes me sad that you believe that, and that too many people pointed you in that direction.” “You’re young enough to take a dozen different directions. And smart enough. You’ve wasted your brains for a while, made foolish mistakes and poorly considered choices. “But you didn’t jump. You squared your shoulders, and you showed you were willing to face what life had dealt you. That takes more courage, Margo – much more – than leaping into the void.” Wow, that is some amazing mother-in-law!!!! And I see a bit of warming up from Margo’s rather cold mother, Ann Sullivan. I do wonder what her story is all about!!! So sad to see Laura going through with her terrible and cheating husband. Wow, loved the tennis match that Josh played with him…….did I not love the broken nose action!!!!!!!! And not forgetting….the treasures hunt for Seraphina’s dowry…….read the book for more…. Margo discovering that all along, the love and acceptance she had being searching the world for, was in fact, right there at home!!!! Lovely!! I loved the settings of Big Sur, Monterey and Milan [image error] [image error] the fantastic and witty dialogue and characters that are endearing and so relatable. And as I wanted, Margo & Josh, together, forever....and now living in their new home....... [image error] YAY!!! I can’t wait to start book 2.
