I know, reading a book isn't going to get me to that finish line. But when I dig into books like this and the recent awesome The Incomplete Book of Running which are "about doing some sport or activity X", I do come away more motivated and excited to hit the road. This book covers his training plans and goes over basic diet and training tips. It's a very personable and easy read, and along the way you learn a lot about Higdon himself, as he narrates stories from his running career. I came away with a few key lessons: the importance of tapering, and the importance of a training plan so that you do not injure yourself. I have learned, as I get more into running: after a certain point, your ambition outstrips your body, and the challenge becomes reining in your enthusiasm so that you don't run too much and injure yourself. Higdon drives this point home many times and that's the importance of having a training plan. I guess this is a book mainly about his training plans and that's all, but I couldn't help feeling that he left a lot out. Too much emphasis on the training plans, and it became repetitive after a while. There are additional interesting topics he hints at but doesn't go whole hog into. For example, he talks a lot in passing about how the different established marathons differ around the country. And I really liked this idea. I never really understood that different marathons had different reputations and significance in running culture, and how Boston is so highly-regarded. However, he never brings it home and talks about them in a centralized way, so there's no one place you can go to reference his remarks about the different marathons. He does have a chapter on nutrition and hydration, but they're mostly his typical style of casual, strung-together narratives and anecdotes about food. I would've liked to see some meal plans — there are 2 or 3 pages of example foods, for example a list of carbo-rich foods. But I'd've liked to see a variety of meal plans from different runners, to see how people plan their week. Gear? Does he talk about what to look for in shoes and shorts? Anatomy? I didn't learn much on running form or anatomy. He doesn't promise these things, so I wouldn't knock it for that, but I did feel the last, repetitive third or so of the book boiled down to "run hard, have fun, good luck in Boston" and that space could be better spent on a better variety of topics.
