I have read 8 books on running. Everything from running for weight loss to the ultimate beginners guide and from inspirational fiction on running to marathon training. I have to say that Hal Higdon's Marathon: The Ultimate Training Guide, Advice, Plans and Programs for Your 1st Marathon or 50th was a favorite. You have to wonder how many books on running can you read? Don't they all start to sound the same? Yes and no. The basic information like how to stay hydrated, warnings on things not to do, proper nutrition etc are things you will come across in all these books. But to me that is a great thing. It makes that information really sink in so you don't forget it. And you do not have to read the same book over and over to remember it. You can be sure to really absorb this basic but really important information while reading a variety of books by different authors. The best part is reading the inspirational things you come across. When it comes to having plenty of inspiration for an aspiring marathoner to read Hal Higdon has plenty in this book. I really like the fact that he has plenty of quotes and tips from runners he knows personally or from the forum on his website. You hear the struggles that other people face and their stories let you see that it really is people just like you who are running these marathons. There were plenty of times while reading this book that I wanted to throw on my running shoes and head right out the door. A realistic check of the weather and a real feel of over 100 degrees outside killed that idea, but kept me motivated to head out as soon as the weather permitted. In the last chapter of the book there are quotes from runners on what they learned from their first marathon. The one that hit me the most was "I realized how much time I wasted doing nothing. An hour spend watching TV became a 7-mile run. Time wasted daydreaming became time spend in the morning sun. It's about setting priorities." For anyone wanting to run a marathon as well as for those that have already accomplished that feat I would recommend this book. If you already know how to stay hydrated during a run skip that chapter and instead read the personal struggles and accomplishments from other runners.
