Woodland Nymph of Redemption Green Mansions is a re-read, of course I read it many years ago and also enjoyed the enchanting movie with Audrey Hepburn back then. There are some books that fail to touch the same chords they struck in me when I was younger and this was one of them. I still have to give this story five stars as the writing is nothing short of poetic and borders on the mystical. Abel is driven out of Venezuela by a failed political revolution, and when he is returned to his lands and finances he is a seemingly selfless man. He tells a friend the story of why he keeps a jar of ashes and must be a good man. The story is of him fleeing Venezuela and finding refuge in a rainforest with the natives who warn him of the spirit girl who lives in a nearby forest. The natives won’t go there, but Abel finds it beautiful and filled with wondrous birds and foliage he has never seen before. There is abundant game and he can’t imagine why his friends don’t hunt there, but they warn that sending a spear or blow dart at something would be caught and thrown back by the daughter of Didi. One day Abel is bitten by a Coral snake and nearly dies, but awakens in a rude hut near an old man who tells him that his granddaughter saved him from the snake. The man’s name is Rufalo and soon he seen a beautiful girl that Rufalo calls Rima. Abel realizes that the enchanting calls he has been lured through the forest with have been made by the delicate woman who shys away from him and he is smitten. Rima speaks with her own musical bird like language and knows everything that happens in the forest. Her grandfather believes Rima’s mother was a saint and therefore Rima is in special contact with the other side. This is a touching and enchanting tale, but I found that in my having grown accustomed to instant gratification with stories that it seemed to drag on longer than I remembered. It is still a beautiful story, but I wasn’t quite as starry eyed as I was in my teens. Still five stars.
