John Gardner's Bond series continues with the novelization of GoldenEye . Gardner is clearly working from an early draft of the screenplay, or possibly just a treatment, one that wasn't as polished as the version that was filmed. The movie was better than the book. (Although I would say the same thing about most of the Ian Fleming books as well, which were obviously written before the movies.) I accept the Bond series's continuity is tenuous at best. I think Gardner's attempts to make the movies' and the books' timelines match in this and the Licence to Kill novelization were a fool's errand. (To be fair, this was possibly the request of the publisher.) In Licence to Kill he awkwardly had Felix Leiter being fed to a shark for a second time. This time he makes less effort at continuity, despite the big changes he had made in the book series in recent installments, including the reorganization of the Secret Intelligence Service with Bond promoted to a senior leadership position and getting engaged to a former Swiss officer, Flicka von Grüsse. At the time Gardner was writing those books, the movie series was on hold indefinitely as the producers were tied up in a legal dispute with Kevin McClory over the rights to the character. Gardner must have figured he could safely take the aging character in a different direction for the changing times. It is sad to see how quickly and half-heartedly he resets his changes in GoldenEye 's novelization. Bond's return to the field and presumable demotion since SeaFire is not mentioned at all. You just have to assume this was a result of the reorganization of SIS (what Gardner calls MI6), which led to its takeover by technocrats, resulting with Judi Dench instated as M. Flicka is not mentioned by name, but during the interlude, a chapter titled "Interlude," which takes place in Puerto Rico before Bond and Natalya fly off for the final act in Cuba, Natalya asks Bond how he seems to know the island so well, and he alludes to a recent mission (presumably the Puerto Rican finale in SeaFire ) in which the woman he was with was hurt and may never walk again. So I guess that was the end of his engagement. I almost feel sorry for Gardner. Did he have a choice to turn down writing the novelization? Couldn't someone outside the official book series have written the book, like screenwriter Christopher Wood did for The Spy Who Loved Me and Moonraker novelizations (the first of which was actually pretty good and arguably better than the Fleming novel of the same name)? Gardner must have resented having to scrap the story line he had built up, and it is clear he had a low opinion of the screenplay handed him. Gardner often comments on the dialogue with adjectives like "melodramatic." On page 251, Alec Trevelyan tells a guard to go after Bond and Natalya, who are attempting to infiltrate the GoldenEye operations center, "Take them out before this begins to get really stupid." As the nameless/faceless guard is fated to fail to take out Bond, we can guess Trevelyan's line, which wasn't in the movie, was Gardner inserting his own judgement of the movie's ending into Trevelyan's mouth. The book isn't all bad. Gardner has a love for inserting technical details in his books. While this is typically boring and distracting (I remember dropping off numerous times reading Icebreaker ), here it isn't overused and lends a bit of realism that wasn't in the movie. Overall, though, this is a book based on a movie the writer didn't want to write, so no one should read it, unless they are doing it for "completion's sake" as they read through the series.
