“Josefina Learns a Lesson: A School Story” by Valerie Tripp was published in 1997 by Pleasant Company. The book has a wonderful set of photographs of book themes done by Jean-Paul Tibbles. The book is volume 2 of the American Girls Collection series published by Pleasant Company. Josefina is a nine-year-old who has 3 sisters. In 1824 all the sisters lived with their father on the family ranch in New Mexico. When Josefina was eight years old, her mother died. The volume 2 book begins with Josefina’s aunt Tia Delores teaching her nieces how to knit shawls. She also taught them how to repair the clothing they wear. During the sewing sessions aunt Tia Dolores also played music on her piano. The music included many songs Josefina’s mother loved to sing to her daughters. While they were sewing Tia Dolores’ nieces also danced to the piano music their aunt was playing. While these events were occurring, the family’s father told them he was planning to trade his farm products with americanos who live in Santa Fe, New Mexico. He also said he was worried that bad weather could interrupt the americanos trading trip, but he decided to take the trip because he needed to acquire various farm tools and the americanos wanted his mules. His sister lived along the road to Sante Fe and he also wanted to help her if the storm occurred. A ringing church bell is a warning that bad storms were on the way. The bells began ringing in a church close to the ranch. The family’s father said prayers with his daughters and aunt Dolores, and then he left for his sister Magdalena’s house to help her survive the storm. Delores and ranch workers would look after the family in his absence. When the violent storm struck the ranch, Delores took Josefina and her siblings outside the home to gather as much food from the ranch garden as possible. She was afraid the storm would destroy their food supply. Carmen, the ranch cook and her husband, Miguel joined them. The food garden was awash in mud and was fast becoming a “river of water.” However, they were able to overcome the flooding and gather many baskets of food. The family father was also able to help his sister Magdalena survive the storm. When he returned home, he learned from his ranch shepherds that over 100 sheep on the ranch drowned from flash floods. Delores told her brother that the sheared sheep wool from last year was in the storage barn. She also told him the family could use the sheered wool to weave many blankets and sell the blankets to americanos to fund the purchase of replacement sheep. Tia Dolores agreed to organize and lead the blanket weaving initiative. Everyone but Josefina’s sister Francisca believed this was an excellent strategy. Francisca was concerned that many including Josefina did not know how to weave. Aunt Dolores said her servant Teresita has a small loom, and she will teach Josefina how to weave using this loom. Josefina was elated! Teresita was a member of Navajo Nation who was abducted at young age. She was taught by her mother how to weave on the loom using techniques associated with the three pieces on the loom —the upper cross piece is the sky bar, the lower cross piece is called the earth bar, and the stick that goes between the strands of yarn on the loom is called the sunbeam. The earth, sky, and sun are the core pieces or parts of the loom In the next chapter Josefina and her sisters gather wildflowers, herbs, roots, barks, different leaves, rabbit bush blossoms, and berries that are combined to make different colors of dye for the wool they will use to weave blankets and clothing. The search and gather activity are exciting for them, and they have baskets of picnic treats prepared by Carmen to enjoy on the journey. The joy of weaving, making clothes and blankets, and finding the components for crafting dyes delighted the sisters very much and caused them to bond with their mentor Tia Dolores. The final chapter discusses how to live the “good life” by learning how to read and how to write. In her ledger Tia Dolores writes the number of wool socks that are made, the number of made blankets, the strands of yarn that are ready for use, and the economic value of the items the family had created. After Francisco learned that she and her sisters would be taught to read and write by Tia Dolores, Francisco became very angry. She told Josefina that she would not take any reading-writing lessons from Dolores. She said it would violate her love for their dead mother, and it would radically change her life in a very complicated way. The next day Josefina told Tia Dolores the angst Francisco has about learning to read and write. Tia Dolores told Josefina that she has a book related to her mother that she wanted to show her. She showed her a handwritten book of poems that Josefina’s mother loved to tell her children. The poems were written down by Josefina’s father and put in a book he wrote and gifted to his sister Tia Dolores. Tia read the poems to Josefina. When Josefina showed the poetry book to Francisco, they both agreed the poems were wonderful. Francisco changed her mind, and she wanted to be taught the beauty of reading and writing. The book ends with this quote: “Reading is a way to hold on to the past, to travel to places you’ve never been, and to learn about worlds beyond your own time and experiences.” Tia Dolores gave the book to Josefina as a keepsake gift. When Francisco saw the book, her life changed! Tia Dolores taught Josefina how to write her name on the first page of the book she was gifted, and she taught all her nieces how to read and write. (P)
