*Possible mild spoilers* There are certain books one should read at a certain period in their lives, else they become trivial to the point of utmost silliness. 'Green Mansions' by W. H. Hudson is one such. My father used to travel a lot while I was a kid. As is usual, he used to bring back goodies for his children. Unsurprisingly, I was interested only in books. This book was such a gift, given to me more than four decades ago, which slept on my shelf till it was read as my last book of 2019. (Perhaps it was the hope of my dad to wean me of the "junk" I used to read. The fact that it remained unread on my shelf so long is proof of the fact that he failed miserably.) I understand that this book is considered a classic; and reading the treacly sentimental tale written in cloyingly dense Victorian prose, one can understand why it was popular in its day. As I said at the beginning, I would have enjoyed it much better had I read it as a preteen, because such books were standard fare for youngsters in a world where young adult literature did not exist; the tale of exotic jungle adventure. However, this story is different from the ones of H. Rider Haggard or Edgar Rice Burroughs - the emphasis is more on romance and less on adventure. This is the nineteenth century tale of Abel, a South American gentleman who had to take to the Amazon forests to escape governmental wrath and Rima, the mysterious forest woman he falls in love with. It is pretty much predictable in its genesis, development and conclusion - a Victorian tragedy in all its sentimental glory. The attitude is racist (the way the "savage" forest Indians are referred to will make one cringe), the prose is prolix and the narrative meandering - I had to skim through large portions to reach the end. There is not even the sense of adventure and excitement that is usually part and parcel of such stories. The only thing that rescues this tale from being a total disaster is the creation of Rima, the mysterious bird-woman with her strange tongue and her way of communing with all the forest-creatures. Rima is the last of a lost race. She lives in the forest among the animals and birds and speaks a strange language, intelligible only to herself (and her long-dead mother). She abhors the killing of any living being, and has a strange control over all the dwellers of the jungle, even the dangerous ones. She even converts her lover and adoptive parent to veganism! This character is much ahead of her time, taking birth during an era when the killing of animals for sport was the norm. However, it seems that the novelist lost his plot after lovingly creating his heroine, because her backstory is left totally blank. She and her mother takes birth from the void and returns to it. While a certain amount of mystery is desirable to tantalise readers, this absolute blackout is just bewildering. One would be pardoned for concluding that the author couldn't come up with a plausible story. A "classic" which can safely be ignored. And this rounds off 2019 for me. 😊
