Although I have changed nothing in terms of opinion I have recently reread and removed infelicities of style as well as spelling and grammar mistakes - February 2024. I am reviewing this book nearly nine years after I read it which, in some circumstances would lead to hold off reviewing and rating till I had reread the book, but this novel made such a strong impression at the time I read it that I feel confident about reviewing and rating it, though I would like to read it again. I thought it an excellent novel about Ireland and the way families and communities functioned in the 1970's (it is always odd when your childhood/teenage years become history) and having been written and published before much of the clerical abuse story in Ireland had been acknowledged or accepted it has an honesty and truth that is free of what could have easily become retrospective denunciation and foreknowledge. This an honest and true portrait of the way abuse by family and church was intertwined, linked and indissoluble - it is one of finest things in the book because to often now the scandal of abuse in Ireland is presented as something the Catholic Church did. But who made up the Catholic Church back then? Who were those abusive priests and nuns? They were Irish men and women, they were the brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, cousins, nephews and nieces, friends, neighbors, schoolfriends. They were not strangers 'parachuted' in to inflict terror on subject population (though many abusive Irish priests were 'parachuted' into missions in Africa, Australia and North and South America after they had blotted their copy books to badly in Ireland) they were an integral part of the society they lived amongst and were formed by. It is also about growing and growing up and away from small places that once seemed the world but are revealed to be very small and unimportant. To make that story relevant and true requires a fine novelist and Mr. McNicoll is one. This is novel worth reading free prejudgment about its time and setting. A very good novel about truth and honesty and the complications of loyalty which are never as easy as those not caught in loyalties complications make out.
