When the Pharaohs were still massively coercing labor to erect their own elaborate tombs, when the Great King of Persia was building palaces for himself and temples for the gods into which no commoner could step, the Greeks were constructing gymnasia, theaters, law courts, public dockyards, markets, and assembly places for their own lowly citizens. That is a different reality and can be evaluated in absolute criteria. The first section of this is the most interesting to me; the latter sections are mainly about why classics is failing inside universities—It’s mostly the fault of classicists for not living up to the Greeks they study. They are focusing so much on the minutiae of Greek literature that they are not paying any attention to what the literature says. How sad, how tragic really, that how the Greeks said it, why the Greeks may have said it, but rarely what the Greeks said is now often the business of Classics in America. The latter sections are also about how to stop the decline of the classics: stop doing that. Stop succumbing to the fads of academia. The authors explicitly hold classicists to a higher standard. We as Classicists, whether we like it or not, must always tell the uncomfortable truth and shun the easy lie; we must inform our students of the truth and forget the consequences to our careers. The consequences to our culture of abdicating these responsibilities are dire. If you want to learn why our nation’s elite now have no morals, why our lawyers, doctors, politicians, journalists, and corporate magnates equate the accumulation of data with knowledge, frankness with truth, inherited power with justice, titles and suits with dignity, and capital with talent—why they all know nothing of Greek wisdom—you must look to the mentors who trained and degreed them. … Is it any wonder, then, that our children no longer know what democracy, free speech, ethics, and Western culture are, much less where they came from and how they are to be preserved? If all cultures are equal, for example, why study the Greeks? The language is notoriously difficult (there’s a darkly humorous section describing just how difficult the language is). And apply a little Greek logic to the fads as well. The paradox is unmistakable: Western culture is racist, sexist, patriarchal; but we nevertheless now are to claim that it all started in black Africa and Asia. The second section suffers from the necessity of reproducing opaque and pretentious scholarship. It is necessary if the authors are to prove their assertions, but I got to wishing that they could have merely asserted it and then moved on. Opaque and pretentious remains opaque and pretentious even as examples. The first section argues that the classics are important for the study of Western civilization, and explains why. Throughout the book there are often examples of why the classics are important. There is a fascinating several-page comparison between the Iliad and the Odyssey, and how they differ, and how it applies to studying Western culture, hidden in the final third of the book. The authors are at their best when describing the importance of knowing where democracy, free speech, and dissent came from. It isn’t just that these things are important now; if we don’t know their history we won’t know how important they are, nor can we understand the dangers represented by alternatives to these values. Their solution to Homer’s murder is a remaking of the university. The university they describe is fascinating, probably something brilliantly useful and that I would personally love going to. But it is also hopelessly utopian. It would require that administrators put themselves out of a job—their model strongly deemphasizes the bureaucracy of a school—which they’d probably be forced to do anyway after increasing the teaching load of every faculty member and returning the focus of education to a classical education. The goal of a college education is to turn out young adults equipped with the wisdom, skills, and desire to lead thoughtful, ethical, and productive lives, whether they become teachers, carpenters, farmers, doctors, or machinists. The university experience is decidedly NOT, and never was, designed to teach students a trade, what the Greeks would call a technê . Those with a rigorous training in the liberal arts will be able to teach themselves in the workplace any of the tasks required i most jobs currently associated with an undergraduate degree—business, accounting, social work, recreation, or teaching. Mathematics will hold a special place in their new university, partly because mathematicians have been doing what classicists ought to have been doing and partly because math is a philosophy. Students will also take at least one semester of Mathematics at the beginning-Calculus level. Mathematicians, unlike vocal but superficial and trendy Classicists, have been quietly but radically re-examining how and why they teach their field. The key to making this a successful course is the articulation of what it is that Calculus, truly one of the great monuments of the West, has to say about the way the world is constructed and how a mathematician goes about trying to understand it. Like a foreign language, pure mathematics developed the logical and rational within the student, inculcates discipline, and shows that the way to problem-solving lies in the marriage of data and logic. It also takes the emphasis away from self, and very early on, as Plato again saw, becomes a philosophy in itself, demonstrating that there are natural canons absolute, unchanging, not subject to personal interpretation, and belonging to a world not of our own making. On a lighter note, there was once a comic book called Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind . I read it when it came out, and some of the complaints about it included that the title was just a random collection of syllables meant to sound vaguely Western. Neither I nor, presumably, they, knew that Nausicaa was a character in the Odyssey.
