A sprawling family epic in 12th century England! In the early years of the 12th century, shortly after Henry I dies without an obvious heir, England is torn by civil war between his daughter, Maud, and her cousin, Stephen of Blois. This unsettled period in England provides the tumultuous setting for a sprawling 50 year epic tale of the construction of a bishop's cathedral at Kingsbridge Priory. Follett uses the history of the era to full advantage and masterfully weaves the fundamental ingredients of 12th century medieval English life into a stirring plot that will keep you reading well into the wee hours - the push and pull of church versus state as bishops tussle with nobility and archbishops and popes squabble with kings or rivals to the throne; the early development of the concept of organized labour and unions; the very tenuous and fluid definition of title and property ownership; the nature of military strategy and the frightful concept of in-close hand to hand combat in the middle ages; markets, trade fairs and the nature of commerce and business licences of the day. Follett has populated this novel with an astonishing cast of memorable characters whose personalities, weaknesses, strengths, habits and physical descriptions are portrayed with a remarkable level of detail - Tom Builder and his wife, "witch" Ellen; the venal, psychopathic William Hamleigh and his ugly, domineering mother Regan; the kindly, prideful Philip, prior of Kingsbridge; brutish, bullying Alfred; the brilliant and beautiful Aliena and her self-centred brother Richard, tied to each other because of an oath made to their father as he lay on his death bed; the pious but machiavellian Waleran of Bigod who has set his sights on nothing less than the lofty position of Archbishop of Canterbury; and, Jack, Ellen's nerdy good-natured son who matures into a master mason obsessed with expanding the limits of medieval architecture. The good guys will make you laugh, weep and cheer and the bad guys will make your skin crawl. But - trust me - bad or good, you won't be forgetting these folks any time soon! Follett's story-telling is as ambitious as the setting in which he has chosen to place it. Like other modern extended family tales such as Archer's KANE AND ABEL , John Jakes' THE KENT FAMILY CHRONICLES or the classic Dickens' NICHOLAS NICKLEBY , we are treated to a smorgasbord of emotions and characteristics - love and hate, strength and weakness, devotion and loyalty, dishonour and deceit, intelligence and bone-headed stupidity, altruism and selfishness, stubbornness and obsession, bravery and cowardice. An extraordinary, compelling drama, THE PILLARS OF THE EARTH deserves to be on your bookshelf. Paul Weiss
