The author points out mistakes or bad choices of important battles throughout history. I will cover just a few battles and the mistake the author of the book alerts us to. WWI The Battle of Tannenberg- 1914 The Czar of Russia appointed two Generals Alexander Samsonov and Pavel Rennenkampf to battle the Kaiser's Germany. That was a big mistake since those two despised each other. This hatred stems from actions in the Russo Japanese war where both were divisional commanders commanding adjacent sectors. When the Japanese attacked Samsonov's sector Rennenkampf stood idle and let it be destroyed. They met coincidently a few days after the battle and wound up having a fist fight over it. Now the two competed for glory with 650,000 troops for Russia and just 135,00 for Germany in trying to beat the German Army. Remmenkampf's Army was able to take eastern Prussia. Meanwhile while Remmenkampf was enjoying his victory the German's used an airplane to conduct and discover that there was a gaping hole between Remmenkamp's Army and Samsonov's Army. So German Army General Hindenburg took the advice of Captain Hoffman who told him about the friction between Russia's two Generals. Then he led the German Army to deliver a crushing blow to Sasonov's Army while (as CPT Hoffman predicted) Remmenkamp stood idle again. Afterwards the Germans proceeded to Remmenkamp's Army and destroyed it as well. Russia was therefore forced to sue for peace losing the war. The Berlin Wall collapse 1989. After rumblings for more rights in Soviet Occupied countries were festering the Spokesman for the Central Committee for Socialists Deutschland Gunther Schabowski held a press conference. After he praised the accomplishments of socialism he was asked a question by a reporter. The reporter asked, "when will your citizens be allowed to travel freely." Mr. Schabowsk's stunning reply was "they can go wherever they want and nobody will stop them." That set off a mass exit of East Germany through the exits into West Germany. They partied and picked apart the wall that had separated their country for the prior 27 years. German invasion of Russia 1941 WWII- After fabulous successes take the Germany Army all the way to the gates of Moscow. By October 17th Moscow was completely evacuated fearing the German advance. Then Mother nature came to Russia's aide. Rain drenched the Russian soil making it very difficult for tank traveling. It didn't stop the German Panzer movement but did slow it down. Hitler very unwisely scheduled the attack for November 15th. By then the rain had changed into frost and snow and blanketed the area. The temperature hit record lows going down to minus 30 degrees. The Tanks froze making them immobile. Then German soldier had no winter clothing with them so they were freezing. At the same time, Soviet Leader Stalin was informed by a spy in Japan that Japan was not going to attack his eastern borders despite Germany wanting them to do so. This allowed Stalin to release troops from Siberia and they attacked the Germans at Moscow. The Germans soon saw (properly outfitted for the weather)thousands of white uniformed Soviets coming upon them. The climate ready trained Soviets pushed the Germans into a retreat and an eventual losing of the war.
