This book is going to be important. One of the main things that I have discovered in all this reading about the Civil War is that women were primary actors in both the conflict and the lead-up to it. Female participation in the Civil War, for good and for bad, was erased by successive waves of societal prejudices. First they got wrapped up with the Lost Cause after publication of Loreta Velazquez's memoirs, and then, as women started to win the right to vote in the early 20th century, society became threatened, stratified itself, and invented a dogmatic reservation of frontline combat for men exclusively. In fact, frontline combat was the only occupation legally barred to women at the close of the 20th century. Part of making this happened involved instilling the myth that women were inherently peaceful, which meant erasing the history of women soldiers. This joins racism and Marxism as the great trifecta of why our society refuses to discuss the Civil War. So this is a good book, it is a short book, it is about something important that is going to become even more important to scholars in the future, and I would recommend it. This is a worthy book even to people who are not particularly interested in the historical era. I think that the authors massively underestimate number of women in the ranks on both sides. I would estimate the real number of soldiers serving to be at least 4% on both sides, and probably much closer to 10% on the Confederate side. The major difference between the Union and Confederate sides in this were that the Confederates had women serving openly, whereas almost all the women serving on the Union side were doing so in male clothing. "In citizen's dress," as one of the female soldiers called it. I don't think the American Civil War or slave society can be understood without greater consideration of female influence and female agency during the time. One of the main reasons that the story of slavery and the Civil War never makes sense to people is that they're only hearing part of it. The story of American slavery is not only the story of plantation slavery. Slavery was not only a thing that men did to other men in cotton fields. The real story of slavery was domestic slavery. The real slavery happened in the home.
