The diminutive portly Belgian detective Hercule Poirot, seems to have sprung from nowhere, complete with his perfect dandy attire, patent leather shoes, waxed moustache and all. We know his sharp wits, his quick smile and “quietly twinkling eyes” . We know that “if anything excited him, his eyes turned green like a cat’s” . We know of his “egg-shaped” head and his insistence on neatness and order in all things, to enable the “little grey cells” of his brain to work. Here we also see an exuberant side to him: “I am like a giant refreshed. I run! I leap! And in very truth, run and leap he did, gambolling wildly down the stretch of lawn outside the long window.” “Sometimes, I feel sure he is as mad as a hatter; and then, just as he is at his maddest, I find there is method in his madness.” But where did he spring from? Did one of Agatha Christie’s most famous creations, who starred in a wealth of novels and stories, just arrive, fully formed? I determined to read the first novel in which he appeared, to see for myself. It was The Mysterious Affair at Styles , which although written in the middle of the First World War, in 1916, was first published in 1920. Almost at once it is obvious that Agatha Christie is paying homage to the great Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. What we are reading, is an account set down by one “Captain Arthur Hastings” , of the recent events at a country house called “Styles Court” . Captain Hastings is a rather formal, pondering, old-fashioned sort of chap, and although he diligently records everything in logical order, he makes sure his readers know that he only selects what he himself considers to be pertinent. Does he remind you of anyone? A certain other rather bluff ex-army doctor perhaps called “Doctor John Watson” ? Captain Hastings also refers to a Belgian policeman, now retired, whom he used to know. His tone is rather deprecating, as he admits that this detective used unusual methods, and had some success, but that he had really had his day, poor chap. “I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot had been a great man in his day.” Captain Arthur Hastings, however, had rather a flair for these sorts of things, although he said so himself. He would develop these methods, and streamline them into a modern way of detecting. Such too, had been Dr. John Watson’s early impressions of Sherlock Holmes, as a rather eccentric fellow, given to fanciful and fantastic ideas, which repeatedly confounded Watson, as they often turned out to be right. This is almost a direct parallel. We smile to ourselves, as Agatha Christie has skilfully shown us by this uncanny reference, that we can enjoy the inside joke, whether or not we know Hercule Poirot of old. In The Mysterious Affair at Styles , Captain Hastings is on sick leave from the Western Front, and currently a guest at “Styles Court” , a country manor house in Essex, belonging to a wealthy old lady, Emily Inglethorp. Poirot has now settled in the village, near to the home of Emily Inglethorp, who had helped him start out again, after being a Belgian refugee of World War I. Sure enough, Hastings bumps into Hercule Poirot himself in the village. Both men are delighted and surprised. We too are delighted - but not at all surprised. Neither are we surprised at the murder which ensues. By the time of Poirot’s appearance, we are perhaps a third of the way through the book. We are also to meet another reincarnation; this time of a police officer, already known to Poirot. Sherlock Holmes had his Detective Inspector Greg Lestrade to contend with. Lestrade was a solid police officer, who was originally set against the amateur Holmes, but as time went on, rather grudgingly acknowledged that Holmes’s wit and methods were way in advance of his. So with the trio here. Hercule Poirot is ably assisted by the lack-lustre Hastings, and we are introduced in this first novel to Agatha Christie’s own PC Plod, who is Inspector James Japp: “Mr Poirot? It was in 1904 he and I worked together - the Abercrombie forgery case - you remember, he was run down in Brussels. Ah those were great days, Moosier …” “He was considered one of the finest detectives of his day”. Captain Hastings faithfully sets down the order of events at Styles Court, and we follow along with him, through the story, as he recounts the events one by one. “I’ve always had a secret hankering to be a detective!” He is so confident at the start that he will demonstrate to Poirot how to solve the case, that it is a joy to watch the interaction between the two. We have a cast of several characters, all of whom are on the scene, and staying at Styles Court. First of all, there is the victim of the case, Emily Inglethorp, who had inherited her fortune and the manor house, Styles Court, following the death of her first husband, Mr Cavendish. She had recently married Alfred Inglethorp, a much younger man than herself, who was considered by her family to be nothing but an arrogant fortune-hunter. We also meet John and Lawrence Cavendish, Emily’s two stepsons, from her first husband’s previous marriage. Lawrence Cavendish is known to have studied medicine. John is married to Mary Cavendish, a friend of Dr. Bauerstein, Emily’s doctor. Dr. Bauerstein is a well-known toxicologist, who is not actually in the house, but resides quite close to Styles Court. There is also a sharp, no nonsense sort of woman, Evelyn Howard, Emily’s companion, who is the most outspoken of the residents about her dislike of Alfred Inglethorp: “Watch that devil - her husband” . There is also a kind of “poor relation”, Cynthia Murdoch. She is an orphan, and the daughter of a deceased friend of the family. Cynthia is never allowed to forget that she does not share the same privileges as the others, but it becomes clear from the start that Captain Hastings is sweet on Cynthia (and in fact that he has a soft spot for all young women). Cynthia Murdoch works at a nearby hospital’s pharmacy, still doing war-work. Finally we have Dorcas, a maid at Styles, and an honest and true “salt of the earth” character. When Emily Inglethorp is poisoned with strychnine, it is up to Poirot to use his detective skills, developed in the Belgian Police Force, to solve the mystery. As we learn more about each of the characters, our suspicions veer back and forth, from one suspect to another. “The idea crossed my mind, not for the first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought that it was lucky that he had associated with someone of a more receptive type of mind.” We follow Captain Hastings’s indignation with delight, as Poirot innocently seems to ignore the obvious explanation, and go off on wild goose chases, until the final showdown. Poirot loves his theatrical endings, where he assembles all the suspects together: “bowing as though he were a celebrity about to deliver a lecture” before gradually explaining why each of them, one by one, could have committed the murder. This time his grand revelation is set in the Styles library, and we know that the last one to be announced, will be the one who did it. “Yes, he is intelligent. But we must be more intelligent. We must be so intelligent that he does not suspect us of being intelligent at all.” “You see, my friend, you have a nature so honest, and a countenance so transparent, that - enfin, to conceal your feelings is impossible!” “You gave too much rein to your imagination. Imagination is a good servant and a bad master. The simplest explanation is always the most likely.” I can almost promise that you will not guess the ending to this one. A classic whodunnit; set in a large, isolated country manor, with many other guests; the murder of a wealthy woman, in a closed room. “All the doors had been bolted on the inside.” To aid our own attempts at detection, the novel includes maps of the house, the murder scene, and a drawing of a fragment of a will. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: “It is so small - it does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.” That way lies confusion!” There is an abundance of clues, and half a dozen suspects, most of whom are hiding facts about themselves. Perhaps there are almost too many red herrings. “A vague suspicion of everyone and everything filled my mind. Just for a moment I had a premonition of approaching evil.” Agatha Christie had begun working on The Mysterious Affair at Styles in 1916, writing most of it whilst staying at an hotel on Dartmoor. She said that the character of Hercule Poirot was inspired by her experience working as a nurse, ministering to Belgian soldiers during the First World War, and also by the Belgian refugees who were living in her home town of Torquay. Just as with Victorian novels, The Mysterious Affair at Styles was first published in serial form. It was serialised weekly in “The Times” newspaper, including the maps of the house and the other illustrations included in the book. Later, it was to become one of the first ten books published by “Penguin Books” when the publishing house was established in 1935. “The Times Literary Supplement” said in 1921: “The only fault this story has is that it is almost too ingenious.” Nevertheless, it is extraordinary to think that The Mysterious Affair at Styles was Agatha Christie’s first ever mystery novel. She only got better, to earn her title as the Queen of Crime, and one of the best ever exponents of the golden era of detective murder mysteries. Added Edit: Poirot's first ever entrance, viewed by Captain Hastings: “Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandyfied little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a detective, his flair had been extraordinary, and he had achieved triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.”
