When my mother left, I laid claim to her books. This was how I ended up with a nearly-complete collection of VC Andrews's works. At the time, the Orphans series was my favorite. (Understandable when I look back at it from a psychological standpoint.) And while I don't necessarily dislike it now that I've read through it again as an adult, I can definitely appreciate all the criticisms I've come across. For one, perhaps it has something to do with the POV not switching from girl to girl (as I would have preferred) but seeing the entire adventure through Brooke's eyes. Some of the characters just didn't seem like the same people they'd been in their own books. For one, in Crystal's book, they established that she was going into the tenth grade. That would make her about sixteen, whereas the other girls were all twelve or thirteen. But at the start of Runaways they're all suddenly the same age. I didn't mind Raven being so standoffish and outspoken, but she seems so much more shallow all of sudden. And I hated how utterly useless Butterfly was. She existed to be protected, and I was sick of her character before I was even halfway through my rereading. Character flaws aside, I felt like this book got pretty repetitive. Like there were only a few plot points that got used over and over again. However, at its most basic-- an adventure story with a strong focus on friendship and family-- I still found this to be enjoyable. Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending on how you look at it) it's one of those books that gets better the less you analyze it. And I can definitely see why it appealed to me all those years ago. Feeling the sting of being recently abandoned by a parent, I really got into all the (admittedly long-winded) sentimental passages about how tough not being part of a family was for each of the girls. And this series fit into a bit of a pattern I had going at the time (The Outsiders, The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants) of books that focused strongly on pseudo-families built on incredibly strong friendships. So the Orphans series may not be some amazing literary work, but I still enjoyed it, and it could work as a good introduction to VC Andrews's writing as it doesn't seem quite as dark or mature as nearly every other book of hers that I've read.
