I guess I'm on a cyberpunk roll. This was the first sourcebook I ever bought for early Shadowrun after paging through it at a friend's house, and it really helps set the world background. While the Street Samurai Catalog contained a bunch of guns and tools and cyberwear so that the consummate professionals that make up a team of shadowrunners can better murder everyone who gets in their way, Shadowtech has a broader focus. It introduces the concept of bioware, so that people who don't want to hack their arms off to put guns in them still have a method of self-improvement. It has sections on genetic engineering, including Leónization life-extension treatment, and on drugs. I made an entire character based on the use of MAO from the drug section, a chemical compound that allows for immediate absorption of other chemicals through the skin, who would use sedatives and sleeping drugs so as never to be responsible for a single death. I'll always be thankful to Shadowtech for that. In keeping with the expansion of the background, large sections of the book are dedicated to technical explanations of how genes work, or how drugs are addictive, or how long it takes to recover from cybersurgery. Some of these have rules, and some don't, but they all paint a better picture of the technology available to the average citizen better than the main rulebook does. The average shadowrunner is not going to live long enough to make life extension technology worthwhile, but a corp executive will. And much like permanent high lifestyle, it gives the PCs something to aim for. Essence in Shadowrun is kind of a kludge so that magicians can't also use cyberwear and thus become more all-powerful than they already are, and it's kind of monstrous if you think about it for more than a moment (wait, someone who needs a replacement limb due to an accident is less of a person?), and bioware has "body index" which is an entirely separate scale to track, allowing mundane characters to load up on bioware and cyberwear simultaneously to stay as close to the bleeding edge as they can. Magicians still lose Essence from installing bioware, but with some of the intelligence-boosting bioware available, it can still be worth it. Magicians, and anyone else, can also lose Essence from drug addiction, so stay clean, kids. Winners don't use drugs. The real fun of Shadowtech is the comments, though. Much like Paranormal Animals of North America , each new piece of tech or pharmaceutical product has a section where shadowrunners comment on its efficacy, how dangerous it is, runs they've used it in, how they want to get their hands on it, etc. All your old favorites like KAM, the Neon Samurai, Findler-Man, Fastjack, The Smiling Bandit , Feral, Hatchetman, and so on get their words in, and even though I play later editions now and most of the rules information here isn't useful, the banter between the commenters still make it a worthwhile read. Shadowrun has moved on, but if you like games set in the 2050s like I do, then Shadowtech is a great resource for what the world was like then in a way that Shadowrun 2050 can't really portray. Show more
