With a byline of 'the story of the beagle who changed my life' and a front cover quote of 'her story will touch your heart', I was expecting a heart-warming story of a dog named Bea. What I got was some short anecdotes of Bea interspersed with information better suited for a textbook. Some of this information was interesting, but I definitely did not pick up this book to read ten pages full of beagle history. I certainly didn't read much about life-changing experiences and, as for my heart being touched, I can't say that it was even grazed a bit. The only significant change Bea seemed to have on her owner was that MAYBE she made her change the focus of her writing? But this 'life-changing' thought came at the same time when the author had fallen and injured her back, so she was pretty much bed/couch-ridden for eight months. I think most people would be pondering life-changing thoughts, beagle as a companion or not. Also, this whole process was shortened to only two pages of the entire book. Based on ratios, that means the author considered the history of beagles as five times more important than her 'life change'?? The last chapter about animal testing seemed like a persuasive essay written by a high school student (maybe an Honors English student, but still...). Seriously. I teach Korean high school students and animal testing was one essay topic some of them wrote about last year and the author of this book wasn't anymore eloquent or persuasive than them. I love dogs and 99.9% of dogs are great and I'm sure Bea was a wonderful dog, but other than her sad background which we really know nothing about except that she was from a lab and has some sort of trauma, there was nothing unique about her. The author spent more effort and words on her challenge with obesity than anything that made Bea seem worthy of a book. The book was not BAD, though. It's a very quick read and there are a few sentences that are either funny or written like poetry every chapter, so if, like me, you want to start a new book but you don't want to start something heavy or long, this might be for you -- if you can pick it up for free or cheap.
