Better Knock On Wood... FEAR by L. Ron Hubbard 2 1/2 stars. In his introduction to this book, author L. Ron Hubbard says: This is not a nice book and shouldn't be read alone after midnight, and author Stephen King highly recommended it... We are all superstitious savages at heart... One beautiful spring day, two small spirits lurked in a dark shadow behind the ajar door of the medical office of Dr. Chalmers... The spirits were avoiding the sunlight... Prof. James Lowry was being treated for malaria before his return to Mexico to gather facts on primitive sacrifice, demons, and devils... As the men talked, the office door moved slightly... It was held that demons appeared at the full moon. Believing this to be true, Chalmers advised Lowry he'd better knock on wood... But... It was too late for that because Lowry was fired from the university that very day due to an article he had written for a newspaper... Lowry turned to his old childhood friend, Prof. Tommy Williams for solace. Williams instead gave Lowry wisdom, for solace was nothing but a lie... Returning home... It was now dusk. Windows were lit, the wind had picked up, and a cool moon hung above stars that blinked. By his watch, Lowry had lost four hours... And his hat... His wife sent him up to bed because the malaria had made him sick, but Lowry was unable to sleep... The wind from the open bedroom window seemed to ask: Why? Where? Why? Where? Finally, at midnight... Lowry got dressed and went out for a walk where, along the way, he met some underworld characters who told him... Don't look for your hat because it will lead you to your missing four hours, and they, in turn, will lead to your death... The recap above was the first part of the story, which I really got into, but what followed wasn't as intriguing and, at times, it was very confusing, like an acid trip. You've heard of the TV series TALES FROM THE DARK SIDE? Well, this story was like the dark side of PILGRIMS PROGRESS by John Bunyan. I really fell down the rabbit hole in the second half, and I blame Stephen King's glowing recommendation for a mediocre, outdated book. Was this story all bad? No, but the vast majority was. It is my opinion that Hubbard should've been buried with this book and forced to spend eternity reading it.
