If you are looking for a Nora Roberts book to start with, do not start with this. I recommend starting with the Three Sisters trilogy, the first book is called 'Dance Upon the Air'. As for this book... I really hated it. Here are the problems: Physical Abuse As other reviewers have mentioned, repeatedly throughout the book, Josh restrains Margo either by the wrists, arms or shoulders during arguments, exploiting his physical strength over her so that she can't get away from him. She struggles and fights as they argue, but can't break free. This is not healthy behaviour, BUT I appreciate (apparently) many women find this type of thing sexy. If you're one of those women, maybe you will find the abusive dynamic depicted here an asset rather than a problem. A word to sum up their dynamic: paternalistic. Margo is written like a petulant bratty little girl, she's ditzy, "not a deep thinker", basically likes pretty shiny things. Josh is a Harvard graduate who is never wrong, undermines the validity of Margo's feelings, insults her, relentlessly objectifies her (he often has thoughts like "her body was sinful...her body was made for sinning...she was full of sin" - is he a celibate repressed priest or something? Are these actual thoughts a person would have? Personally I find it a bit creepy) I don't like when the protagonist's every flicker emotion is constantly invalidated, undercut and laughed at, by both the love interest and the author. I don't like a male love interest who is basically infallible, always given the high ground in arguments, constantly gets jealous over nothing and turns nasty and violent. His frosty lecture to Margo before they are even a couple on why she's not allowed to do a Playboy photoshoot was stomach-turning. Margo is a grown woman, but you wouldn't know it from how NR writes her. Margo's Modelling Career Nora Roberts seems to see modelling as an immature, immoral and laughable profession. It's one thing to write characters treating Margo with scorn because she was a model and modelling is the profession of "slut" simpletons (slut is a word NR uses a LOT) - but it's something different when the book itself endorses that view. It's only when Margo gets a "real job" as a shop keeper that she can start to have some self-respect and grow out of "selling sex" (bear in mind, Margo was never a prostitute, but NR weirdly paints Margo's modelling career that way). THE ENDING The most damning part of this book comes near the end, so warning for spoilers. The following is the sequence of events that leads to the finale of the book where the characters end up happily married: -Margo has been tending her shop when an old friend drops by - some guy named Claudio, Italy's most successful film director, apparently. -Margo and Claudio go upstairs and have wine and chat. -Josh arrives at the shop with the intention of proposing to Margo. He walks in on Margo giving Claudio a kiss (an Italian / friendship kiss). -Josh is so jealous and full of rage, he thinks about murdering both Margo and Claudio. -Noticing Josh, Margo is happy to see him and begins to try to introduce Claudio, saying "This is a friend from Rome..." but the look on Josh's face is so frightening that she stops, and Josh snaps at her and storms out, not allowing her to explain. -Margo catches up with Josh in their hotel room. She is shaking, her teeth are chattering, and she is "terrified" of Josh's anger. Then this happens (these are all actual quotes from the book): He put his hands in his pockets to keep them off her throat. "I'll tell you what I saw. I saw you in the bedroom [...] You had your mouth on another man. [...] I walked in on the first act. You should be able to figure out what that makes you." She would rather he'd used his fists on her. [...] Josh: How dare she sound hurt? Josh: "You've sold sex your whole life. Why should you change?" [...] Josh: "We know what we think of each other, Margo. You've never had any more respect for me than you do for yourself [...] I told you in the beginning, I don't share. I'd like you out by the end of the week." [...] She sank to the floor and rocked. At this point, so near the end of the book, I stopped reading for a while in disgust. When I came back to finish it, it just got worse. When Margo tells her friends what happened, they partially blame her and have sympathy for Josh. Margo herself even says "I can't say I blame him!" As if Margo has a history of cheating on partners (she does not). Her only "crime" is that she has a flighty carefree personality, she's sexy, was a model and had a good career, and slept with men she wanted. The whole time she is with Josh, she is faithful to him. But it's apparently up to Margo to go grovelling to Josh, so she pleads with him to meet her, she apologises, and he rewards her by proposing. The WAY this was all written, like Margo had done ANYTHING to deserve such treatment from Josh, and like it was Margo's fault and it was up to her to make things right - was so rage inducing, I almost threw the book. NR really seems to believe that this is healthy adult romance, when it's actually abusive and twisted.
