Left Behind: The one where stuff happens to people and then the other people react to that stuff I am trying not to belabor this point, but Tim and Jerry have a serious violence fetish. Some random character that I know nothing about gets captured and is like ✨military trained✨ so he knows how to stand up to interrogators. He is like super quiet the whole time but they do this weird long monologue in his head about how all the ways he could maim his female captor. Here are the things he thinks about: - blinding her with two fingers to the eyes - Breaking her Jaw with a punch - crushing her to death by flipping the table on top of her and dropping his whole weight on it. - And just plane ole shooting her with her friends gun “How could anyone not believe” is one of the most common phrases in this book. It has the preachy arrogance to anyone with doubts that is meant to transcend the wacky universe of this book. Say what you will about affirming the Christian faith, but it isn’t meant to be the most logical option. The same people that say that faith is only granted by God also preach that it is so logical that only an idiot could reject it. Which one is it Tim? Which one is it Jerry? Yayyyyy George got the chance murder her capture. All he had to do was fake being dead and then jump into a girl and crush he stomach into her spine so she projectile vomits as she dies. Also Michael the Arch-Angel is a pilot as well. They literally walk through dispensationalism as established and irrefutable truth. To say that this book is preachy is not a metaphor for being heavy handed with its worldview, it is quite literally preachy. They literally just have people preach entire sermons and record them in this book. Its just a manuscript of a random evangelical church. Its such bad writing. Only telling no showing. So one of the Christians is a grown woman dressed as a man to keep her identity hidden. Which on its face is nbd, I saw “she’s the man” I’m sure it doesn’t age well, but whatever. She is talking to another believer (a man) and this other believer mentions growing up liking boys. Our male presenting believer says that she grew up liking boys and the instant reaction of our believer friend is that he “recoiled.” After this our believer friend reveals that she is actually a woman and the man is relieved, confused but relieved. I know this was normal for the time, but if somehow you are reading this and are somehow convinced Jerry and Tim are good people. Please reconsider. They don’t play the recoiling as something to be ashamed of it’s just plane and simple homophobia. If homophobia isn’t an issue for you, I don’t know what to say to convince you other than, would Jesus have recoiled from someone if they found out they were gay? There is literally no concept of time in these books. Either 5 chapters will be spent on a 12 hour random mission or without warning 6 months will pass without so much as a justification. “I know there is nothing wrong with making a lot of money, but in my case it blinded me to the truth.” Beautiful succulent reassurance that Jesus loves a good capitalist. He just wants to make sure that you don’t totally forget about being a Christian when you are swimming through your piles of gold like Scrooge McDuck. Turns out it’s super easy for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle. Also they dunk on all High Church traditions by calling them “dead churches” and the reason that people got left behind from the rapture. Eat that anglicans! Also they set up this silly debate between the false prophet and the Christian leader guy (clg). Unsurprisingly the clg absolutely annihilates the false prophets in one of the all time greatest rap battles to ever exist. Which like, okay that’s fine. I just think it feeds into this all to common narrative that if people just heard how logical Christianity was than they would get it. If they hear the claims and don’t swallow them wholeheartedly and immediately they are - deceived and not culpable but still going to hell - Hard hearted which means God heardened their heart for some reason and they are going to hell - prideful which means they are going to hell and super deserve it Which like I don’t know why you would create all of these sentient beings just to send most of them to hell. Then the ones that you don’t send to hell are clowns like Tim and Jerry. One of the mini antichrists does this weird effed up magic show where he kills people and then resurrects them and then kills them again all while practicing his stand up comedy and lowkey it is the best scene in these books so far. These books make it VERY clear that once you get the mark of the beastie boys you literally can only go to hell. One direct result of this is that it’s okay to kill people with the mark. Because they aren’t people really people anymore. They are just hell fodder who weren’t lucky enough to grow up near a church. Also one of the Christians call a middle eastern dude a “camel jockey” multiple times.
