This is the primary recorded accounts of 'The Ghost' and 'The Darkness', two man eating Lions that hunted and fed on colonial railway workers back in the early 1900s. As part of a larger collective journal by Patterson, this book details not just the events surrounding this unusual real life horror story (making up about the first 1/3 of the book) but Patterson's many other adventures and experiences in Africa. This first section is a fascinating read, and works as a great piece of horror literature in its own right. The rest of the book is sadly a little less exciting, although no less interesting if you want to hear exactly what it was like to be a rich white explorer pressing the frontiers of the last great romantic age of exploration, piff helmet and kharki shorts on, shotgun in hand. Patterson is clearly educated and quite charismatic- he speaks many languages, is a diplomat and a gentleman, a workman and has a taste for culture and adventure. He goes to dangerous places and shrugs off the various discomforts of a foreign wilderness with energetic positivity that's unusual considering his class. Although he often refers to the natives as 'savages' he speaks honestly and often fondly of the foriegn cultures and peoples, and treats them with the same open minded positivity he treats most encounters. Patterson IS a product of his very different times though, and whilst he is clearly fascinated in the exotic wildlife he is even more happy to enjoy their beauty after he has shot them all and turned them into a variety of home decor. As a drinking game try taking a shot every time Patterson admires a particularly fine animal specimen in the wild before whipping out his trusty .303 and 'bagging it'. Look, it's not very nice but 120+ years ago we didn't care about endangered species or have widespread, decent cameras. The best way to show an exotic animal to your friends was to murder it and have the good bits mounted in your front room. Patterson shows to be a bit of an enigma on the subject- He shows a great appreciation for zoology. He tries using a camera several times, but the film always spoils or development fails. He sees and marvels at various animals including a pair of Giraffe, letting them go unhurt. He also shows regret whenever he does not cleanly kill his targets- he doesn't want them to suffer. On the other hand he also show a heavy disregard for life- shooting Snakes point blank, shooting an Ostrich from a moving train and often 'bagging' his way through as many Savannah trophies as his servents can carry. I had no trouble with sitting in the mindset of the times, but did chuckle at the amount of hides, horns and heads Patterson must have emassed! Animal murder aside this is still a great bit of historical autobiography from a time difficult to imagine in 2023.
