For years I have been saying to anyone who'll listen that the dybbuk is a perfect vehicle to explore gay/trans themes. Imagine my delight, then, to learn that a lesbian dybbuk novel was already written almost 30 years ago. And even better, it's outrageously funny and impossible to put down. If the title doesn't already pique your curiosity then I guess some of the humor might not land quite as well for you. But for me, this was one of the best novels I've read in a long time. You could situate this book by saying: take The Master and Margarita but make it gay, and Jewish, and make the social farce about late-20th century capitalism rather than Soviet bureaucracy. But there's an even deeper change you have to make because while Bulgakov exposed the ways that humans behave demonically to one another, Galford lets demons have their own humanity. That's shown of course by making the titular dybbuk the narrator for the story. Her snarky, sharp tone (and the fact that she's an enthusiastic agent of evil) does not feel in contradiction to the compassion and warmness that she feels for the Jewish people and community who are her special victims. That's not just an interesting narrative choice as a question of literary style, but it helps thematically show the connection between the hated outsider status of demons, Jews and queers. As Kokos remarks at one point (commenting on another character telling stories about Jews banishing demons): "Has our charming storyteller forgotten that, once upon a time, the Christian world made no distinction between Jews and demons -- knowing both had horns?" Conveniently, Kokos also has access to the thoughts of her victim Rainbow Rosenbloom (the other titular character). Thus we know, and the writing makes it easy to believe, that the kinship (coalition?) between those categories can be appreciated from both/all sides, even if warily and never resulting in a total loss of differentiation. While the main story follows Kokos and Rainbow in contemporary (now slightly past) London, parallel plots are happening at Mephistco (Kokos' demonic megacorp employer) and in the shtetl where Rainbow's many-great-grandmother came from. At a breezy 250 pages, the novel does a nice job knitting those stories together and giving the space and pacing to let each one have its own style and charm. The satire of capitalism at Mephistco is delightful and so is the very Jewish family squabbling of Rainbow and the Rosenbloom aunts, but balancing them tonally so well is a real accomplishment. If I'm critical of anything, I would say it's just in the last act and denoument of the book where this feels a little rushed, and neither the dramatic sex-and-guns-and-magic finale in England, or the corporate drama in the Unseen World, get quite enough time to play out in as much detail as we would like to see. (Or maybe I was just hungry to read more about these characters by then?) Some favorite bits: * Rainbow and her Jewish dyke friend recovering from the ordeal of a family seder by eating the most treyf-y meal in London. * The amused, sometimes mocking, but also compassionate descriptions of the Limnititzker Jews (past and present) * Kokos responding to a threat against Jews overriding Rainbow's "liberal guilt" and enacting, literally, baroque Yiddish curses on the offending mortals * Lil and Nick Thumb, Kokos' besties (and sometimes enemies) at the corporate wilderness of Mephistco In short, I'm delighted to have stumbled across this book. No book has made me laugh so hard in a long time and I know this is one I'll come back to. If any part of this review is intriguing then you should definitely give the book a read. You won't regret it!
