City of Light, David Warner’s debut novel is a complex tale of corruption, politics and vice in Western Australia’s underbelly of the 1980s. It starts in 1979 with the main character Richard ‘Snowy’ Lane as a young detective constable in Fremantle CIB being called out to a dismembered body of a young woman in a disused abattoir. A serial killer nicknamed ‘Mr Gruesome’ has struck again and Snowy soon finds himself moved to Homicide and working the case. The police eventually arrest someone for the murders, but Snowy is not certain they have the right man as some of the evidence doesn’t fit with the case. Moving on to the mid 80s Snowy has left the police and become a private detective. There’s a lot going on at this time with the mining boom and subsequent property development, the America’s cup, and the dodgy political dealings which would later be dubbed WA Inc. Snowy’s world brushes the shoulders of many of the politicians, business and police involved. In the third section of the book the political shenanigans are all coming to a head and we’ve come full circle as a murder with hallmarks similar to those of Mr Gruessome’s occurs and Snowy wonders if they really did get the right man ten years ago or if this is a copy cat killing. This is a long book which could have benefitted from some editing to make it sharper and less confusing for those unfamiliar with WA politics, as well as refining some of the overblown similes. The cast of characters is huge and their relationships complex, so it requires some concentration to keep them all straight. When we first meet him Snowy himself is a very Aussie bloke, not out of keeping for the times. He plays football for East Fremantle, in the time before it joined the national league, the AFL to become the Dockers and enjoys relationships with women without commitments. Misogyny was also fairly rife at the time with beautiful women regarded as trophies. For someone like me, who spent their formative years in WA in the late 70s, not a stone’s throw from Fremantle, it’s all familiar territory and it’s even quite likely that Warner and I crossed paths in the suburbs and venues he mentions, including Steve’s the pub frequented by UWA students. This and my familiarity with events and politics in WA during the 80s added to my personal enjoyment of the book because Warner has the perfectly captured the atmosphere and vibes. It’s also pretty darn good for a first book and having read some of Warner’s later books where he has improved his craft, I’m glad I went back and read this. Rating: 3.5 rounded up to 4 Just one thing I’m puzzled about – why is this title labelled Dan Clement #1 when no one by that name appears in the book? Very confusing!!
