1. As long as nothing really happened this book was pretty readable. It moved along at a quick clip, it had a certain zip to the writing style and it was like a junior league mid-period ( LA Quartet ) era James Ellroy. Sort of. Once stuff started happening the book got worse. And as more stuff happened the worse the book got. And then as the book started to resolve and the mysteries began to be solved the book got even worse still. If the book had gone on much longer it may have turned into a mucoid stream of shit. Literally, the book would have turned into shit-like snot in my hands. That would have been pretty fucking gross. 2. The book got worse . The author likes recapping / repeating, in italics, lines that are important to the resolution of the mystery very soon after they are said in the text. Then he repeats them in italics over and over and over again in case you are a fucking moron who didn't catch it the first time he repeated the lines with no structural slash narrative reason . Over and over and over again. Towards the end you think maybe it is because the narrator is going insane, but then you say nah, it's because the author thinks his readers are fucking morons. And we are if we believe in the believability of the main character. 3. It adds neat little twists to a story when your narrator is basically fluid nonsense that can be morphed into whatever is needed for each scene. This add's the element of, wow I never saw it coming that he was going to anally rape that poor woman right after he said he loved her. Wow, what a twit he is he threw up just looking at an autopsy photo (I mean he is only a crime journalist, wouldn't think he'd come across something like that). 4. Every character in the book probably shouldn't be implicated in the crime. Ok I'm jesting a little. But just a little. Who did it? We all did it. We are all guilty. Ok, good. We are all guilty now write a fucking coherent crime novel. Or maybe the review was a harking back to the Scooby Doo endings where every time you thought you knew who did it a mask was pulled off and you found out someone else was really guilty. The book got worse 5. I'll finish this review with my own neat-o-riffic homage to my favorite type of exchange the author wrote. At first I thought, what the fuck, when I read it. But then when the author repeated the style of dialog a second time (and I think a third time, maybe only twice though) I thought, wow I've never seen this in a book before. To think most authors would think of another way of handling this but David Peace doesn't shy away from the gritty realism. "Tell me why you wrote this shitty book," I asked. "No," David Peace responded. "Tell me why!" "No" "Tell me why you did it."' "No, I won't tell you." "Tell me." "I won't." "C'mon, tell me or I'll hit you." "No I don't tell you, I'm not afraid of you." "I'll hit you. Tell me." "No." "Please tell me?" "Why do you want to know?" "I want you to tell me." "And I don't want to tell you." "Tell me." "No." "Yes." "No. I won't tell you." "Tell me, we've been at this for almost a page, it can't go on much longer." "I won't." "Please? I can't go on asking you." "No." "I must go on asking you, please tell me." "Hell no." "Fuck you, tell me!" "Fine. For the money, I did it all for the money." "A-ha!"
