Diana Athill slept with Andre Deutsch, was given a job at his start-up publishing house (I'm not saying she wasn't qualified, only that that detail in a career path always interests me), and spent five decades editing both lowly cookbooks (harder than it sounds) and writers like Jean Rhys, Updike, Philip Roth, and V.S. Naipaul. Here she talks about poetry and poets: "But I also felt a kind of nervous reverence which I now find tiresome, because it was what I supposed one ought to feel in the presence of a superior being; and poets, although they do have a twist to their nature which non-poets lack, which enables them to produce verbal artefacts of superior intensity, are not superior beings. In the distant days when they were singing stories to their fellows in order to entertain and instruct them, they were useful ones: in the days when they devised and manipulated forms in which to contain the more common and important human emotions they were clever and delightful ones; and in the comparatively recent days when they have examined chiefly their own inner landscapes they have often become boring ones (I have stopped reading the Independent 's 'Poem of the Day' because of how distressingly uninteresting most of them are). And even when the poems are not boring, the poet can be far from superior - think of poor Larkin!" Of the poets Deutsch publishes, she finds Geoffrey Hill's "dense and knotty poems...the richest in sudden flashes and enduring illuminations." She contrasts Roth and Updike. Roth "was a writer whose fame preceded his work; when his very gifted little first novel, Goodbye, Columbus , crossed the Atlantic it was all but invisible for the haze of desirability surrounding it..." They drop Roth after his third novel, which is a mild failure; the next one, Portnoy's Complaint , was of course a blockbuster. Updike "was never set up as a star and never disappointed....he was a perfect author: an extremely good writer who knows his own worth but is also well-informed about the realities of the publishing and bookselling trades." Part Two of Athill's memoir covers her editorial and personal relationships with the writers Mordecai Richler, Brian Moore, Rhys, Alfred Chester, Naipaul, and Molly Keane. It is here that the memoir shines, although it's interesting that clearer pictures emerge of the writers than of Athill herself. The chapter on Rhys begins, "No one who has read Jean Rhys's first four novels can suppose that she was good at life; but no one who never met her could know how very bad at it she was." The image of Rhys before the publication of Wide Sargasso Sea , living in a tiny, unheated shack in Devon, having spent the past two years recovering from a heart attack, her husband newly dead, Sargasso Sea ten years in the making, is searing. The chapter on Naipaul is equally fascinating. If you had no interest in Naipaul before, you probably will after reading it.
