Back to David Markson’s Notecard Quartet. This second novel is about “Writer”, presumably Markson himself, as he attempts to write a novel. Simple enough. The first book, Reader’s Block , had Markson constantly discussing suicide when thinking of death. In this book, you are constantly told about the mode of death of different authors. Every single page, usually. Let’s get right to it, here are some of my favourite bits: A novel with no intimation of story whatsoever, Writer would like to contrive. The King James Bible, the First Folio—both during James I. Who on the other hand did not pay Chapman the royal stipend due on his translations. Ernest Hemingway once challenged Hugh Casey to a boxing match. Casey knocked Hemingway down repeatedly. Hemingway kicked Casey in the groin. Much of what we have of Aristotle was not strictly speaking written by Aristotle at all. But would appear to be classroom notes taken down by others. The word Bible never appears in Shakespeare. Jesus Christ is mentioned eleven times. What is Hamlet reading, in Act II Scene ii, when Polonius inquires and Hamlet says Words, words, words? Anthony Trollope wrote seven pages a day, seven days a week. And would actually begin a new book if he came to the end of one before his day’s quota had been met. Sadi. Rumi. Hafez. Rembrandt worked so slowly, especially in his later years, that it became ever more difficult for him to find sitters. In good part explaining the hundred-odd self-portraits. The tail gunner on the Enola Gay wore a Brooklyn Dodgers cap. Richard Feynman’s roommate, when they were both working at Los Alamos, was Klaus Fuchs. The precious, pinchbeck, ultimately often flat prose of Vladimir Nabokov. The fundamentally uninteresting sum total of his work. June 16, 1904. Stephen Dedalus has not had a bath since October 1903. Edward Teller lost a foot in a streetcar accident. Plato talked too much, Diogenes said. While dismissing Socrates as a lunatic altogether. Dickens’ astonishing manic walks. Of as many as twenty-five miles— and at a headlong pace. He has no insight into character. And no dramatic talent. His dialogue hardens to wood and stone. Said Emerson about its author after reading Oliver Twist . Even in a palace it is possible to live well, said Marcus Aurelius. Met him pike hoses. J. Robert Oppenheimer died of throat cancer. Archaeological evidence for the historical reality of Susan Sontag. Balzac wrote more than two thousand characters into his Comedie humaine . Get thee to a brewery. Harold Bloom’s claim to the New York Times that he could read at a rate of five hundred pages per hour. Writer’s arse. Spectacular exhibition! Right this way, ladies and gentlemen! See Professor Bloom read the 1961 corrected and reset Random House edition of James Joyce’s Ulysses in one hour and thirty-three minutes. Not one page stinted. Unforgettable! What’s this? Can’t spare an hour and a half? Wait, wait. Our matinee special, today only! Watch Professor Bloom eviscerate the Pears-McGuinness translation of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus – eight minutes and twenty-nine seconds flat! Guaranteed. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was evidently the first person in England ever to receive a ticket for speeding. Thoreau: How many a man has dated a new era in his life from the reading of a book? Why does Writer sometimes seem to admire Ulysses even more when he is thinking about it than when he is actually reading it? Is there a single Jane Austen volume that manages not to bring up the subject of money before the end of page one? What a coarse, immoral, mean, and senseless work Hamlet is, Tolstoy said. Did Professor Bloom take any books with him, do you know? Someone said he had a twenty-six-volume complete Joseph Conrad. It’s only a weekend cruise. The last book Freud read before his death was La Peau de chagrin by Balzac. A man without feet, walking on his ankles. Someone insisted having seen at Hiroshima. The time is close when you will have forgotten all things; and when all things will have forgotten you. Said Marcus Aurelius.
