Finished reading “Cecil Beaton: the authorised biography” by Hugo Vickers 01.03.2015 7th ed. ISBN-10 184212613X ISBN-13 9781842126134 At approximately 620 pages of text, this was a real slog. One star for the author, 4 stars for Beaton's diaries ... for this is essentially slabs of the diaries strung together with wooden narration. There is no light and shade. This is a chronological walk through a man's life with no overview and little interpretation or explanation. Episodes get dropped in without context. A classic example: On p.406 in my copy it says, “He went to Nikko in the snow and had perhaps his most successful Japanese day.” That's it. What made the day successful? Was it the company, the lack of company, the photos he took, or was he able to have a day without his camera, or something completely other? This book won't tell you. It would have been good to get a picture of how Beaton worked. He seemed to use relatively simple cameras and claimed to have little technical ability (yet even a little in his case must be more than most of us possess). He had assistants, for photography and writing, possibly for designing but that's not clear – but how often they were used and how working sessions were structured .... you won't find out in this volume. With very few exceptions, the degree of importance of various people in Cecil's life is nigh impossible to determine. A cavalcade of people pass through his life and, annoyingly, footnotes are few and far between, seemingly at random, to say who so many of these people are. Even when the book was written 30 years ago, the generation who would have recognised the characters would have largely passed. That only gets worse as the years roll on. Many people are mentioned in such small vignettes that you wonder why they rated a mention at all. Regularly some passages have to be re-read and dissected carefully. A horrible over-use of pronouns instead of names often makes it hard to discern who is saying what to or about whom. As for the man himself .... I'm sure you'd get a much better picture if you gave this book a miss and went straight to the diaries, the ones edited by Beaton and an assistant, most definitely NOT the volumes edited by Vickers. From the diary entries that make it into this volume, Beaton comes across firstly as a snob and social climber, quite superficial. But as time passes you see that although a snob, he accepts people across the board, he needed to be in the sectors of society that he reached in order to do the work he did, and he worked very, very hard. He had his enmities but he was also kind and generous. Ultimately he comes across as a hugely talented but quite sad man.
