This book has the one of the harshest, cruelest, darkest opening, has written its name to the literature history! After being witnessed sweet 14 years old girl: Susie Salmon’s rape and massacre by her creepy, doll maker, 36 years old neighbor, you want to throw up, scream, pump your fist into something, scream more, wish to do something stop the visual images imprinted on your mind! It is one of the effective thing you want to forget forever but you know it will never fade away! As the girl’s mother keep saying her name to summon her to the house, her killer doesn’t stop. He finished what he started and dismembered her body as viciously as he ruined her innocence. He dumps her into sinkhole and throws at her charming bracelet in the pond! As her spirit flees from her personal heaven, she starts watching how her family struggle with their lives. She even watches her killer and sees him struggling, too, touching the knife he cut her throat, suffering from emotional turmoil. She wants him dead. She also finds a way to connect with a school outcast Ruth Connors. From now on there are so many resemblances you can catch with Swayze’s Ghost. Even the ending has so many resemblances. The book started impressively, earth shatteringly strong and Susie’s heart wrenching and extra traumatic, sad spirit story who is trapped in teenage body with a mature, experienced voice to tell her sadness about the people she left behind and her vengeance story was outstandingly emotional and well written. For too long, I was planning to read this book. I can only tell one thing, please stay the hell away from the movie adaptation. ( of course it’s not about my hate for actress Saoirse Ronan!) After I watched it, I skipped this book for too long but now I understand they just ruined everything about the story starting with killing its essence and spirit! It’s truly deep, compelling, unconventional and disturbing story but at least the ending was relieving, more hopeful and taking the emotional pressure out from your chest. It’s a great book as my flashback Saturday choice. Here are some quotes I’d like to share: “Sometimes the dreams that come true are the dreams you never even knew you had.” “Each time I told my story, I lost a bit, the smallest drop of pain. It was that day that I knew I wanted to tell the story of my family. Because horror on Earth is real and it is every day. It is like a flower or like the sun; it cannot be contained.” “Between a man and a woman there was always one person who was stronger than the other one. That doesn’t mean the weaker one doesn’t love the stronger.” “My name is Salmon, like the fish; first name, Susie. I was fourteen when I was murdered.” “If I had but an hour of love,if that be all that is given me,an hour of love upon this earth,I would give my love to thee.” “There was one thing my murderer didn't understand; he didn't understand how much a father could love his child.”
