I read most of Cecil Beaton's diaries and recently purchased the two huge unexpurgated sets. However, before I launched into those I thought I would read this biography. At my age, I am familiar with all the names and boy was this book full of name dropping. Cecil sure crammed a lot into his life. He seems to have met every name person in three generations and photographed all of them. It is a condensation of his diaries for those who cannot or will not read either the original diaries pruned for publication by Cecil or the unexpurgated diaries tampered with by the Vickers himself. Cecil was a fascinating man and since I have read autobiographies, biographies, and books of letters by so many of the people mentioned in this book - Diana Cooper, Stephen Tennant, Cyril Connolly, Nancy Mitford, Peter Watson, Peter Quennell, James Lees-Milne and so very many others - in which Cecil has been mentioned..reading him directly is a pleasure and to have an outsider pull it all together was interesting. However, it took me a long time to read, which is not normal for me, even for a book close to 900 pages. I usually give a book the benefit of the doubt and in this case it had me worried that at my advanced age my grip on reading was loosening...I hope it was the book. Cecil Beaton was one of Britain's greatest cultural icons - not just as a photographer capturing some of the most celebrated portraits of the 20th century but also as designer of the iconic sets and costumes for the films My Fair Lady and Gigi. In 1980, Beaton personally chose Hugo Vickers to be his biographer, entrusting him with his diaries and the entire body of letters he had written - both personally and professionally - over the course of his life. Drawing on five years of intensive research and interviews with the likes of Audrey Hepburn, Truman Capote, Princess Grace of Monaco and Sir John Gielgud, Vickers' biography was an instant bestseller upon its publication in 1985. Exploring Beaton's metamorphosis from being the child of a staid middle-class family to an international figure mingling with the glittering stars of his age, the biography also details his great love for Greta Garbo and reveals his private sense of failure that the success he always wanted - as a playwright - eluded him. Republished in a new paperback edition in time for Bright Young Things, a major exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery in 2020, Cecil Beaton is the definitive and authorised biography of one of the world's most fascinating, famous and admired photographers.Cecil Beaton
