2.5 I’ve previously learned about American women (i.e., Deborah Sampson) who disguised themselves as men to fight in the American Revolution. As much as a Civil War aficionado I claim to be, I don't recall ever hearing of similar women fighting in the Civil War. “They Fought Like Demons” was my attempt to correct that ignorance. The book does its best to illustrate that yes in fact there were plenty of recorded (and probable unrecorded) instances of women fighting in the Civil War, disguised or otherwise. The author’s do their best (many of the Confederate records of these women for instance were destroyed and men otherwise tried to bury these women’s stories) to capture the stories of these women who defied social norms to fight alongside their family and loved ones or just because they thought it was the right thing to do. There is plenty of useful information in They Fought Like Demons and I did finish the book getting some understanding of the known and unknown women that did fight in the war. It’s just that while there were some neat stories (even though she’s a Confederate, Loreta Velazquez’s wartime and controversial post war life would make for a good movie) and plenty to learn (like post war challenges, the contrast of Victorian era men romanticizing women soldiers vs early 1900s men trying to squash/dismiss these women’s service) the book isn't the easiest to read. The authors do a good job devoting each chapter to a particular theme but beyond that the way the chapter proceeds to repetitively just list a number of names and what they did got really tedious after all, particularly when some of these themes/stories came up *again* in later chapters like examples of women’s identities being discovered. There are a few stand out examples of individual women’s tales that stand out and are generally interesting and the final few chapters do get more engaging. But They Fought Like Demons just felt like a slog to read which is unfortunate considering how interesting the subject matter otherwise is. “They Fought Like Demons” did do what I was hoping it would do, namely educate me about a group of women participating in one of the bloodiest conflicts in American histories and their experiences doing so. I just was a bit letdown with its presentation.
