This is an amazing first-hand account of the hard work, long hours, and strained emotions at the World Trade Center in the days and weeks following September 11. The author who counseled people after the Oklahoma City bombing found a niche counseling men whose hearts might otherwise have gone overlooked in the face of such a disaster--the dump truck drivers, the bulldozer and jackhammer operators, the dog trainers who had not found a single intact body. Giunta describes the look in people's eyes, the powerful sense of grief, but also of community. He chronicles the way Americans came together all over the nation, while men "unskilled in emotional turmoil" suffered alone, sifting the smoking ashes at Ground Zero. This is a book of horrifying but fascinating details: The occasional finger found still wearing a wedding band (and the quest to find the ring finger's family), a foot still in its shoe, the ubiquitous cigars everyone smoked to mask the smells, the mountain of debris and the never-ending line of trucks moving what was left of the Towers to a landfill on Long Island or somewhere. But the real draw of the book is the great stories of the way God worked in people's lives, the way He showed Himself to be still active, still loving, still on His throne no matter what we have suffered. A fascinating development later in the book is Giunta's own story of having been adopted as a child. The tragic deaths of 9/11 leave him thinking about his own childhood, and the seemingly unrelated stories come together beautifully. *** Reading this book was an excellent opportunity to learn some of the more "positive" stories about heroes dealing with an extraordinary tragedy. The chaplain's story of his work in the trenches week after week is fascinating. Some of the anecdotes are brutal, but real: locating a severed finger and packaging it for DNA testing, rubbing Vicks Vapo Rub in his nostrils to help with the smell of decayed remains, counseling dump truck drivers who were working 20-hour days and were filled with stress and grief and lacked the tools to process it. I gave my copy away to a friend headed to Thailand to minister to those displaced by the Tsunami some years ago. I would love to read it again, years after 9/11.
