As I have recently been reading about the Catholic church and it's doctrine, I naturally wanted to ready this book, since James White is at the forefront of the anti-Catholic group of Protestants. I have watched/listened to most, if not all, of his debates with Catholics likewise. What I have found, nothing has changed in over 30 years since he started debating Catholics and writing this book. His arguments are largely the same, without change. The only difference between 30 years ago and now, he has become increasingly angry in his interaction with Catholics. Now, the core of my issues with James White (hereafter JW) and this book is this: the crux of his arguments is centered around Sola Scriptura. JW asserts that Sola Scriptura (hereafter SS) is a true doctrine, quoting Paul's letter to Timothy. From there then goes after Catholic doctrine after that. Now, while that is not a bad approach, there is a problem with his argument. He asserts that SS is true, but doesn't provide a good positive case for the doctrine. More specifically, he does not, then or now, offer an argument of the scripture proving the doctrine of SS is true. Does the Bible actually teach SS? This is a question I have yet to find an answer. Of all the debates I have watched, no protestant can provide a sufficient argument that the Bible teaches SS. JW did not provide this in the book, nor has he done so in the last 30 years (insofar as I have watched his content). A few additional things about my issues with the book. JW only deals with official Catholic teaching about 5-10% of his citations. The other 90-95% of the citations were from Theologians. Now, in Protestantism, that is fine and normal. However, this is not how the Catholic church works. They have official teaching and dogma, and the church's theologians do not hold ultimate authority. This path of dealing with Catholic doctrine is disingenuous. He looks at them from Protestant SOPs, instead of dealing with their doctrine view Catholic SOPs. I was shocked, to be honest, that in this book that JW actually cited official Catholic doctrine via some from the Council of Trent and the Catechism. This was actually the first time I have seen him use those citations to deal with what they say. So JW 29 years ago was better than JW of today. The other main thing, which I hear all the time from Protestants, especially reformed folks, that justification by faith *is* the gospel. Justification by faith is *not* the gospel. JW accuses Catholics of having a different gospel, when he himself has another gospel. The reformed gospel. If justification by faith=the gospel, then this is not the gospel of Jesus Christ. If JW's argument for being Protestant is one of the best, as is purported, then Protestantism is cooked.
