I find this really hard to give a star rating to because I completely disagree with his politics, yet I devoured the book and really enjoyed it - "hate reading" as @gbaker called it. Kind of a guilty pleasure like watching Jeremy Kyle (this book has a lot in common with that show). Anyway, I thought I'd list things that the author doesn't like: Intellectuals Modernism The sexual revolution Government Bureaucrats Police (well, not the concept, but how they are so politically correct these days) Political correctness Liberals (though I think he gets them confused with anarchists and libertarians sometimes) Multiculturalism Welfare Tattoos (they are the cause of crime, don't you know!) Nightclubs The Guardian newspaper The BBC Non-judgementalism Stephen Pinker Anyway, tonnes of stuff. And you know what, some of the stuff he hates, I hate too! Like betting shops and aggressive public drunkenness. But he comes across like a mad, snobbish toff. In fact it's kind of hard to believe he works as a psychologist in very poor area of London because he has zero empathy. O wait, that's another thing he hates! Those damn bleeding heart liberals. He seems to really miss the good old days of Victorian England when it was much easier to ignore those dirty poor people. Now there are so many of them, how annoying! All his chapters (essays written throughout the 1990s) are just masses of anecdotes about his patients which were actually super interesting in themselves. And he does talk about how he just uses anecdotes instead of actual evidence of the causes of poverty and crime etc (like he's preparing his defences against obvious criticisms), but I'm going to point out the obvious criticism that there is no evidence that, for example, tattoos cause crime. I would *love* to hear what he has to say in a post-GFC world where the crimes of bankers and the finance world have been exposed. Although I already kind of know - "not the kind of thing to make you fear walking the street at night". The best thing about this book and the reason I would recommend it to anyone is that, for liberals, it is a fantastic insight into how Conservatives think. And I guess for Conservatives it just enforces their opinions. So everyone wins!
