How I wish I could have stumbled upon this book (or one like it!) decades ago. Brilliant - and extremely dangerous. I kind of think of Catholics the way I do Mormon's and Jehovah's Witnesses: There we have people who claim to love their savior Jesus, the Bible, Heaven, God's morality, and the Church. Sounds wonderful doesn't it? Then you find out a few years later that their Jesus, Savior, Bible, Heaven, and Church are not the same as yours. These New believer's only agreed with you until they got seriously educated in their religions OFFICIAL doctrine. Nasty eh? The Big question is: Will Roman Catholic's make it to Heaven? It's a possibility - if they have a rebellious streak towards official doctrine and tradition. Sometimes being rebellious and stubborn is a wonderful thing. I have heard that Mother Teresa made some interesting stands against the Church. Sure would like to see her in Heaven - But did she love Mary, man's church traditions, and the Saints more than Jesus? I'm not sure. My personal Biblical philosophy: Did the thief on the cross make it to Heaven? Was he Catholic? OR Mormon? Most religions would most likely disagree that the thief made it to Heaven, He just didn't DO ENOUGH. It was too simple to be effective. But here goes: Luke 23:40-43..."Do you not fear God, since you are under the same sentence of condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we are receiving the due reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing wrong. Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom." And Jesus said to him, "...today you will be with me in paradise." This man made it to heaven - having only a one minute conversation with Jesus. No Popes, prophets, rituals, decrees, traditions, spiritual weddings or chants, (or purgatories and indulgences.) The best thing is that everything the thief said agreed fully with the ENTIRE Bible. You can run those few verses through the entire Bible and feel assured they ROCK! The best part about this book by James White is the Catholic statements about ME. (well, not really me specifically...but in general.) Apparently I an Anathema. Many many times over. Cool eh? (look up Anathema on the web: Mostly it means I am unacceptable.) in 1562 the 22nd session decree stated: Canon 5 - If anyone says that it is a deception to celebrate masses in honor of the saints and in order to obtain their intercession with God, as the Church intends, let him be anathema. (tricky wording eh? fascinating) Here's a fun statement by an infallible Pope Pius IX (Dec. 9, 1854) "It must be held by faith that outside the Apostolic Roman Church, no one can be saved; that this is the only ark of salvation; that he who shall not have entered therein will perish in the flood." Here's another: Pope Boniface VIII (Nov. 18, 1302) "We declare, say, define, and pronounce that it is absolutely necessary for the salvation of every human creature to be subject to the Roman Pontiff." I won't even bother to get into the bits about Mary being equal with Jesus. That's just too freaky! This is a fun game for anyone: go through historical Catholic decrees and find out how often you are theologically Anathema. Then have a look at ECT (Evangelicals and Catholics together). The Catholics seem to forget these important statements given by the OFFICIAL church meetings. Weird eh? WE should be very skeptical of any group who claims: "The Bible is just NOT enough! All our crazy rules and rituals must also be embraced...OR ELSE!"
