"Bob Glandier's slow burn" As I have mentioned on countless other occasions, Disch is a master of the Gothic trope. In the case of The Businessman (1984) one of his more powerful descriptions is creeping rot in a character's life. Before you know it, you've gone to hell. Before you know it, you're falling apart. Before you know it, the bottom drops out. How does Disch turn these primitive facts of life into art? 1. As with most of us, when Bob turns thirty he starts to "go to pot." We don't hear this expression much these days, but it still conveys the message. Before he realized what was happening, he had struggled. He had dieted, he had lifted weights. He had tried to stay in shape. But gradually he was worn down and he gave up. It wasn't graceful but it was true. There's just this way things have to be. We are worn down, we give up and then death, if merciful, ushers us out of the theater where we'd spent too many hours on our rear ends. Here is the sure sign that the end is near: "He had let his paunch sprawl over his belt." No use in trying to tighten things up anymore. 2. "His jaw softened from Dick Tracy to Porky Pig." Again the connection that most Gothic authors make to horror and the animal When humans slowly become more basic, more attached to their animality, they descend into horror. His clothing was one of the few things that kept him firmly within the human community. And we know the importance of clothing for keeping our dignity. Talk to any survivor of Auschwitz and you'll understand. 3. As Bob was sinking, slowing sinking in the primal ooze, he clung to an image of himself in which he found some consolation. A businessman plays golf. So we need polyester golf clothes. And a businessman smokes expensive cigars, so we smoke expensive cigars. The key ingredients of the successful Eighties businessman is someone in insurance, pharmaceuticals, finance, who enjoys the boozy lunch and the boozy dinners. 4. He had given up jogging when he surrendered to the inevitable. Rather than a sweatsuit, there was the back yard, the lawn chair, a daquiri, and a magazine. Older associates found Bob a relief from their own agony; here was a young man quickly tracking them into decrepitude. When sexual intercourse finally up and left at 41, Bob had no idea what he was doing. Everything he had built a life on- alcohol, money, position, work, sex, social life-were deserting him. He was disintegrating and his figure was ballooning from slack muscle development. Brando and Elvis were more content with their obesities.
