I return to this essay almost every year! And in 2016, Maalouf's reflections on the link between identity, violence, and the desperate need to define belonging by exclusive participation in a specific group seem more urgently needed than ever. While reading The Crusades Through Arab Eyes , another one of his masterpieces on changing perspectives to gain understanding of historical processes, I go back to "In the Name of Identity" to check my thoughts. It is a universally valid account of the different layers of identity we all carry with us, and tremendously helpful when trying to navigate an increasingly polarised, yet diverse world. Last year, I read several excerpts of the book with 13-year-old students, worrying that they would have a hard time distinguishing between personal and community identity, but the reaction was stunning: they wanted to share the different traces of various cultural backgrounds they found in themselves, and how they struggled to combine and reconcile different traditions they are exposed to, while feeling the overwhelming power of uniform media coverage, forcing them into an almost scary uniformity of mass thought. I would not have expected young adolescents to see the uniformity of social media identity so clearly. It gave me hope while also filling me with sadness, knowing that they spend a large portion of their lives dedicated to expressing belonging by adapting a suitable identity. The magic in Maalouf's approach is his wish to understand all angles and perspectives of a specific attitude towards life. He is not willing to judge anything without deep knowledge of the context. And he generously shares his own identity struggles, making a case for a compassionate approach to the "otherness" of others as well as within yourself. For anyone moving between cultures, growing up a TCK ( Third Culture Kids: Growing Up Among Worlds ) or simply interested in the complex identities of all human beings, this is a rewarding read. Maalouf's understanding of the topic is rooted in his multilayered family history, where different religions, languages, cultural strands join together and form a multifaceted, sometimes contrasting reality, well worth exploring in order to deepen the ideas expressed in his essays and novels. In Origines , Maalouf's family background is highlighted. It shows where he gained his views and knowledge on identity, as he grew up mirroring his developing convictions in different social and cultural settings. It is a great complement when reading In the Name of Identity: Violence and the Need to Belong .
