There are three works to consider under this title. There is Beaumarchais play (1778), which I read several times in the past since it was a set text when I was a student. Then there is the Mozart opera which I have watched recently in the Teatro Real. And there is also the Libretto to the opera, by Lorenzo da Ponte, which deserves to be considered on its own. Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais, (1732-1799) The life of Beaumarchais deserves several volumes, with his marriages, his involvement in the American revolution and his diplomatic role in Spain. It was the latter that led him to write his Figaro trilogy, from 1775 with the Le Barbier de Séville ou La Précaution Inutile (based on Tirso de Molina’s El burlador de Sevilla , from 1620), followed by Mariage three years later, until the weakest of La mère coupable in 1792. The Mariage was not performed in public, though, until April 1884, and after sixty performances it was forbidden. These were dangerous times in Paris, and the five-act play was loaded with political references, with the famous Figaro ‘tirade’ in Act 5, and the many references (critiques) to the judicial system in place. Of the three plays, this is probably the most provocative, and the most powerful in its dramatic qualities. The story takes place just a few years after the Barbier, at the end of which the Count marries Rosine. Most productions make the mistake of, now that Rosine has become the Countess and the Count goes back to his philandering, of showing her ‘of a certain age’. A striking aspect of Mariage is that of the couple Figaro-Suzanne, it is the latter who pulls the action, in spite of the action and of the crucial role that Figaro played in The Barbier. Lorenzo da Ponte (1749-1838) Da Ponte deserves a rich biography, and the one I read in the past The Librettist of Venice: The Remarkable Life of Lorenzo Da Ponte--Mozart's Poet, Casanova's Friend, and Italian Opera's Impre , is one I am planning to reread. In the opera world of the 18th century, the librettist Pietro Metastasio (1698-1782) had been the dominant figure, and indeed one of the shapers of the genre ‘opera seria’, dominance that he exerted from his seat in Vienna. His demise offered space to Salieri, who in his turn backed Da Ponte once he had to leave Venice and settled in Vienna in 1781 – just after the death of Metastasio. At the time, the liberal Joseph II (1741/65-1790), eldest brother of Marie Antoinette, was the Habsburg Emperor. This is important because among other reforms he considerably neutralized censorship and allowed civil marriages without the consent of the parents. Da Ponte succeeded in gaining Joseph’s attention. It was through his patron the banker Raimund Wetzlar, who also supported Mozart, that Da Ponte collaborated with the composer. They produced three operas, identified as the Trilogy of Desire (Mariage, Don Giovanni and Così fan tutte), that are all in the current repertoire in the major opera venues. But it was Da Ponte who succeeded in getting the emperor’s approval to produce Mariage, a play that was forbidden. The librettist adroitly pruned the play (the Figaro tirade is completely cut out), synthesized it into a four-act work, simplified its plot and number of characters, and cunningly, when he presented the opera to Joseph II, he included a few extracts of the wonderful music. The emperor could not say no. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756-1791) When in 1785 Mozart met Da Ponte, he had already written, with success, a few operas. But he had also moved away from the genre to concentrate on composing for the keyboard. This he then moved somewhat to the side and engaged in opera again, and in string ensembles. The premiere of this opera in Vienna was just over a year after Beaumarchais had has his in Paris. It may help to understand this very daring step when it is realized that after the French was forbidden, about twelve translations into German were published around the still fragmented German lands. But Mozart wanted to produce something that belonged to the opera italiana subgenre, and indeed the opera has an Italian title Le nozze di Figaro . The first run of Le Nozze in Vienna was a great success – about five to seven numbers were “encored”. When it then moved to Prague, the success was even greater, and this explains that the premiere of Don Giovanni took place there. Mozart’s musical and dramatic skills he deployed in the way he matched the musical structure to the play. There are symmetries and contrasts, in formats and tonalities, when for example he uses the same tonality for the Duchess and for Susanna when she disguises as the former, and then reserves one particular tonality to be used only in the sections in which there is some simulation. That this play received the blessing of the emperor also accounts for the survival of the Fandango at the end of Act 3. Ballet was forbidden in opera but what the troupe did when the first performed in front of Joseph II was to mime, in a ridiculous fashion, the section that corresponded to the dance, to the consternation of the emperor. After his inquiry, the fully fledged Fandango was restored to the work. Although I enjoyed the production at the Teatro Real, it is a wonderful opera and it was well sung, it was nonetheless a disappointment. The Real chose to present an old production, the one from the Salzburg Festival of 2006, which can be found in YouTube, with Anna Netrebko, Ildebrando d’Arcangelo and Dorothea Roschmann among others.
