It is the first book related to French literature that I remember reading. I almost swallowed the book on a round trip to Aveiro, and honestly it was the right book at the right time. I read it very quickly, but I read the Portuguese version, which was very well written, I loved the way it was written, the way it seemed that the book spoke to me and made me feel everything, however, I am interested in buying the book in French and reading it because from my perspective it will always be different. Now my opinion about the book itself. The book addressed a very delicate topic which, as the title says, is separation. The book talks about the separation of a couple who have two children, and addresses the father's perspective. It shows the suffering and sacrifices he made to maintain a relationship that was ultimately his alone. He made a lot of sacrifices since the beginning of the relationship, and even with the amount of negative attitudes coming from his wife, he still managed to blame himself and tried for both, or should I say, for all four. It was a book that conveyed a lot of melancholy feelings and was also a little repetitive, it also managed to show how much you can complicate a problem that could be solved quickly, and it showed the feelings and thoughts that prevent you from doing so. This book showed a waste of time made by love. And one of the things I liked most about this book was the social criticism made. After the divorce, even with the countless wrong attitudes made by the woman, even though she went to court just to be superior, even with all the effort made on the part of the father, she stayed with the children. She destroyed the sacred relationship that the father had with his son and managed to take from him everything she wanted. Even though she'd been horrible from start to finish. Even if she betrayed him in every possible way, even if she deceived him, even if she made him turn to medication.. even though she broke his heart countless times and made him develop much anxiety, she stayed with the children. It was a wonderful description of such a negative and repressed subject. I had never read a book on this subject so well described. I really liked to have read the woman's perspective but I understand why it wasn't put, and it was still an incredible book, but if they put a little bit of her perspective, it would be more contextualized, because deep down, the book is just a group of assumptions about what she felt or thought. This book brought me pain but at the same time relief, I loved the book, I can imagine every scenario and detail in my head, I just had difficulties being in a public place and having problems with concentration, but still, the book managed to get over it of all this. It was an incredible book, I recommend it to all readers and to all life passengers because we never know what will happen to us the next day, or what will happen to our friends, and I think this could also be useful in case it happens. something similar in our life.
