Great Closet Cases in Literature - Claggart from Billy Budd - Nick Carraway from Great Gatsby - David from Giovanni's Room - Javert (thanks Wendy ) - Ripley Patricia Highsmith insisted that Ripley wasn't gay, but he certainly was in Talented Mr. Ripley, and his interest in Bernard Tufts in Ripley Under Ground and Jonathan Trevanny in this book is difficult to explain otherwise. He's settling into a pattern where, in each book, he becomes obsessed with a different guy. It doesn't work out for the guy. What Ripley's Game doesn't share with its two predecessors is Ripley's shadowy games with identity, the maneuvering and confusion about who he is, who he's killed, who's dead. I miss it. Instead, he spends much of the book insisting that he's not even a bad guy: the victims this time around are Mafia, bad guys themselves, so he's pulling a Dexter. He seems incapable of settling down: he keeps finding excuses to murder people. But now he's coming up with a heroic self-image in his head to justify it. (Of course, you're aware that the Mafia guys were all casualties on his way to his real target, who was always Trevanny, even if he didn't know it himself. That's still interesting.) It's still a fun and entertaining book. He always makes me want to bring up hypotheticals to my wife: "If I suddenly came into $200,000, how could I explain it believably?" We couldn't think of a way. "If I murdered a guy but then bought you a harpsichord, would that be cool?" She said that sounds nice. She's probably kidding. I don't think she wants me to murder anyone. Maybe she does. But I don't love the whitewashing. In Talented Mr. Ripley he was a void, a great screaming abyss of amoral loneliness; as he gains confidence he loses some of his interest. I'm getting diminishing returns as I read through the Ripley series. Only the first was what I'd call a great book; the next two are just fun reads. Nothing wrong with a fun read though. PS If you have any other good examples of closet cases in literature, I'd like to hear 'em. My list is shorter than I feel like it ought to be. ...See below for a list from some dude named Seth, it's an excellent list.
