Two stories, one the coming of the modern world, capitalism and consumerism, and the other, the poor peasant girl marries money. An alternative title could be All About Shopping. It is interesting to see how the shop assistants in the first department store in Paris (the Ladies' Delight was modelled on the Bonmarche, the real first store) were treated as servants. They lived in dormitories, had curfews, were expected to be chaste and could be fired for anything - or nothing - at all. Interesting also to see how these girls, almost the lowest of the low, assumed airs and graces and found people they could bully whom they viewed as being even lower than themselves. Hasn't changed. It hasn't changed either that the people with money who therefore consider themselves to be at the top of the tree, "quality", object tremendously to those who would rise and marry into their ranks, especially if they aren't even pretty! (Megan Markle for instance, pretty as she is, the British press made much of her lowly beginnings and acted all superior over her dysfunctional family). The story of how the working class of Paris suffered with the coming of the Ladies' Delight department store is the same as when Tesco moves in, or WalMart. All the little businesses die, the suppliers of those businesses often craftsmen, are out of work, and the uneducated young girls and strong young men find themselves low-paying work in those leviathans of the retail industry with rarely a chance to rise let alone own their own business or be respected as skilled tradesmen one day. Everyone says they won't shop at Tesco or WalMart, that they will continue to support their local shops but few - ever do. It's just so convenient... This is a good book, a lot more gentle in its depiction of the working classes and their plight than is usual for Zola, although his overarching theme of a great industrial machine grinding people down remains. Lots of well-drawn characters, good people, bad people and very, very naughty ones. It would make a marvellous film, lots of potential of showing both the changing times and coming of consumerism and an age old love story with a twist, a heroine who is definitely not fair of face. Update The BBC made a serial. They spoiled it by making the heroine pretty rather than a very competent and dedicated young woman who grows in confidence at her abilities. That missed Zola's points of not only could an extremely talented person who makes money for their employers rise, but that a man could fall in love with character and personality above all. Independent TV did worse by responding with Mr. Selfridge about the founder of the wonderful London department store, Selfridges. That was merely soap opera. Originally read and written in 2011, but rewritten 7th July 2018
