And there in this chapel built for the worship of women's beauty and grace were the clothes... The dummies' round bosoms swelled out the material, their wide hips exaggerated the narrow waist, and their missing heads were replaced by large price tags In this entry of the Rougon-Macquart series, Zola takes on a specific aspect of capitalism: the fashionable department store which doesn't just cater to shopping needs but which creates and feeds a desire for unnecessary goods in a 'virtuous circle' of conspicuous consumption - all of which leads to massive profits on the part of the owner and capitalist-in-chief, Octave Mouret. The shop itself is imaged throughout as a cathedral, a place where shopping has replaced religion and where excess and luxury are the new faith; and as a massive engine where all the people associated with the store and whose livelihoods have been replaced by mass production and selling are mere cogs in a machine which takes them in, uses them up and spits them out when it chooses. Zola seems ambivalent about all this activity: on one hand, he understands and shows how Mouret creates a market through his expenditure on advertising, his targeting of women, and all the little retail tricks he performs; on the other, Zola seems mesmerised by the innovation and creation, the sheer spectacle of the store which expands over huge blocks as the new widened boulevards are built in Paris, and the glittering display of finery from silks and furs to ribbons and lace, all of which are described in sumptuous prose. At the same time, the book exposes the exploitation of workers: the 13 hour days, the way new staff work on commission only setting them in competition with each other, the pretence of employee care by providing board and a canteen - only the food is inedible because the chef is incentivised to provide the cheapest meals while needing to cream off his own commission: the meat is tough and the fish smells. Into all this comes Denise: a provincial shopgirl who is seduced by the store - and the man who owns it. But, a virtuous girl, she refuses to be bought while Mouret mourns that all his millions of francs profit can't purchase the love he wants. This book really comes to life when it's detailing the seductive world of the store. The sub-plot of Denise only really exists to personalise issues of what it means to be a worker and what money can - and can't - buy. While not the most compulsive of Zola's novels, nevertheless this is a fascinating contemporary description of a moment that transformed retail: we can still recognise the strategies of loss leaders, sales, hiring and firing, stock turnover and the exploitation of workers including seasonal precarity. Most of all, Zola is already aware of the 'sexiness' of shopping and the seductive moves made by Mouret to create, captivate and renew his female market - even if their husbands are going bankrupt to fund their newly-created desires for more and more unnecessary luxury goods. And part of the ambivalence this book expresses is the role of women: they are Mouret's target and are exploited both as shopgirls and customers. However, the store also offers the female workers an independence and financial rewards, however precarious their situations might be. By creating the store as a feminised destination (we barely hear of male customers), women's purchasing power is being validated and they are seen to be operating in a public and commercial space - even if and though they are being manipulated to buy things they never wanted or needed before, but which are now designated 'fashionable'. When Denise has ideas to make the workers' lives more stable and fair, Mouret calls her a 'socialist' - and her ultimate fate is to be seduced and, presumably past the end of the book, subsumed within his own capitalist machine. If all Zola's novels figure in a triad of blood, sex and money, this one ticks off the latter two with energy.
