Une Vie Maupassant (1850 – 1893) If you were expecting to read the happy story of the life of a beautiful young lady from the age of sixteen to forty-six, you would be seriously disappointed. Maupassant has worked out in detail everything that could go wrong and will go wrong. A life of grief, misfortune, and destruction of everything a young person innocently hopes for when leaving the convent where she had her noble and religious education. Jeanne cherished and the only daughter of Baron Le Perthuis des Vauds, had every reason to hope for a bright and happy life. And so it seemed at first. Just four months after her return to the family castle on a clifftop in Normandy, she is presented and swiftly married to a new neighbour, the young and good-looking Viscount de Lamare. Honeymoon on the Isle of Corsica was her first and last encounter with love and happiness. As soon as the young couple had returned to the family property ‘The Poplars’, the life of Jeanne was behind her. Her husband changed his personality overnight, rejected Jeanne, preferred to have his own bedroom, spent his time hunting and became physically neglected, dirty, bearded, unkempt and rude in every way. The baron and his wife had gone to live in another property in Rouen. One day, to Jeanne’s great surprise, on the floor of her bedroom, Rosalie her maid since childhood, gives birth to a child, a boy, she cries without end and refuses to tell the name of its father. Jeanne’s husband getting into a rage of fury, wants the maid to be chased away with her bundle, without further delay. Jeanne calls her parents for help, who in turn call the parish priest for advice and Rosalie is further pressed and reveals the child’s father, who is no other than Julien, Jeanne’s husband. Jeanne is devastated and her family now turns against Julien, but the priest knows how to smooth those waves, hinting at some secret knowledge he has, from the sins of the older generation. Rosalie is also forgiven and with the gift of a small farmstead, a young husband is found, willing to marry Rosalie with a child. Jeanne at this time realizes that she too is expecting and soon gives birth to a legitimate child, a boy, to be named Paul. She turns all her attention and love to the child. When Jeanne’s old mother dies, her sorrow is without limit until she discovers in her mother’s old papers, some secret love letters establishing the truth, that her mother also had a secret lover in her youth. Jeanne is heartbroken and destroys all these letters, to avoid her father getting to know them also. Meanwhile, Julien, the Viscount has discovered another lady to pursue, the wife of some noble neighbour. Following the priest's advice, Jeanne passes the information secretly to the deceived husband, who in a rage of jealousy assassinates the adulterous couple. Jeanne now has to live with the knowledge that, even though through another meddling of the priest, she was the key to that act of fury. Fifteen years go by, and young Paul is growing up. After some years of college, where he spends little attention, he runs away with a young woman to London first and then to Paris. He spends money without counting, asking his mother for help every time he is in need. At first by thousands, then by ten thousand and in the end several hundred thousand francs. He now threatens to commit suicide if he cannot be helped. Jeanne calls her old father for help. In the end, all their fortune is lost and spent, even the castle has to be sold. The old baron dies of grief, and Jeanne falls ill and almost loses her mind. Rosalie, her maid, turns up at the baron’s funeral and now takes care of Jeanne. At this point, the downward spiral of the story finally stops. Rosalie, now over forty, the same age as Jeanne, has grown into a strong woman and her good common sense knows how to handle Paul and his money problems. In the end, the very good news is the arrival of a little girl, Paul's daughter, and Jeanne's granddaughter. It was about time to read something good in this story.
