How to Read Reading is typical therapy for the unrecognised dread of chaos. Thinking can only make chaos more obvious, and therefore more dreadful. Sex provides merely a temporary distraction from chaos, an interlude between dreadful moments. Gluttony and drugs can be effective remedies for the feelings generated by chaos but they have unfortunate side effects. No, it is only reading that provides a lasting cure for the chaotic meaninglessness of life. Reading does not answer questions, it frames them so that chaos appears orderly. Reading calms the mind like a mother's voice calms a child. It doesn't change the world; it just makes it more bearable. To expect more from reading is a sort of sacrilege: “Nothing is more vulgar than to have everything explained, including the things that are inexplicable.” As the poetically named Prétextat Tach says, “We need meaning more than anything else.” Some of us will kill for it. All of us search for it. Writers write in order to read about the meaning they have created out of chaos. “Writing begins where speech leaves off, and a great mystery lies behind the passage from the unspeakable to the speakable. The written word takes over where the spoken word leaves off, and they do not overlap.” It is only the written word that satisfies the therapeutic need to connect things which are inherently independent. “What is text,” asks Prétextat, “if not gigantic verbal cartilage?” Hence the power of religious texts to still our worries about fundamental disorder. But most people don’t really read properly. “There are a great many people who push sophistication to the point of reading without reading. They’re like frogmen, they go through books without absorbing a single drop of water.” They use words to insulate themselves from what is not words. They are unaware that reading is meant to change everything about them, especially in their relationships to things that are not words. What these folk lack is sympathy with the motivation of the writer, which is not communication but influence. “Faced with a shapeless, senseless universe, a writer is obliged to play the demiurge. Without the remarkable assistance of his pen, the world would never have been able to give shape to things, and the stories of men would always have been wide open, like some horrible madhouse.” The writer wants the reader to confirm that the world has structure and purpose, that is to say, meaning. People idolise the god-like writer when they overlook his intent to dominate their existence. They forget, if they ever knew, that the writer is using them. “Great writers have a direct and supernatural access to the lives of others.” This is only a talent by convention; actually “writers are obscene; if they were not, they would be accountants, or train conductors, or telephone operators; they would be respectable.” So writers have to be interrogated carefully by readers - like Job demanding a response from God, but with even more intense persistence. The divine does not give up its secrets or its motivations easily. Idols have to be destroyed at the root lest they appear in some alternate form. The real reader kills the God who provides meaning by exposing him for what he is, and humiliates him for the deceitful order he has given to the world. This is a reader who has grown up and left the illusions of childhood, particularly the false literacy of words. He is the one who gets God to admit that “Love has no meaning, and that is why it is sacred... Love serves no purpose other than love.” Recognising this, the real reader becomes... well, God. If he's lucky, he then has a chance to experience something other than words. He might even use words in an entirely different way. Then the process starts all over again.
