An excellent Sunday afternoon read and pertinent to much that is being written and read in the media under the banner of the silencing of women today. This short, articulate novella is actually a conversation, or a lengthy letter from one widow to her best friend, whom she hasn't seen for some years, but who is arriving tomorrow. Our recent widow is reflecting on how she is unable to detach from memories of better times in the past, during those 25 years where she was happily married and the only wife of her husband and the more bitter, heart-breaking recent years where she was abandoned by him for the best friend of her daughter, a young woman, who traded the magic of youth, for the allure of shiny things (with the exception of his silver grey streaks, which he in turn trades in for the black dye of those in denial of the ageing process). Was it madness, weakness, irresistible love? What inner confusion led Modou Fall to marry Binetou? To overcome my bitterness, I think of human destiny. Each life has its share of heroism, an obscure heroism, born of abdication, of renunciation and acceptance under the merciless whip of fate. By turn she expresses shock, outrage, anger, resentment, pity until it turns towards those she must continue to aid, her children, to those who have supported her, her friends, including this one about to arrive, and to thinking of the lot of all women. And to think that I loved this man passionately, to think that I gave him thirty years of my life, to think that twelve times over I carried his child. The addition of a rival to my life was not enough for him. In loving someone else, he burned his past, both morally and materially. He dared to commit such an act of disavowal. And yet, what didn't he do to make me his wife! It is a lament, a paradox of feelings, a resentment of tradition, a wonder at those like her more liberated and courageous friend, who in protest at her own unfair treatment (an unapproving mother-in-law interferes reminding me of Stay with Me ), took the road less travelled, taking her four sons, arming herself with renewed higher education and an enviable career abroad. It is a testament to the plight of women everywhere, who live in sufferance to the old ways of patriarchy, whose articulate social conscience has little outlet except through their children, whose ability to contribute so much more is worn down by the age old roles they are continued to play, which render other qualities less effective if under utilised. I am not indifferent to the irreversible currents of the women's liberation that are lashing the world. This commotion that is shaking up every aspect of our lives reveals and illustrates our abilities. My heart rejoices everytime a woman emerges from the shadows. I know that the field of our gains is unstable, the retention of conquests difficult: social constraints are ever-present, and male egoism resists. Instruments for some, baits for others, respected or despised, often muzzled, all women have almost the same fate, which religions or unjust legislation have sealed. Ultimately, she posits, it is only love that can heal, that can engender peace and harmony and the success of family is born of the couple's harmony, as the nation depends inevitably on the family. I remain persuaded of the inevitable and necessary complementarity of man and woman. Love, imperfect as it may be in its content and expression, remains the natural link between these two beings.
