I thoroughly enjoyed reading this novel and loved Zola’s vivid descriptions and cast of characters. The 3rd book in the Rougon-Macquart series, this one focuses on the Les Halles, the fresh produce market in the centre of Paris. The French title, Le Ventre de Paris translates as The Belly of Paris but is often called The Fat and the Thin in English translations. (Although I have an old secondhand hardback from the fifties that’s titled Savage Paris!). These markets were like some huge central organ beating with giant force, and sending the blood of life through every vein of the city. The belly of Paris is a fitting title as this book wallows in descriptions of the food on display, the mountains of vegetables and fruit, the meat and offal, the fish, and the fresh flowers, the cheeses and butter, all the colours, smells(and stenches) and sounds of the markets. The markets are enormous and busy, the people coming and going, the auctions, the market stalls, the cellars beneath where animals are stored and killed, and all the people. Such abundance on display. The fat and the thin refers at the most basic to the main characters, two half brothers who are opposites in appearance and character. Florent has returned to Paris on false papers after being transported to South America. He is a scholar and teacher and thin. Quenu is younger and becomes a good cook and works in their uncle’s butcher shop where he meets his wife Lisa (formerly macquart). They inherit the business and build it up. (Their young daughter Pauline is the main character of Zest for Life ). The family is round and of course making sausages etc they are surrounded by fat. Lisa comes to dislike Florent, and his leanness seems to be a reason to distrust him as much as his political beliefs! Other characters include Cadine and Marjolin, a young couple abandoned as small children in the market who now live their lives in, around, above and below the halls. Also Claude Lantier makes many small appearances, a painter whose own story will be told in The Masterpiece The various fishwives and other female market sellers, old and young are quite wonderfully described as they go about their lives, jealousies and competitiveness, not to mention spite, and acting as a loud group against any officials. The plot follows Florent as he gets a job as the fish inspector even though he objects to working for the government. He regularly meets in the evenings for a drink with other political agitators. He’s never really accepted by the all the market workers and what happens is inevitable. But the plot doesn’t seem to me to be Zola’s main aim. It’s a description of a way of life in Paris from the sellers in the markets to the making of black pudding, the gossip, the petty infighting of all these people who exist and make their living in this distinctive environment, a world of its own. Zola has long passages describing the poultry and meat in great detail, the gore, the shapes of the carcasses and offal, so much food that it seems to represent gluttony and greed. Claude divides people into two categories, the fat and the thin. In these designs Claude detected the entire drama of human life, and he ended by classifying men into Fat and Thin, two hostile groups, one of which devours the other, and grows fat and sleek and enjoys itself. The implication is that in the battle between the fat and the thin, the fat will always win. Those colossal markets and their teeming odoriferous masses of food had hastened the crisis. To Florent they appeared symbolical of some glutted, digesting beast, of Paris, wallowing in its fat and silently upholding the Empire. He seemed to be encircled by swelling forms and sleek, fat faces, which ever and ever protested against his own martyrlike scragginess and sallow, discontented visage. To him the markets were like the stomach of the shopkeeping classes, the stomach of all the folks of average rectitude puffing itself out, rejoicing, glistening in the sunshine, and declaring that everything was for the best, since peaceable people had never before grown so beautifully fat.
