Update 9th Aug 2021: Some years since I last read this book, still a great book and more than deserving of its place as an African and feminist classic. Reading through my initial review after this long I couldn't help but cringe and wince at certain points. I was certainly co-optative in certain ways as I used some ideas from this book to try and resolve the conflicts I had been dealing with at the time I read this, and was tempted to remove it in favour of a new review altogether. But then I thought that it is very possible that I might also want to write another review to replace that one if I ever re-read this again in the future, constant self-editing and obsessing does nothing but stagnate. That said as I leave this part as an update, reading through this was as wonderful as I remembered. And that last quote remains as brilliant as I first read it: "The word 'happiness' does indeed have meaning, doesn't it? I shall go out in search of it." ************* What does one do when one feels the pressure of culture and religion weighing down on you? How does one find solace? Ramatoulaye, writes a long letter to her friend Aissatou, reminding her (and herself) of their maiden days, married days, of their shared joys and pains while narrating her own troubles and triumphs. The recounting of Ramatoulaye's journey to healing and liberation is nothing less than moving. Faced with the humiliation of her husband's betrayal by finding another wife, she remains bold and doesn't bend nor bow to anyone's demands. "To overcome my bitterness, I think of human destiny. Each life has it's share of heroism, an obscure heroism, born of abdication, of renunciation and acceptance under the merciless whip of fate." Mariama Bâ also brings an important issue, to which as an African and a gay individual I can relate to. Can modernism and culture blend and co-exist? Can we learn from different cultures other than our own and still keep our own intact? Can one still be proud of one's culture when they go against some of the norms and preconceived notions of what a woman's place is in the society? She answers the question in only the profound and wise manner that echoes throughout her short but thorough book: "To lift us out of the bog of tradition, superstition and custom, to make us appreciate a multitude of civilizations without renouncing our own, to raise our vision of the world, cultivate our personalities, strengthen our qualities, to make up our inadequacies, to develop universal moral values in us..." Mariama arises as a powerful voice challenging, demanding. A rare voice in African literature in the 80s, a period when not many women in the African landscape were asking as many questions or questioning the position of the African woman in both society and politics. From describing beautiful sceneries of their youth to Ramatoulaye's day-to-day activities as a single mother, Mariama Bâ constructs a beautiful setting of pre and post independence Senegal, with all it's problems, hopes, conflict, culture, beauty and all in a 90 page book, exquisitely written.
