The beginning of Canto the First :: “May it please Heaven that the reader, emboldened and become of a sudden momentarily ferocious like what he is reading, may trace in safety his pathway through the desolate morass of these gloomy and poisonous pages. For unless he is able to bring to his reading a rigorous logic and a spiritual tension equal at least to his distrust, the deadly emanations of this book will imbibe his soul as sugar absorbs water.” The beginning of Canto the Second :: “What has been the fate of the first lay of Maldoror since his mouth, filled with the leaves of nightshade, gave utterance to it in a moment of meditation and released it throughout the kingdoms of wrath? What has become of that lay? We do not know precisely. Neither the trees nor the winds have preserved it. And Morality, who happened to be passing by ignorant of the fact that in its glowing pages she would find an energetic defender, saw it wending its way with a firm and direct tread towards the obscure fastnesses and the secret fibres of human consciousness.” The beginning of Canto the Third :: “Let us recall the names of those imaginary angel-like beings whom my pen during the second lay has drawn from a brain shining with a radiance derived from those beings themselves. They are still-born on the scorched paper like sparks the rapid extinction of which the eye can hardly follow. Leman! ... Lohengrin! ... Lombano! ... Holzer!...For an instant you appeared, covered with the insignia of youth, within my enchanted horizon.” The beginning of Canto the Fourth :: “It is a man or a stone or a tree about to begin the fourth canto.” The beginning of Canto the Fifth :: “Let the reader not be angry with me if my prose has not had the good fortune to please him. You maintain that my ideas are at least singular. What you say there, respectable man, is the truth; but, a partial truth. And what an abundant source of error and misapprehension all partial truth is! Flocks of starlings have a way of flying natural to them, which seems to be governed by a uniform and regular tactic like that of a disciplined army obeying with precision the voice of a single general.” The beginning of Canto the Sixth :: “You whose enviable calm can do no more than embellish think not that it is any longer a question of uttering, in stanzas of fourteen or fifteen lines, like a fourth-grade pupil, exclamations that will pass for inopportune and noisy cacklings of a cochinchina chicken, as grotesque as may be imagined without trying especially hard; but it is preferable to prove by facts the propositions on advances. Would you then claim that because I had insulted as if making light of them mankind, the Creator, and myself in my explicable hyperboles, my mission were complete? No: the most important part of my work still remains as a task to be done.” Users may expect their own varying results according to the unique shape of each their prejudices and predispositions. The way I will say it is that within these six Cantos of Maldoror Herr William T. Vollmann discovered the permission to allow his prose to blossom and his imagination to range.
