On re-reading, this jumped up to 5 stars, currently top banana in the Ripliad. It's interesting to see my original review (below) where I was disconcerted by Ripley being off-stage for so much of the first half. Maybe because I expected that absence this time around, I was more ready to invest in Jonathan - another would-be Ripley, in some ways, who goes from 'normal' man to killer: and though his motives are slightly different money for his wife and son given his terminal diagnosis, versus Ripley's desire for Dickie Greenleaf's privileged life there are fascinating parallels between the two men. Once again, the most important relationship is between Ripley and another (handsome) man and, once again, the visceral killing (taking place in a train toilet, no less!) is suggestive of gay sex, still illegal when Highsmith was writing. If murder itself is up close and personal, the aftermath between Jonathan and Ripley is even more so: bound together by their covert actions, the secrecy, the way Jonathan's wife is jealous and a bit scared of Ripley whose friendship, she claims, has changed her husband, has made him a man she no longer recognises can all be read in queer and doubled ways. If the violence is all the more violent in this book, so the humour is also ramped up - Tom tends to fall into silent laughter at the most inopportune moments and I wanted to join in with him in a disconcerting way. There's also that wonderful scene where Tom - yes, Tom Ripley! - goes to Jonathan's house to act like a marriage guidance counsellor to his wife: Highsmith is hilarious! But this is also a wonderfully dark book where conventional morality is both evoked (it's ok to kill mafia hoods because they're murderers themselves, no? no?) and questioned, and where we're drawn even closer into the seemingly rational thought-world of Ripley... and we have to force ourselves to remember that that's not the way most people think. Or live. Straight onto Ripley #4 for me. ------------------------- 3.5 stars Tom Ripley strikes up yet another of his shadily ambiguous relationships with handsome men in this book but this time it's Jonathan who is seduced into murder... It feels deeply significant that Ripley helps him kill, a stand-in for quite a different kind of intimacy? There's more action in this mafia-inflected story as well as a Strangers on a Train vibe. But with Ripley off-stage for much of the first section and Jonathan just not being as fascinating a character, this takes a bit too long to really get going. Once it does, and if we read between the lines, it tells us perhaps more than we've so far about Ripley's inner emotional life.
