A flood of emotion overswept me after reading this rather strange novel. I immediately checked out Mark Childress on wikipedia to see where this guy presently lives For someone who was born and raised in Alabama (according to the book's profile blurb), Mr. Childress must certainly have hated living here, because with the exception of one of his protagonists, nearly all of the characters in "Crazy In Alabama" come off as either racist buffoons or homicidal maniacs (or, in a few instances, racist homicidal buffoons). Set in 1965 in Industry, AL (pronounced in-DUST-ree, thank you very much) it follows two plot threads in a headache-inducing fashion: Lucille, amother of six kids, kills her husband, then high-tails it to Hollywood to become an actress. At fhe same time she is on the lam, her nephews Peejoe (nyuk nyuk...crazy Alabamian shorthand for Phillip Joseph) and Wiley are shipped off to live with their funeral home director uncle, at the very same time a Selma-esque race war breaks out in Industry. Here's whence the headache ensues: half of the novel (the "Auntie's Gone Crazy" part) is a lighthearted romp (or at least farcical in the extreme), the other half depicts an extremely somber, totally serious civil rights struggle. The reader (certainly THIS reader, anyway) doesn't know whether to chuckle at Aunt Lucille's cornpone antics or be utterly appalled at rednecks beating up blacks wanting to swim in a community pool (with the seeming aegis and sanction of notorious former Alabama governor George Wallace). This overall story is an implausible mess, chockablock with puerile dialog and perpetuated stereotypes; its 2-star rating is only merited by the overall strength of the story, which is (after shaking off the headache) is compulsively readable, if only in a train-wreck sorta way. (A parenthetical aside to Mr. Childress, who evidently no longer lives in Alabama: Did you hate Alabama THAT bad that you had to make it seem like everyone there is a big ol' dummy?? While the civil rights movement brought the attention of the whole world to Alabama in the '60s, it's a stigma that the state has tried hard to overcome...and...I got news for you...racism exists today in the 21st century...even in Florida, where you live. Ever look at the racial demographics for states like Montana? North/South Dakota? Idaho?There's a reason black folks don't live there...yet no one's writing books (or screenplays for really bad movies) like "Crazy In South Dakota". Racism is not unique to Alabama...turning your recollections of life in Alabama into a circus freakshow does everyone in Alabama a disservice.)
