Les Chantes de Maldoror is best known for the praise afforded to it by the Surrealists. Of course, their infatuation is completely understandable: within these hallucinogenic pages, one may find the now famous line comparing beauty to "the random encounter between an umbrella and a sewing-machine upon a dissecting-table." But despite the obvious temptation, I strongly believe that we should avoid viewing Isidore Ducasse's magnum opus through the anachronistic lens of influence—i.e., as a "dark progenitor" of Surrealism, to steal a phrase from the book's back cover. Les Chantes de Maldoror stands up on its own. Nevertheless, I found myself making my own anachronistic comparisons: with its fevered imagery and sordid descriptions, often presented in pseudo-scientific language, Les Chantes suggested to me a sort of proto- Naked Lunch . Yet this resemblance can only be superficial. Whereas Burroughs gleefully wallows in confusion and irreverence, Ducasse seems driven, at the end of the day, by a powerful sense of morality. And nowhere is this more clearly articulated than in the following passage, which I've drawn from the Fourth Canto: [I]f I let my vices soak into these pages, people will believe even more in the virtues that shine, and in the halo which I will place above those virtues, that the greatest geniuses of the future will be sincerely and recognisably grateful to me. For some, such didactic moralizing may be off-putting; but personally I find it refreshing, for it serves to elevate Les Chantes from a mere curiosity piece into something grander. Which is not to say, of course, that it isn't curious. Indeed, it is probably one of the strangest literary works that I've ever had the pleasure to read. But it's also passionate and idealistic. In short: highly recommended . So why only three stars? Not speaking any French, I was unfortunate enough to read Les Chantes in translation: specifically, R.J. Dent's version, published by the Solar Nocturnal imprint of Solar Books. I have not read any other English translations of the work, although I'm aware that several alternatives exist (a thoughtful comparison of these has been conducted by The Bricoleur , who speculatively concludes that "the definitive English version of Maldoror has yet to be written"). But regardless of Dent's skill as a translator, the book is severely marred by numerous typos—the least of which simply annoy the reader, while the worst seriously limit one's understanding of the text. My rating, therefore, has been reduced accordingly. And one final point of contention: The Solar Nocturnal edition claims to contain illustrations by Salvador Dalí, which resulted in a profound sense of disappointment when I discovered that these "illustrations" were no more than cheap facsimiles, three inches by four inches in size, black-and-white and inexcusably pixelated. In the future, I plan to skip anything published by Solar Books, if only out of spite.
