"Ebb and tide of feeling: heat and dazzlement, the wood fires, the sharp green mango, bitten into in turns, a delicacy in our greedy mouths. I close my eyes." What you hear is the voice of the heartbroken Ramatoulaye, who has been forced into solitude (according to the dictates of Islam) to mourn the death of the husband who, when he lived, humiliated and abandoned her. This is an epistolary; a meditation on life and life's choices. It is an anguished plea from one conservative woman, to her liberal best friend who, when faced with the same choice, chose freedom: I listen to the words that create around me a new atmosphere in which I move, a stranger tormented…Cross sections of my life spring involuntarily from my memory, grandiose verses from the Koran, noble words of consolation fight for my attention I read this book as a high school student in Liberia, and I still remember how it seemed to taunt me: there it was, on the list of books to be read in my Language and Literature class; when I went to the next class, Reading, there it was again; and later, in French class, guess which book was waiting in its original French version: Une si longue lettre. The ebb and flow of this book is somewhat unique, as is its syntax and nuance. It is also one of those books that loses some of its power through translation, but there is no mistaking its cultural and universal penetration. She is not just an African woman (a Senegalese); she is not just a Muslim woman. She is every woman. The moment you start reading this book you understand how her problems are universal, and why this book has become a statement of gender struggles; an ode to the inner turmoil any woman could experience at such a midlife change: I had lost my slim figure, as well as ease and quickness of movement. My stomach protruded from beneath the wrapper that hid the calves developed by the impressive number of kilometres walked since the beginning of my existence. Suckling had robbed my breasts of their round firmness. I could not delude myself: youth was deserting my body. She is not just the product of a polygamous marriage. She was the other half of a two-decade marriage, when she was suddenly informed by relatives, that her husband had just married her daughter's best friend. She was not only forced into becoming a first wife--as is often said in blurbs of this book--but she was abandoned and her twelve children forgotten, when her husband left his home to parlay the town with his young wife. This is not about a woman who must become the head wife of a bigger family, this is about a woman discarded by a man who pretends to do right by his religion, but in actuality, has done right by his vital organ. Every night when he went out he would unfold and try on several of his suits before settling on one. The others, impatiently rejected, would slip to the floor. I would have to fold them again and put them back in their places; and this extra work, I discovered, I was doing only to help him in his effort to be elegant in his seduction of another woman. The idea that she still loves this man, is searing, but understandable. The thought of her still holding on to that life, unbearable. This theme of choice is an educational debate and exploration that takes place through the mothers and daughters of this novel: A daughter who wants her mother to leave an unhealthy marriage; a best friend who did leave and start a better life away from home; a woman who left her country, only to find that she would never be at home in her husband's country; an unmarried daughter who had to decide her unborn child's fate. There is a saying that discord here may be luck elsewhere. Why are you afraid to make the break? Unlike many women of her generation, Mariama Bâ was educated. She became a pioneer for women's rights. A Senegalese writer and schoolteacher who believed that the writer of a developing country needed to be the voice for the voiceless and speak out against archaic customs, she chose to do so through her fiction and main character, who is thankful for the women who were able to accomplish what she could not: I am not indifferent to the irreversible currents of women's liberation that are lashing the world. This commotion that is shaking up every aspect of our lives reveals and illustrates our abilities. My heart rejoices each time a woman emerges from the shadows.
