I liked this one better than the last one of these I read. I was quite engaged in Olivia's story for most of the book. In the end I just got worn down by sheer volume, there was too much of everything- emotion hardship, more emotion, miscommunication loneliness etc making all together a melancholy mood but I wasn't really into it. 680 pages is almost always too many and it was too many for me here- there were too many different things going on. I am glad I liked Olivia because I really loathed most of the characters- Kenneth, Miriam, Garbriella. When it came to Jean and Jimmy I had an appalled sort for pity for them without wanting to spend much time with them and then there were scores and scores of support characters who were a little bit too well developed (I subscribe to the idea that you want to really engage with about three characters more than that becomes exhausting and/or confusing). The murder was well plotted and Olivia's story was well used within that without making it obvious too early who did it (well it became obvious too early, but not because of Olivia and by then I was a bit worn down by other aspects of the story too). Lynley and Havers are portrayed as polar opposites in a way that I think is supposed to make Lynley look really shiny and flatter him but to me he looks like a rich sexist (better censor out the word that comes to mind here). I continue to feel furious at the way Havers has no real role within the series apart from failing to be as privileged confident or powerful as Lynley. Initially I thought I would like that there was a female inspector in the book but she was just there for Lynley to be horrible to and tellingly wasn't even in on the end. I have no time whatsoever for Lady Helen. She is toxic femininity personified- useless, irrational, beautiful (of course) and sympathetic to the male gaze. Every time she appeared in the book I cringed at the things she said or that Lynley said about her. Inexplicble and wearying: I felt there was an attempt to explain the "brilliant man attracted to ditzy female" phenomenon without a sound understanding of gender and in particular how insecure masculinity is. Nevertheless Lynley musing (and Helen's demand) on why he loves her took in surprisingly archaic notions such as "distraction" (a reformulated and slightly dysfunctional version of home as the feminine sphere) and then settled on the fact that she was "oh so sympathetic" so that this useless gnat of a human mind at least had the virtue of focussing on him the supreme (narcissistic) male. Lynley is a curious character for a female to have written because his narcissism is so sympathetically presented. Of course Havers has no lovelife. In all things she must be opposite to and inferior to Lynley. I've been scathing- aspects of this one were good. I liked the positive portrayal of animal activism, I liked that an awful lot! I also really did like that Olivia was such an "outlaw" and was written in a way that stressed the importance (and problem) of agency. Even though the uneducated working class characters (such as Jean and Jimmy and horrible Uncle Derek) were portrayed in such stereotypical ways, there was still a degree of sympathy for their desires and needs in life, and especially for the way family mattered to them. I have read worse.
