Holy Mother of God... I do not know where to begin with this. You see this title, and you look up the book: "Oh, a novel about women and shopping, this is going to be a bore..." Even I had my doubts, and I am an avid reader of Zola, he has yet to disappoint me. And yet, I believe that this may be the best work of his that I have yet to read, perhaps Germinal is slipping through, just... It's still so relevant to today in so many ways, the birth of the super stores and the effect they had and still do on small business. The ethical problems of big business muscling out the small guys unable to adapt, whether it be from financial limitations or due to stubbornness. Female employees being coerced to act on the whim of their male employers; the manipulation of pretty much every possible stakeholder in business only to drive up profits; marrying for money, this book has everything. Readers of Zola will be aware of how gritty and raw he his; he does not hold back on the disastrous effects and ramifications that a world driven by capital and materiality has on his well built (with a strong emphasis on psychological aspects) characters which are more than believable, they come to life. Plenty of ups and downs in this one, you finally get some reprieve, a glimmer of hope, and then the door is slammed in your face. You cannot even make out who is the 'bad' guys are half the time, but I think that was purposeful since we are all human and acting in what we perceive to be our best interests, especially in a dog eat dog world that was Paris in the 1880's with new wealth being generated creating different class interactions. There's so many characters that all have their own story. You feel pity, anger, sorrow, relief, all varying emotions for them as they progress along this story, certainly far from being one-dimensional. The ending seemed a bit too rushed for my liking, however the imagery leading up to it was some of the best I have read in a long time. Business is a machine, and if you get in its' way, you will be dealt with relentlessly. Funnily enough Futurama is on TV now, the episode being where the robots try to take over Earth.
