Reunion is just about the perfect novella. In merely 74 pages, Fred Uhlman captured the blossoming of an adolescent friendship, the end of childhood, and the darkness cast by political and social realities of life in Stuggart, Germany, just before Hitler’s rise to power. Looking back thirty years, the narrator, Hans Schwarz, son of a Jewish doctor, recalls how at age sixteen he had sought the friendship of Konradin Graf von Hohenfels, a distinguished young count from an illustrious and powerful German family. Of their first meeting on a grey, dark, winter’s day in a grammar school, Hans says, ‘He came into my life in February 1932 and never left it again’. These words take on greater poignancy when considered in light of the devastating changes that are to follow. For Hans, ‘this boy... was to be the source of my greatest happiness and greatest despair.’ In his precise and tender prose, Ulhman gave utterance to the beauty of friendship as it unfolds for these two boys, each lonely in his own way. It calls touchingly to mind that phase in adolescence when the need to belong and find acceptance is most pronounced and youths are given to romantic ideals of friendship that demand ‘complete trust, loyalty and self-sacrifice.’ It is wonderful to share the joys of a young friendship. But the winds are changing as Hitler’s influence begins to permeate every corner of German life. Ulhman deliberately kept the political complexities in the background. In the foreground, Hans and Konradin’s friendship bears the brunt of Hitler’s disdain and persecution of the Jewish people. This novella is more than just a Bildungsroman. It is a sterling testament of brotherly affection, love, courage, and integrity. Nowhere in this novella is this more powerfully expressed than in the closing sentence. It left me on the verge of tears. I sat quietly for a long while and pondered why this story is titled Reunion . And then I finally understood. Read Reunion . Ian McEwan hailed it ‘A masterpiece of elegant economy…It is a brilliant work of art that deserves a far wider readership.’ I cannot say it any better.
