Before telenovelas were invented, people were reading feuilleton. Although the first category is mainly addressed at women, both types of media provide entertainment for the masses, through tropes that are easy to understand and have that engaging factor that people of a certain education prefer - lots of action, a little bit of romance, poor vs. rich conflict, justice/ revenge seeking. Féval, Dumas and other authors of the era knew exactly which buttons to push in order to appeal to a large audience and keep them entertained. I was never a fan of novels "de cape et d’épée"; my relationship to the genre stopped at "The Three Musketeers", which I remember liking, but I'm pretty sure most of my memories of the story come from the movies rather than from the book. Féval was never really on my radar and the only reason I have read "Le Bossu" now is because of a challenge. I don't know how I would have perceived the novel had I read it when I was a teenager, but my main opinion now is that it did not age well. As much as I can appreciate what it did for its era, I cannot place it at the same level with other authors who wrote around the same time and whose works are still relevant today. I won't go as far as to say the plot and characters are formulaic, because, at the time they were written, they were not; but thankfully literature has evolved and writers learned how to... well, write. The plot here is pretty much straight forward, predictable, with barely a twist. Féval's characters are cardboard cutouts, empty shells with one or two traits each, to make them discernible. Although I was entertained by the Cocardasse-Passepoil couple, their only role is to the the comic relief; but at least they (and, to some extent, Flor) are recognizable, without even being the heroes of the story. All the while, the hero himself is bland, with no rootable factor, and Aurore disappears just as easily as she appears, one of the least memorable heroines I have encountered. For a book that is mainly based on interior monologues, character development is poor to non-existent and we are told (repeatedly) rather than shown what the characters are like. This book would have bored me to death (and it put me to sleep a few times) had it not been for the occasional humor, mostly provided by the afore-mentioned couple, and for the "love" story - unfortunately, not for the reasons you'd think. For a novel that is supposed to be action-driven, there's little action to speak of. I would have expected that a story about a swordsman were filled with (or at least had some ) fighting/ dueling scenes; there are, but they are brushed over so fast, that the reader has no idea what/ how it happened, except for "he suddenly appeared and three people fell to the ground slashed". It bares no comparison to the detailed fight scenes we see nowadays from the likes of Joe Abercrombie, Mark Lawrence and others - but maybe the comparison is unfair. What we do get, in detail, are the descriptions of streets, buildings, corridors, clothes, and multiple endless monologues speaking of nothing at all or repeating the same things over and over again, with little effect on character construction, unfortunately. If monologues are employed, they at least should be used to build backstories, traits, motivations. Going back to the love story, this is my main pain point. I can understand that, for the era, the relationship between Lagardère and Aurore might have been seen as romantic. But today it is just creepy to have a 40-something man marry his pupil, a girl of 18, whom he had raised since she was a baby and basically washed her, fed her, educated her (Aurore only had a female servant when she became a teenager, before that she was pretty much alone with her adoptive father). This sounds a lot like grooming and just no, nope, creepy. So I guess the only things I somewhat enjoyed about "Le Bossu" are the humor and the historical part. At least Féval took it upon himself to explain the political and economical aspects of Regency France. It's a fair assumption to say I will probably never read this author again, no matter how many times my husband tries to convince me. I came, I tried, I noped.
