There's a meme. Several naked men are waiting in line to have sex with a woman. At the back of the queue is a man holding flowers and the caption reads: don't be the guy with flowers. Well, this novel is all about that man. And it's some of the most egregious ragebait (in book form) I've ever seen. The story is about a couple with two kids going through a separation. She no longer shows affection for him and he suspects an affair which she denies (her first lie) but then later she admits that she's in love with another man but hasn't slept with him yet. The husband wants to know if she still loves him and she says yes (another lie). He wants to know if she intends to leave him and she says it depends. This is the point in the book where I could no longer tolerate her as a character. It's one thing to cheat, to destroy a marriage, but it's another thing to deliberately torture the man and simply make him wait for her lover to decide if he wants her or not (that's what her decision depends on after all). From this point on, she really is just an awful monster with no redeeming features. Franck clearly doesn't want us to view her this way, doing his best to give her a few sympathetic moments, but it's utterly impossible not to. And that's my primary criticism of the book; this isn't literature, it's melodramatic nonsense designed to provoke the reader. Franck is a screenwriter and it shows. He is dealing with heightened emotions, unrealistic people, incomprehensible decisions, and deliberate provocation, all In the hopes of manipulating the audience into a response. It's effective (oh, how I loved to despise this woman!!!) but again... it's not literature. She is simply acting in a manner that is patently causing her husband (and eldest child) pain and does not seem to care in the slightest; meanwhile, he is a wet blanket, an emasculated coward who lets her walk all over him and tries to rationalise his pathetic weasel-like behaviour by pretending he's a good progressive feminist. Franck very wisely makes a point of letting us know that these people are PAINFULLY left-wing, presumably because he knows we won't buy this garbage any other way. Only that kind of insipid progressive would behave the way his characters do (and even that is a stretch). This whole book is an advert for the limp-wristed worldview of the self-loathing bourgeoisie. It's vomit inducing. This book is manipulative to the extreme. But it works. I got a kick out of hating both of them and their banal wine drinking friends. And the writing is quite compelling (a kind of stream of consciousness style) but ultimately, it isn't great work. It's just a fun way to waste a Sunday afternoon. It's a low-brow soap opera with the added steps of being about progressive middle class French people (and therefore more profound and meaningful). But don't fall for it, what you're reading is utter trash.
