This book has been on my radar for quite some time. It is hailed as one of the most important feminists texts in the African literary canon. So Long a Letter is an epistolary novel originally written in French by the Senegalese writer Mariama Bâ. It deals with the condition of women in Senegalese society with a focus on the effects that polygamy has on them. It is a letter that Ramatoulaye Fall, a recently widowed Senegalese woman, writes to her lifelong friend Aïssatou Bâ. She writes of her husband's sudden death (he had a heart attack) and recounts the major events of their life together. The letter is written while Ramatoulaye is going through Iddah, a four month and ten day-long mourning process that Muslim widows in Senegalese culture must follow. And to say that I loved this man passionately, to say that I devoted thirty years of my life to him, to say that I bore his child twelve times. The addition of a rival to my life was not enough for him. By loving another, he burned his past morally and materially, he dared to deny it ... and yet. And yet, what has he done to make me his wife! In the first few letters, Ramatoulaye recalls and describes the emotions that flooded her during the first few days after her husband's death. Then, she transitions in tone and time by discussing the life she had with her husband, from the beginning of their relationship to his betrayal of a thirty year marriage by secretly marrying his daughter's school best friend Binetou and starting a new family with her. In the letters, Ramatoulaye reflects on how she emotionally dealt with and was changed by her husband's betrayal, his death, and by being a single mother of many. Aïssatou seems like the perfect addressee for Ramatoulaye's woes since she experienced a similar martial situation, albeit she left her husband and chose to live on her own after he took up a second wife. On top of discussing the difficulties that polygamous relationships place on women in Senegalese society, Ramatoulaye also touches upon the topics of Senegalese class hierarchy, religion (particularly the role of women in Islam) and feminism. Therefore, the book can also be seen as a challenge to colonialism while also acknowledging colonial practices at the same time, as Ramatoulaye asserts her rights and insists on being heard and no longer silenced. In the letters, the tensions between Ramatoulaye's feminist values (developed largely as a consequence of her French colonial education) and her religion, which is often used a means of justifying the mistreatment of women like herself, is explored. However, Ramatoulaye attributes the mistreatment of women by men to the misinterpretation and misappropriation of Islamic scriptures, rather than suggesting that the scriptures are inherently sexist. Personally, I really liked this book. I loved its clear feminist message, appreciated the beautiful writing style and connected to the strong women that this narrative presented. I was surprised by how easily I was able to connect to Ramatoulaye. Even though her situation couldn't have been different from my own, I immediately felt connected to her and her struggles. I survived. I overcame my shyness at going alone to cinemas; I would take a seat with less and less embarrassment as the months went by. People stared at the middle-aged lady without a partner. I would feign indifference, while anger hammered against by nerves and the tears I held back welled behind my eyes. From the surprised looks, I gauged the slender liberty granted to women. Mariama Bâ managed to make her characters come to life. This is not a suger-coated narrative. It's very real and raw and brutally honest. Ramatoulaye who, after her husband's betrayal, after he literally "forgot" about his first wife and children, had to emancipate herself. There was no other choice for her. She had to live as if she was on her own. Her husband no longer supported her and no longer showed any affection for her. Therefore, she had to become independent. The way Ramatoulaye reflects this process is so interesting because she's so honest. On the one hand, she found a lot of joy and purpose in her new-found freedom. On the other hand, she admits that she also feels extremely lonely, resentful and discouraged. It is as if "an immense sadness breaks within" her. Ramatoulaye also reflects on why she wasn't strong enough to leave her husband when he presented her with his decision to take a second wife after 25 years of marriage. Back then, she didn't feel like she had enough strength to bear the weight of this moral as well as material (financial) responsibility by herself. Mariama Bâ shows how women are trapped in polygamous relationships because it is harder for them to live independently on their own, especially if they have to support many children. And that's where Ramatoulaye's beautiful friendship to Aissatou comes in to play. My God, these two women. They're among my favorite literary friendships of all time. In the book, Mariama Bâ shows how much strength the two got from each other. In a way, So Long a Letter is a love letter to friendship, to the very special bond that women can share. Friendship has splendors that love knows not. It grows stronger when crossed, whereas obstacles kill love. Friendship resists time, which wearies and severs couples. It has heights unknown to love. Aïssatou was one of my favorite characters in this book. She is the one who divorced her husband Mawdo because she did not believe in polygamy. In a scathing letter to him, she explained her actions and never looked back. [That letter, man, I was hollering. She ends it with the words: "I strip myself of your love, of your name. Clothed in the only worthy garment of dignity, I go on my way. Farewell, Aissatou."] She is able to take care of herself and is off well enough that she was also able to buy Ramatoulaye a car, after Modou betrayed her, to make her life much easier. The significance of Aïssatou's actions – a woman starting over on her own – can be felt throughout all the letters. Her divorce is symbolic because it represented a new life for her. Therefore, it isn't surprising that Daba, Ramatoulaye's daughter, sees Aïssatou as a sort of role model. When Daba learns that her father took a second wife, she pleads with Ramatoulaye to leave him. She tells her that she should and can leave him just like Aïssatou left her husband. For me, it was beautiful to see how much Ramatoulaye grew after her husband's death and that she was able to speak her truth and assert her own power. After her husband's death, two men propose to her and Ramatoulaye is able to turn both of them down. It is one of the most powerful moments in the narrative when she reprimands her relatives who want to pressure her into a new marriage: This time I will speak. My voice has known thirty years of silence, thirty years of harassment. It bursts out, violent, sometimes sarcastic, sometimes contemptuous. It is good to see Ramatoulaye so self-determined. She has given herself a voice, moved herself from the margins to the centre. Overall, the novel has quite the positive outlook as Ramatoulaye cherishes her daughters healthy marriage to a man who respects her as a woman and doesn't view her as a "slave" but rather his equal. In regards to its feminist themes, I also appreciated how proud Ramatoulaye was of being a mother. Raising children is something that in most society, also in the West, isn't appreciated as much as it should be. Therefore, it was great to see how proud Ramatoulaye was of loving her twelve children unconditionally and providing for them, even through hardships such as the early pregnancy of her 16-year-old daughter. The only criticism I have of the book is the fact that oftentimes the second wives, Binetou ("rival" of Ramatoulaye and second wife to Modou) and Nabob ("rival" of Aissatou and second wife to Mawdo) were put down. It diminished the feminist message in parts as these women were pitted against each other. It left a bad taste in my mouth that Binetou and Nabou had almost no agency and were described as never being able to be as good as the first wives of these men. Nabou is even referred to as a "chore" to her husband, while Binetou is almost slut-shamed as Ramatoulaye judges her from "going from night club to night club" and marrying a "sugar daddy". It was weird to me that the plight of these so-called second wives was never explored. They suffer as much from a sexist society as all these other women. And it is clearly shown that both Nabou and Binetou were influenced by their communities and that they were driven out of different hardships into these marriages (e.g. in order to escape poverty). This criticism makes it impossible for me to rate this book five stars but apart from it, it is an incredibly interesting and well fleshed out novel that more people should read!
