When I read "The Talented Mr. Ripley" late last year, I was impressed by my first exposure to Patricia Highsmith's writing but also dead certain that I never needed to follow her titular character through any more of his adventures. Tom Ripley, a con artist and murderer, wasn't really my cup of tea. It wasn't any sort of moral objection; I have read about similarly despicable characters with glee, and never once asked myself if I was a bad person for doing so. No, Tom Ripley just struck me as an okay main character but not one that I wanted to spend time with. But then I gave "Ripley Under Ground" a try and realized that Highsmith was doing far more interesting things with Ripley than just "oops, did another murder just now." And so it goes with the third installment, which is the best so far. "Ripley's Game" finds Tom being asked by Reeves Minot to take out some Mafia types in Germany and deciding to have a little fun with it by setting up someone else to do his dirty work. Jonathan Trevanny, an Englishman in France living under the death sentence of leukemia, is the perfect foil for Tom's scheme: he's not sure how long he has, he has a wife and young child who will need financial security when he's gone, and he made the unfortunate mistake of being rude to Tom at a party, thereby putting himself on the con artist's radar. Just for shits and giggles, Tom conspires to set before Jonathan a nest egg's worth of dough if he (Jonathan) becomes an amateur hit-man, and the poor soul takes the bait. But then something strange happens, as we progress onwards: Tom Ripley becomes...sympathetic? I'm shocked at myself for saying it, and it doesn't excuse his actions, but Tom somehow decides to help Jonathan and ends up dooming him despite his best efforts not to do so. Tom disappears from the novel for a while, a d you're wondering as a reader what's going on. But when he reappears, he does so with gusto, and as it turns out he's strangely remorseful for the bind that he's put Jonathan in. It's not a typical trait for this fascinating character, and you almost wonder if it's for show. It may very well be...but you'll have to read the rest of the novel to figure it out for yourself. And even then...you might not land firmly on one side or the other. But yeah, this is the masterpiece of the Ripley saga so far; "Talented" set the table, while "Under Ground" was the appetizer. "Ripley's Game" is the main course, perhaps, or maybe the entrée (I'm not a sophisticated diner, so I could be getting this analogy all wrong). My main point is, this novel delivers on the promise of a character who continues to evolve and, while still displaying sociopathic behavior, grow into a protagonist who is not one-note at all. Tom Ripley is charming at times, even while doing despicable things. And "Ripley's Game" serves as a reminder of what a joy it is to see a writer firing on all cylinders. I can't wait to read the final two books of the series, though I also plan to luxuriate in the feeling that "Ripley's Game" gives me. Tom Ripley contains multitudes, as it turns out; none of them are admirable, but none of them are boring, either.
