Really a remarkable book; my review will NOT do it justice. This sat on my shelf for awhile because I was intimidated by the topic. Shusaku Endo is one of my favorite authors, but his tone and themes typically take a much more melancholy look at life than many other authors. Perhaps you've seen the movie Silence, directed by the great Martin Scosese, with Liam Neeson, Andrew Garfield, and Adam Driver. This is based on a book by the same author, and its friggin sweet as well. Endo is a Japanese Catholic author, which is a rare and unique combination. Fittingly, one of his major themes in most of his works and this one as well, is the ability for Japanese society to authentically and naturally accommodate and integrate the Christian religion (without all of its additional western trappings). In many of his earlier works, he seems to believe in the possibility , while narrating the deep cultural and psychological difficulties of actually engaging the reality of it. His characters are never heroes, but individuals, people with problems deep set in their psyches from past trauma, current despair, relationship setbacks or personal failings. The advantage is a novel that is meaningful, insightful and relatable; the downside is that they can feel discouraging (because very often, life is). His portrayals of the Christian perspective on life are not glossy, easy or typical of the American idea. Apostasy, abandonment, cross-cultural confusion, historical impact on truth-claims, addiction, personal pride...these ingredients pepper the Christian existence for the faithful follower of Christ, who, in Endo's eyes, is typified by this verse more than any other: "[Jesus] was despised and rejected by mankind, a man of suffering, and familiar with pain. Like one from whom people hide their faces he was despised, and we held him in low esteem." With this as a central thrust, Endo emphasizes the themes of rejection, servanthood and sacrifice, and universal compassion as his character come to understand and align themselves with Christian ideas in a very complex and antagonistic world. (Like seriously, think about that verse just one minute. How different would American Christianity - or Roman Christianity, or YOUR Christianity - be, if that was the verse you always came back to, and judged everything else by? What if that verse represented the Church more than any other? What if I had the commitment to pursue that lifestyle above all else? yeesh, right?) This book was his last, and is particularly interesting to me. From a literary perspective, he is a master storyteller and effortlessly weaves four or five plotlines of important characters throughout the novel - together, a group of Japanese tourists travel to the Ganges in India. Although none are particularly religious, each is seeking some sort of emotional and existential relief from the burdens of life. Most of them are quite taken aback when they come to realize that the primary religion surrounding them in India is not their own Buddhism, but Hinduism. The stories are special and sad, and we care deeply for the characters while we observe their search for self-understanding and some sense of freedom from pain. There are some unique plot-twists and overlaps and it moves at a very steady pace for so serious a book. The Hindu religion and the Ganges provide a suitable context for the novel's thematic excursions, but also as a peek behind the curtain at Endo's own ideas. As the characters travel to a distant land with different religions ideas and socioeconomic dividers, they experience personal enlightenment in unexpected ways. In all of his writings, Endo considers the compatibility between his Japanese cultural identity and his Christian theological persuasion, and it seems that his convictions have developed as well. As the main character Otsu is constantly kicked out of seminaries because of his eastern-leaning beliefs (tending towards pantheism or a religiously functional relativism), we see glimpses of Endo's own struggles to successfully assimilate the western-influenced ideas of Christianity into his own more open eastern mindset. Many other reviewers have concluded that he may've abandoned his original Christian convictions, but I think that Endo, as always, has not necessarily arrived to any conclusions, but has merely expanded his understanding of God's involvement in the world and has taken a more global vision. Otsu remains loyal to his own spiritual connection while acknowledging God's presence in traditions that are not his own (he finds community with Hindu monks and takes part in their traditional practices of caring for the destitute caste in India). In similar fashion, I wonder if Endo also recognizes the active engagement of the Christian God through other traditions - keeping in mind the close knit relationship religion, culture and history play together, which has plagued and provoked his thought in the past. If you are interested in the inward journey of individuals as they navigate through particularly challenging, lonely, and even shattering situations, this book may offer a lot of validation and insight for you. I am a Christian, but I am also often conflicted by the reality of infinite perspectives and possibilities (seriously, what is anything? is anything anything?). I am also acutely aware of how one's own personal upbringing and cultural conception of reality colors everything, and this makes me wonder if true change is possible at any level of one's being. This book, while offering no attempts at answers or answers themselves, allowed me to embrace others on that same journey of self-realization and redemption and reconsider my own activities, existence and aims. If you want to read a book with a lot of action scenes or obvious answers, I would not recommend this at all.
