Having just finished a buddy read of Emile Zola’s The Ladies Paradise, I am in general agreement that this is a flawed four star book. Call it 3.5 with a major round up. Paradise is listed as the eleventh book in the “Rougon-Macquart" series, and is the sequel to Pot-Bouille, translated as Pot Luck in my English edition. In Pot Luck we are introduced to Octave Mouret, an aspiring barely middle class snot who marries his way into the ownership of a store, The Ladies Paradise. His wife and owner of this shop dies, falling into a hole that will become part of the reborn new invention, The Ladies’ Paradise modern Department store. In this book Marat has built and continues to rebuild his newly invented store into a machine that industrializes the process of sales. Into this set up arrives a new thread bare, overburdened young county mouse, Denise Baudu. Between these three characters, The Store, its, owner and its new, over matched, innocent girl Zola builds his novel. Ladies’ Paradise is the result of fives years of Zola making a close study of the two department stores then making their debut in Paris. He relates to us with meticulous and exciting detail all of the inner mechanics and machination of this new living eating thing, the Department store. With equal parts resignation and road side accident curiosity he notes the effect of the new way of selling as a destructive, if un-stoppable force in retail. Local small stores of whatever age, tradition or hopes are bought out, literally undermined or simply withered under the effects of mass marketing, price wars and capitalistic competition. There are hints of back door deal making, but ultimately the success of the huge box store is that the small guys cannot compete. This should sound familiar in our age of internet based marketing challenging the big box, brick and mortar retailer. Zola takes us from the board rooms to the shipping rooms where we meet the staff and in the internal workings of this company as a living presence. Staff is alternatively, slick, seductive, conniving, sincere, submissive and fearful. Employee rights and benefits are not yet meaningful terms and arbitrary hire fire and promotion keeps people complicit, when they are not working to cut each other out. The great lie of the store is that it presents the promise that everything is about and for its predominately female fan base, that is customer. In fact, this promise is itself the deliberate cover for schemes, psychological machinations and applications of marketing over substance. Women are not so much the masters of this place as its pray. Women are intended to happily desire to feed their money into its always hungry maw. With Denise we get to see and feel the conflicts of a well meaning every woman. She has personal loyalties towards her family and friends from the world of traditional retail. She will have to chose to stay with these loyalties or her apparently instinctive grasp that the department store and its new way of selling is the future. She is also romantically inclined toward her boss’s boss’s boss, Octave Mouret. He will also become attracted to her given she is one of thousands of employees and several concurrent mistresses. It is the conflict represented by this may or may not be consummated romance that much of the human based plot is based. This is also the weakest part of the novel. We know Octave to be a serial womanizer and large-scale manipulator of women. Denise is not just innocent but highly principled, consciously, and conscientiously virginal. Given all of this what is a happy ending? It was the consensus of the buddy read that this ending is, facile less than credible and perhaps incomplete. For all, Zola is a good story teller. There is much of fact in his fiction. At least as it relates to the Store. The Ladies’ Paradise can be an exciting read, something few would associate with the story of a department store. There are several levels of human drama, most well presented. It is only in the resolution of the central human drama that our group of readers found disapointment.
