(Note : there may be a few spoilerish things here, just saying) Julien Sorel is a handsome young peasant with a freakish memory. He doesn’t like his daddy and his brothers because they beat him up all the time. Like actually, not metaphorically. WORKING CLASS HERO : JOHN LENNON They hurt you at home and they hit you at school They hate you if you're clever and they despise a fool But I memorised the whole of the New Testament in Latin So I think I’m pretty cool So he impresses some priest with his huge memory and the priest gets him a job as a tutor for the local mayor Monsieur de Rênal, who has a hot wife. STACY’S MOM : FOUNTAINS OF WAYNE Stacy, do you remember when I mowed your lawn? (mowed your lawn) Your mom came out with just a towel on (towel on) I could tell she liked me from the way she stared (way she stared) And the way she said, "you missed a spot over there" (a spot over there) Things get real steamy with Madame de Rênal's wife MAD ABOUT THE BOY : DINAH WASHINGTON Will it ever cloy This odd diversity of misery and joy I'm feeling quite insane and young again And all because I'm mad about the boy Like, he is only 19 and she’s like 30 at least. So there’s that. Anyway, after some shagtastic weeks the secret gets out and Julien has to vamoose. So his next career move is to a seminary which is a name for where they train to be priests, yeah, like mind-blowingly dull. His blazingly good looks and enormous memory don’t win him any friends, and he has like the worst time. So then he gets a break, he’s recommended to some local aristocrat and lands a gig as this guy’s secretary. The family name of these aristos is de la Mole, which is funny because they are not moles. Anyway guess what there is a hot daughter Mathilde and she takes one look at Julien and she is all CALL ME MAYBE : CARLY RAE JEPSEN Your stare was holding Ripped jeans, skin was showin' Hot night, wind was blowin' Where you think you're going baby? Naturally Julien does not object to this frou-frou babealiciousness but at the same time is appalled and horrified at the crass materialism of French aristo life PRICE TAG : JESSIE J Seems like everybody's got a price I wonder how they sleep at night When the sale comes first And the truth comes second It's not about the money money money We don't need your money money money Forget about the price tag Ain't about the uh cha-ching cha-ching Ain't about the yeah b-bling b-bling So Mr Mole gets Julien involved in some political stuff that I frankly couldn’t follow. This part is skippable. Anyway, this Julien and Mathilde thing is going on and of course shagging the boss’s daughter is always a turn on UPTOWN GIRL : BILLY JOEL I'm in love with an uptown girl You know I've seen her in her uptown world She's getting tired of her high class toys And all the presents from her uptown boys And one thing leads to another and before you can say Papa Don’t Preach, yes, she’s up the duff. Mr Mole is not pleased but he does the right thing and stumps up, showers Julien with ducats or louises or whatever they used for money, and everything looks tickety boo but then along comes a letter from Stacy’s mom and kind of wrecks the whole situation, saying all these awful things about our Julien. When he finds out about the letter what does he do… yeah that’s right WOKE UP THIS MORNING : ALABAMA 3 When you woke up this morning Everything was gone By half past ten your head was going Ding-dong ringin' like a bell From your head down to your toes Like some voice tryin' to tell you There's somethin' you should know Woke up this mornin' Got yourself a gun He jumps on a horse, which they used to do, and goes and buys some guns, which they still do. NOW READ ON
