“‘I've thought of a wonderful way to start a forest fire,' Tom said musingly as they were having coffee.” “There's no such thing as a perfect murder,” Tom said to Reeves. “That's just a parlor game, trying to dream one up.” Ripley’s Game, the third (of five) in Patricia Highsmith's series featuring the talented sociopath Tom Ripley, seemed a little familiar to me as I proceeded through it, though I knew it was my first time reading the book. I looked up films based on it and realized Wim Wenders’ The American Friend was an adaptation of it, a great and noir-ish film I had seen and liked when it came out in the seventies, featuring Dennis Hopper as Ripley. Then I saw that it was adapted into a film featuring John Malkovich, a film Roger Ebert loved, and one I’ll see soon. I like Matt Damon as Ripley best, I think, as Damon has that boyish innocence about him, and so in the first book and film you are surprised by his turn into a killer. In all later books his character and motivation are well established, so we expect his behavior and get it. A couple familiar things about the story include that it is a sort of 1974 version of Breaking Bad, as one of the two main characters, Jonathan, has leukemia, and gets involved--thanks to the game-playing of Ripley-- in a kill-for-hire scheme in order to make a lot of money for his beloved wife Sophie and his son George before he dies. In addition, there’s a Dexter connection in that Ripley and his puppet Jonathan take on an Italian mafia family. One unusual thing about this book is that Ripley is not part of the story for almost sixty pages, as Jonathan Trevanny, an art framer, takes center stage. Like Ripley himself, and Bernard Tufts, the forger in book two, (and so many of Highsmith's characters) Jonathan woulld seem to be an "ordinary" good guy who makes a bad but on some level reasonable decision, gets quickly in over his head, drawn into “evil” like a drug; it’s a dark view of nature that doesn't assume economically disadvantaged and "insane" people commit crimes. Everyone is a potential member of the Depravity Club. What I don’t like: the loss of that surprise we had in the first book; now we know he is a sociopath, and that he’ll do anything to satisfy his need. I also liked the ambivalence of the first book where Ripley is clearly bisexual; we see he likes Dickie Greenleaf, and we sense the tension in him about this and the sense of rejection Tom feels when Dickie seems to choose his girlfriend over Tom. In the second and third books the more explicit references to bisexuality seem to be gone--Tom is happily but shallowly married to Heloise--though I can see how his close connections with men, including to Jonathan in this book, might be interpreted as bisexual attractions, though Highsmith denied Ripley was gay, and there is nothing explicit in this text to necessarily suggest sexual tension between them. Jonathan and Tom are very close at various points, though, and Jonathan’s wife Sophie increasingly resents their destructive relationship. I still like the nuanced psychological view of a damaging friendship between Tom and Jonathan. *I don’t like the assumption that Tom and Jonathan can defend themselves from an attack by an old Italian mafia family. Hey, seen The Godfather?! But okay, I let it go. *I like how for the first time someone in these Ripley books--Sophie, Jonathan’s wife-- believes not a word Ripley says, isn’t having any of his smooth lies. *I like the references in the second and third books to previous incidents such as the death of Dickie Greenleaf and the paintings of Derwatt. The threats from the past--revelations of possible guilt--are always part of the suspense. This is a very well-written book, over all, where the middle-aged Rip draws a good younger man into his cabal.
