After thinking about this overnight, I've had a change of mind about a few things. -1) This is a murder mystery to be solved by experienced Inspectors and Detectives. Lynley actually says, "You can't be expected to anticipate evidence." So Scotland Yard doesn't train their employees to look for blood, footprints, clothing fiber, etc? Good grief, no surprise that there is no actual ending in this book (but one can make a pretty good guess and in the real world, not every crime is fully solved), Lynley is seems incompetent at times. Warning: if you like a black/white ending, don't read this novel. Cereally. -2) I know nothing about the game of cricket. The author had 621 pages to tell me something, anything. (The murder victim is a famous cricket player). After reading my first Dick Francis novel, I learned a ton of stuff about horse-racing and found it exciting. George either knows nothing about cricket or assumes the reader does. Either way, the book fails in this regard. Hilariously, she thanks people for educating her about cricket in her "Acknowledgments" section. Too bad she didn't pass that information on to the reader. -3) Often, the author just writes and writes about the same thing. At one point, George pens, "I don't need to tell you of Kenneth's success." Then she spends two pages writing about it. She DID need to tell us the story of Kenneth's background, so why deny that it's a vital part of the story? -4) Helen, Lynley's great love, actually puts a tin of vichyssoise in a microwave (among other airhead issues that match Lynley's) because she doesn't like cold potato soup. Perhaps George is saying that Helen and Lynley are pulling each other down. There are many problems in their relationship, after all. -5) Chris-a guy living on a barge- awakens and realizes "he needed to pee s0 badly that his dick (an oft used term in this book) was practically seeking out the toilet without his assistance." Okay, sorta funny, gotta go! Perfectly natural, a universal issue. THEN, finally, 2 pages later...he is still sorta eyeing the bathroom. No, NO, no. -6) I don't mind that this is a very dark book with rotten, ugly people. I've read darker ("A Little Life" for example) but have usually been rewarded with some kind of redemption for someone. No redemption here. -7) Oh, there HAD to be a chase scene lasting for what seemed like hours (about 500 pages) until one just doesn't much care. Cops, walls, deadends, gates everywhere. The goal is to grab young 16 y/o Jimmy- and it feels like every cop, Lynley and his side kick Barbara are racing around London as if George had to name hundreds of streets and places in L0ndon. I, personally, thought the chase scene through the Queen's bedroom in Buckingham Palace on the unbelievable side.* But I liked it when everyone climbs the Tower and takes Olympic level dives into the freezing cold Thames. I gave Barbara's triple lux backward dive a 10.** -7) The author punishes, horribly, sexually active people. The message: if you like to have sex cause it's fun then you either are murdered or get a terrible disease. If you don't much like sex but mess around on occasion, George may let you live. MAYBE, but sex=bad. In 1994, 30 years after the sexual revolution? In her last book, sex was fun, baby, fun. Shagadelica! But there are 619 pages in this edition, and maybe an issue such as the above every 50 or so pages that really stick out and bring the story to a screech halt. So I'll generously take only a point off, so far, so we are at 2 stars. Maybe these are all comic elements, intentional. Now: +1) Barbra Havers' story continues to enthrall. She is Lynley's smarter-half, and she's a brilliant creation. She's real, she struggles financially and isn't beautiful (on the outside), and apparently she doesn't have sex cause no one has killed her yet or given her an awful disease. There is a great scene where Lynley, of true nobility, visits Havers at her very humble abode. +2 Then there is Jimmy, a sixteen y/o boy who worshipped his famous athlete/dad Kenneth, and is perfectly portrayed: his monumental actions and sacrifices might just bring tears to one's eyes. Jimmy's mom, Jean, is stunned to see that her Jimmy is turning into a man. (But she isn't much surprised to find that both Jimmy and a younger brother masturbate a lot-Kenneth perhaps has y been clear on the subject, or she's just a good mom who gets it.) And oh, does Jimmy hurt because of what he feels he must do. And how Lynley uses Jimmy is simply cruel. +3 Kenneth, who we hardly get to know, is a very smart, top-of-his-classes, ambitious student used and abused by a teacher. His early death is agonizing on several levels and for everyone in the book. After all, sports stars are the heroes for many, and have been since television showed them to us starting in the 1950s. +4 Then there is Olivia. And the people involved in ARM, an organization saving animals from 'experimentation.'. And these animals, with their spines intentionally broken (and worse) dovetail perfectly into one character's descent into illness. This issue might make this book unreadable for some people. +5 Then there is a darn good story here. Lots of red herrings, like in any good murder mystery. You may guess the villain early on - some red herrings are clearly real clues. Yes, an excellent 300 page not-so-cozy-British-murder-detection story. And not a single gossipy girl's school, vicar, body in the library, secret passageway, etc. So many tropes avoided. So I must give George a perfect 5-star rating for her often stupendous characterizations. And minus 1 star for the stumbles that should have been edited out. There are very few epic murder mysteries. Eco's "The Name of the Rose" is one, and it's about half the length of "Ashes". Christie's epic, globe-trotting "Orient Express" runs about 200 pages and turns to an equally non-ending but oh-so-satisfying one. (If you've read it, you know what I mean. If not, you must!) At 621 pages, "Ashes" is, yes, a door-stopper. And I gotta read another, I'm hooked on Havers. Helen and Lynley? Dumb as doorknobs sometimes: they are super rich and sometimes it seems they don't belong in these novels. George, please, put Helen on a cruise, send Lynley back to 'Detective School" and move on! Besides, what is it with Lynley and his butler, Denton, and the constant playing of "Phantom of the Opera"? I LOVED that show, George sorta trashes it. Methinks she's a bit jealous. Me too, imagine the profits. Using my usual scale: CAST - 5 stars. ATMOSPHERE - 3 stars. *Didn't happen in the book, but it could have been edited out. **Some people do take a dive into the Thames. But still just a tad too much time is spent on this element. CRIME- 5 stars. Unusual method, the victim is basically a good guy but a used and abused great athlete, the suspects are many but slowly dwindle. INVESTIGATION -4 stars. Barb is on top of things, (Lynley a bit slow on the uptake and his entire interaction with the vulnerable Jimmy just wrong but you know things like this happen). But it's the reaction of the investigation by the characters that is fascinating. RESOLUTION- 4 stars, very debatable. I say Lynley doesn't close the case (toward the end he says he may not be able to), others may say he does indeed. But, oh, if he does close the case, at least 4 character;s lives are impacted horribly. Summary - 4.2. Even for its faults, my favorite of the series so far. George is a very good writer, and I think there is a 5 star novel right around the corner in this series.
