Darkest humor and cannily written. And it is hilariously funny in spots. It reminds me of a cutting and yet spot on era work of Stephen King. It's not horror, but yet it is. The first half I enjoyed far more than the second. And not because of the tension within the horrific events in town over the swimming pool integration, nor even with the macabre details of the Tupperware container's innards or the escapades they traveled. It was something else that made me completely uneasy. Whatever that something is (for a feeling descriptive word)- it is nearly identical to what I felt when I read Stephen King's IT. It was way too over the top nasty in base imagination for me. Funny to a point, and then all of a sudden, not at all funny. Not at all funny enough to give me a stomachache. Most of these characters are extremely well drawn. As is the town and the funeral home arrangements for precision detailing. Poor Mabel! Both Dove and Chester, completely of that time. As were the kids all around. Some of their amusements and habits absolutely authentic. You did not need to be in Alabama to harness bugs. It wasn't my habit, but my brother did it all the time. I recall having a son with an attached caterpillar "train" once, too. Boys. But most of Lucille's story that occurred on the road after New Mexico? That "men met and used" made me queasy, rather than made me laugh. And the ending for her was not what I expected. For me it lost at least 1/2 a star. Meemaw's and Peejoe's stories were the best parts of the book. At least a 4 star. But the shootings, the fire, the riot, and Milton! All of that, it brought back very bad memories. Riots are not funny. When an author makes them funny, something in me just cringes. I've been there with Peter, and it sure isn't a laugh. That someone CAN laugh about the entire in such a way, so much later? If you are in a safe place where difference doesn't often entail some form of baiting or violence encouraged, I guess it's altered? And that kind of "make believe" can seem far more funny to read about. Particularly shooting through walls or kicking people when they are down.
