I've read enough of Patricia's Highsmith's oeuvre now to start to pick apart her obsessions, the main one being the relationship between two men, one a sociopath and the other a would-be sociopath, a sociopath in training, or at least a man fascinated with the dark side. This is one of such novels. The morality is a little trickier here, largely because the wife of the innocent man is made out so deliberately to be the antagonist. The husband Jonathan Trevanny longs for adventure, which plays out in unleashing his repressed and timid nature in the jouissance of a bloodbath, but it's sadder than the other novels because he is basically a decent man, neither vain and ostentatiously wealthy like Dickie Greenleaf nor ridiculous and self-dramatizing like Bernard Tufts, so the fallout for him feels more tragic. A few weeks back I read a novel written by Elisabeth Sanxay-Holding titled "The Death Wish," about two men with a desire to murder their wife: one a relative innocent and the other a sociopath, the innocent man intrigued by and wishing to emulate the sociopath's actions. Right after this, by pure coincidence, I read Highsmith's "The Blunderer," which employs exactly the same premise. All of Sanxay-Holding's novels contain women who are victimized by sociopathic men who are fools and monsters and deserve to be locked away, following conventional morality. I have seen none of this morality in any Highsmith novel, but it's at least clear in her novels such as "The Blunderer, " "This Sweet Sickness," and "The Talented Mr. Ripley" that there is a horror to the sociopathic mind and that we are meant to shudder at it. In "Ripley's Game," by contrast, we are so much in the sociopathic point of view that the would-be moral center, Trevanny's wife Simone, is just a boring antagonist, a spoilsport, a killjoy, a prude, a wet blanket. We're bored when we're in the mind of the upright citizen Jonathan Trevanny, and excited when we flip to the point of view of the sociopathic Ripley. We are along for the joyride and, like the innocent Trevanny, we are made complicit. We see Ripley as a hero, just as Trevanny increasingly does, and we see people of normal psychology like Simone as boring and uptight. The path to moral corruption is neatly laid out in Highmith's clever literary game, and she corrupts the reader in the process. I was slightly sick by the end at having been tricked into complicity with the monster Tom Ripley. He's so self-assured, so confident, so cool! How boring to not want dead bodies littering the floor of one's bourgeois flat and to have to invent clever stories to the police to explain them away! Highsmith's writing was ahead of its time, because today we're all sociopaths-in-training. I believe that at the time of the book's publication, the horror of having been tricked into identifying with Ripley and forced to see him as a hero would be obvious as literary irony. Today, not so much.
