I find it interesting to review this rather traditional, contemplative novel, which is less sentimental in nature than its title suggests. Endo writes about the opportunistic, somewhat repulsive student Yoshioka and his brief romantic encounter with Mitsu, an innocent and naive girl from the countryside. Yoshioka entices Mitsu into having a sexual relationship, but then proceeds to 'ghost' her, to use the more contemporary term. What is only a brief fling for Yoshioka, clearly has more meaning for Mitsu. Yoshioka finds a job, chases other women and tries to make the best of his situation, whereas Mitsu slowly slides down the social ladder, only to ultimately find herself at the absolute bottom. She leaves traces of herself wherever she goes, in case Yoshioka decides to come looking for her after all. Endo's fascination for catholic themes like sacrifice and forgiveness are everywhere in this novel. The Dutch titel for this book, 'the girl I left behind', suggests some sort of regret coming from Yoshioka - regret that is remarkably absent throughout. There is a wistful sense of relativity emanating from every page - as Mitsu says, 'it does not really matter if I am here or somewhere else'. Endo uses Yoshioka and Mitsu as puppets who deal with this absence of direction and perspective in a very different way. Yoshioka seeks to make progress, but is obviously stunted in how he deals with human relationships, being unable to fuse his sexual desires with his own personal relationships. Mitsu, on the other hand, is stuck looking into the past. The only way for her to move forward, is to overcome this defining encounter with Yoshioka she had years earlier. It is interesting to see how Endo turns this rather simple story into a novel with moral undertones, veering away from romanticism or sentimentality. As Yoshioka (rightfully?) says, towards the end of the story - my actions towards Mitsu weren't perfect, but were they remarkable in any kind of way? Endo produces a thought-provoking ending, but for me, it was not enough to cover up a novel which had some basic flaws in storytelling. It could have been done more elegantly, and I feel that some of the themes in this book translate badly into a more modern perspective. I also have some problems with the character Yoshioka - to put it bluntly, he's a jerk, and it doesn't help the book forward. Perhaps I am also just a bit disappointed at the lack of emotion in this book. This, in itself, is not new in my reading of Japanese literature. Still. Any way, I'm not going to digress too much, tempting as it may be. Not a bad book, by any means, but likely one that I will not remember for any specific reason.
