Isidore-Lucien Ducasse, the author's real name, lived during the mid-19th century without an Internet, television, movies or cable (without even the Scifi Channel, home of the 'Sharknado' http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2724064/ and '30 Days of Night' http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0389722/ movies. (Comte de Lautreamont is a pseudonym.) I have a point in including these two movies - Ducasse creates a famous shark scene, and there is a scene of a spider sucking blood from a dreamer's neck in ‘The Songs of Maldoror’. 'The Songs of Maldorer', a historic must-read literature opus of horrors, is a slog to read through despite the really truly subversive and gruesome subject matter. The narrator is likely a demonic being? He tortures and kills male children, cuts up people after murdering them, shoots swimmers escaping from a shipwreck, disses god almighty himself, even spying on god while lovemaking (which actually isn't as interesting as it sounds - hint hint: too too weird and ickily written)? Admittedly, the S&M scenes ARE still often stomach-turning and blasphemous, even by today’s standards of what comprises our horror genre. However, the author writes in an inventive style of his own with such nebulous and confusingly unique grammar that it makes the reading of this 'classic' a chore. Originally written in French, there are four English translations - I liked this one best of the two I read/skimmed. However, although individual sentences often sing with glory, even in translation, and some particular nightmarish descriptions of the narrator's activities have apparently sent generations of readers into ecstatic creative productions of Surreal Art, the only reason for anyone to attempt reading this book would be out of curiosity or for a Literature class. It is strictly a 'History of the Novel' read. There is a lot of expert guessing online about the author and his purpose in writing this unique book - was it transformed from real events or was it all imagination? The horror stories we see now every day on cable television, with vivid graphic gore being commonplace and accessible to us sitting in our living-rooms, could only be known to Ducasse either through conversation, pictures, books or in having seen or done something similar in real life. I think this book is the work of a juvenile, or perhaps a schizophrenic, mind - intelligent and educated, a young man playing at being a 19th-century male goth. Or he was simply unable to control the fantasies and images which may have been assaulting him. I think it is possible the author actually did some of these things (in a manner without the fantasy elements of his book) or saw them done. Heavy use of alcohol/drugs give a schizophrenic or psychotic madness to thoughts and dreams, too. I was sure that the author had to be in bad health when he wrote this; when I read his bio (what there is), apparently his health may have been as bad as I guessed it was in reading the novel- even if it was from starving to death because of Napoleon's war - but I suspect he was maybe diseased as well. Syphilis, perhaps? In any case, he died at age 24. ""Ducasse was born in Montevideo, Uruguay, to François Ducasse, a French consular officer, and his wife Jacquette-Célestine Davezac. Very little is known about Isidore's childhood, except that he was baptized on 16 November 1847 in the cathedral of Montevideo and that his mother died soon afterwards, probably due to an epidemic. In 1851, as a five-year-old, he experienced the end of the eight-year Siege of Montevideo in the Argentine-Uruguayan War. He was brought up to speak three languages: French, Spanish and English. In October 1859, at the age of thirteen, he was sent to high school in France by his father. He was trained in French education and technology at the Imperial Lycée in Tarbes. In 1863 he enrolled in the Lycée Louis Barthou in Pau, where he attended classes in rhetoric and philosophy (under and uppergreat). He excelled at arithmetic and drawing and showed extravagance in his thinking and style. Isidore was a reader of Edgar Allan Poe and particularly favored Percy Bysshe Shelley and Byron, as well as Adam Mickiewicz, Milton, Robert Southey, Alfred de Musset and Baudelaire. During school he was fascinated by Racine and Corneille, and by the scene of the blinding in Sophocles' Oedipus the King. According to his schoolmate Paul Lespès, he displayed obvious folly "by self-indulgent use of adjectives and an accumulation of terrible death images" in an essay. After graduation he lived in Tarbes, where he started a friendship with Georges Dazet, the son of his guardian, and decided to become a writer. After a brief stay with his father in Montevideo, Ducasse settled in Paris at the end of 1867. He began studies at the École Polytechnique, only to abandon them one year later. Continuous allowances from his father made it possible for Ducasse to dedicate himself completely to his writing. He lived in the "Intellectual Quarter", in a hotel in the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Victoires, where he worked intensely on the first canto of Les Chants de Maldoror. It is possible that he started this work before his passage to Montevideo, and also continued the work during his ocean journey. Ducasse was a frequent visitor to nearby libraries, where he read Romantic literature, as well as scientific works and encyclopaedias. The publisher Léon Genonceaux described him as a "large, dark, young man, beardless, mercurial, neat and industrious", and reported that Ducasse wrote "only at night, sitting at his piano, declaiming wildly while striking the keys, and hammering out ever new verses to the sounds". In late 1868, Ducasse published (anonymously and at his own expense) the first canto of Les Chants de Maldoror a booklet of thirty-two pages which is considered by many to be a bold, taboo-defying poem concerning pain and cruelty."" The above information is from the following Wikipedia article: http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comte_... The historical record explains this book enchanted many artists who later read this book. Presto! The Surrealist Movement was born! http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surrea... The below quote in particular is relevant: "Because Surrealist writers seldom, if ever, appear to organize their thoughts and the images they present, some people find much of their work difficult to parse. This notion however is a superficial comprehension, prompted no doubt by Breton's initial emphasis on automatic writing as the main route toward a higher reality. But—as in Breton's case—much of what is presented as purely automatic is actually edited and very "thought out". Breton himself later admitted that automatic writing's centrality had been overstated, and other elements were introduced, especially as the growing involvement of visual artists in the movement forced the issue, since automatic painting required a rather more strenuous set of approaches. Thus such elements as collage were introduced, arising partly from an ideal of startling juxtapositions as revealed in Pierre Reverdy's poetry. And—as in Magritte's case (where there is no obvious recourse to either automatic techniques or collage)—the very notion of convulsive joining became a tool for revelation in and of itself. Surrealism was meant to be always in flux—to be more modern than modern—and so it was natural there should be a rapid shuffling of the philosophy as new challenges arose. Surrealists revived interest in Isidore Ducasse, known by his pseudonym Comte de Lautréamont, and for the line "beautiful as the chance meeting on a dissecting table of a sewing machine and an umbrella", and Arthur Rimbaud, two late 19th-century writers believed to be the precursors of Surrealism." Many Literature readers and literary critics of ancient Canon/Great Books adore these intelligent, talented, and often drugged-out addicts and/or alcoholic, usually male (millennia of prejudice meant women were often forbidden to read anything but their religious books, if they could read at all) writers of genius. Their lifestyle invariably involves abuse of wives and children and prostitutes, while living in decrepit attics with excrement literally on the floors. Insects crawled on them in their stupefied sleep. They starved from having spent whatever cash they had on alcohol/drugs. Some of these drug-alcohol-fueled authors ARE very good, and worthy of being respected as great writers (if not family guys). Some seem to have become totally psychotic and took up a pen while blitzed or while having an episode of mental derangement. The world of mostly male Literature experts applauds wildly and buys every copy printed. Is it of value? Reluctantly, I say yes. At worst we females gain insight to the male mind. At best, some really wonderful books are written. But this isn't one of those wonderful books. It is horrible on several levels. (As another example of Great Things developed from the lowest common denominator, many of the American college boys who went to Mexico hoping to duplicate the experiences of or only after reading 'On the Road' by Jack Kerouac, a book which was about seeking to have sex with Mexican child prostitutes and hassle-free 24-hour drug use, went on to write really good books, inspired by Kerouac’s excellent writing, his honesty, and the sex/drug lifestyle. It seems Kerouac’s admirers, mostly male, either refuse to see or talk about Kerouac’s actual message in writing the book, which was about how destructive his life had been to himself and everyone around him. Some Kerouac admirers have gone on to be Genius Artists.) The religious and moral hypocrisy in most societies is the target of Ducasse’s most infamous book, written in a very personal expression of his agony and ecstasy in being morally depraved. To me, Ducasse appropriated the style of writing from the book of Revelations in the Bible. His main character (characters?) wrote from the viewpoint of being followers of Lucifer. The author placed his nightmarish scenes (dreams?) in his contemporary Paris. He includes particularly revolting religious imagery one being god shagging a prostitute and leaving behind a long hair which jumps around, which our demon lover finds and decides to lecture . The idea was perhaps of creatively and satirically attempting to toss the conventions of writing a story into the fire (particularly in the grammar rules which identify the subject, i.e. 'I, you, me, they', so that there is a struggle by the reader to understand which narrator is speaking). I understand the intellectual point of writing about these subjects. I can imagine the shock of a 19th-century reader capable of reading and perhaps bored with the usual religious pap, and for the intellectual, the mental stimulation, the excitement of a new creative invention of the imagination. However, for a 21st-century reader, this book is a tremendous bore because of the style of writing. I think there are lots of satirical transformations of other authors' philosophical writings and stories of the era included (I saw references on the Net from experts who say that Ducasse stole entire sections of material, verbatim, from other books of the time), but if so, there was almost nothing I found funny, clever or interestingly done. There are TWO moments of interest: "Throughout my life, I have seen narrow-shouldered men, without a single exception, committing innumerable stupid acts, brutalizing their fellows and perverting their souls by every means. They call the motive for their actions glory. On seeing these spectacles, I wanted to laugh with the others, but such a strange imitation was impossible, so I took a sharp-edged penknife and slit my flesh in the two places my lips joined." First Canto, near the beginning. omg. The source for Heath Ledger's Joker in 'The Dark Knight'?!?!? http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0468569/ Also, another scene seems to cause EvERY reader a bit of a chuckle - our evil ringmaster has sex with a female shark, his equal in depravity and thus a soulmate. In the entire book, these two short brief scenes/descriptions were the ONLY paragraphs that woke me up and caught my interest. I am an atheist, an ex-Christian. I get it - the author's disappointed with God, or perhaps realizing religion is based on foundations of fog and mist and fictional imagination, and the forever social moral hypocrisy of all human communities, from small villages to sophisticated cities. This is a self-discovery with a pain striking at the heart in multi-dimensions. It IS horrifying and soul destroying. Young men particularly, especially intellectual writers, SCREAM it out of their systems in their books.
