Oh, my goodness! I first read this book the year it was published. It was my introduction to the magnificent Elizabeth George and her equally magnificent "Inspector Lynley" novels. Not too long ago, I read Something to Hide , her latest published Lynley book, and I loved it. I finished it wanting to spend more time in the company of Lynley and Havers, so I decided to reread Playing for the Ashes . I loved every page of it, and most of all, I loved spending time with Lynley and Havers. They have become best friends of mine. This is the book in which Lynley and Lady Helen Clyde become engaged. It's the book in which Barbara moves from Acton to Chalk Farm and meets Taymullah Azhar and his daughter, Hadiyyah. It's the book in which Lynley first sees Havers' small cottage in Chalk Farm, inside and out. And, as far as I'm concerned, it's Ms. George's magnum opus, so far. (She, herself has said she hasn't written her magnum opus yet, and I hope that's true.) George is such a good writer. Just fabulous. This book switches back and forth from Lynley's POV to Havers' POV to Olivia Whitelaw's POV to Jeannie Flemming's POV, however, at no time was I even the slightest bit confused. The transitions are so smooth, so good, so beautifully written that no confusion was possible for me. This also happens to be the only book of Ms. George's in which I guessed the killer correctly, but of course, it was a guess only, and I had no idea how the killing was accomplished or why, and it's not a spoiler to tell you that the killer does have an alibi. Like many readers, I found the character of Olivia Whitelaw disgusting, just a horrible, rotten-to-the-core person. I tried to make allowances for her behavior, telling myself she was a victim of bad parenting, she was young, and she was terminally ill, but as much as I tried to work up any sympathy for her, I just could not. Every time I began to feel anything close to sympathy, the scene of Olivia meeting her father and mother by chance, and the horrible way she spoke to them, negated any sympathy I could have felt. As for Chris, I think he took her in because he likes fixing broken things. There are so many suspects in this book. Just about everyone is suspect, but only one person, outside of the killer, knows the whole truth. Astute readers will be able to ferret out who that one person is, but they almost certainly won't be able to put all of the pieces together, just as Lynley could not, though he knew who the killer was. I think, with this book, the "why" is more important than the "who." But the "why," in a murder is always important. Some readers say there was too much Olivia in this book. I can understand their feelings. I didn't like spending any time at all with Olivia. She seemed particularly hateful to me when she was thrilled with the excitement of engaging in Chris' nighttime activities but didn't seem to care about the cause, itself. That's when she lost my shred of sympathy for good. However, I don't see how her sections could have been shortened. If they had been, we would have had a different story altogether, and the irony of her inserting details about certain activities into her letter would have been lost. I could feel sympathy for Jimmy, though. He never spoke to either of his parents the way Olivia spoke to her mother and father, and he truly loved both of them. I was a little baffled at the end of the book, just as some other readers were. I do think I know what Lynley was going to do, and I hope I'm right. I think Ms. George left clues scattered throughout the book that we don't pick up on until the end, and to me, that's masterful writing. As it is, I finished this book with an, "Oh, goodness! What a masterpiece!" (I'd still love to hear what other readers think about the ending.) This is a dark book that deals with social issues as well as a murder investigation, but all of Ms. George's books deal with social issues as well as murder, and all are pretty dark. Havers lightens things up for us, and occasionally, Lynley does as well. I laughed as he flipped through one of Barbara's romance novels. I'll never forget that scene. My very favorite "Inspector Lynley" book remains Just One Evil Act , but I think Playing for the Ashes is the best in the series, so far, and though it's Ms. George's longest book, I don't think it's too long at all. This is murder mystery as it should be written, and it's murder mystery as only Elizabeth George can write it. I couldn't recommend it more highly.
