In this novel, the third in the accomplished Ripley mystery series, Highsmith invites the reader to glimpse the blasé manner in which our (anti-) hero can rope innocents into his cold schemes. 4.5 stars, imho. (Spoiler alert!) Ripley, for no other reason than pique, casually sets the wheels in motion to ensnare an upright fellow in a plot to dispatch Mafia figures, in an effort to keep two crime families out of the illegal gambling business in Munich. The man, happily married and a father, is ill, with poor prospects for living much longer. Therefore, he reasons, why not earn a tidy sum by becoming involved in a hit, so as to provide for his family down the road? Well, actually not quite that simple a decision, really. Highsmith elegantly allows the reader to see how the poor man is gradually lured into the scheme as the German fence, initiating the crime, simply never acknowledges any doubt that our uninitiated craftsman will ultimately agree to do the deed. Tasty! The genre ‘psychological thriller’, in these times, often leaves me somewhat cold. The plots are all too frequently, maddeningly predictable, and the matter of abnormal psychology as it relates to criminal acts, described with an unnecessary measure of pop culture clichés thrown in. Not so with Highsmith, to her credit - and adding to my pleasure. She held off describing scandalous events and schemes involving Ripley, in terms of his cold manipulations and tangled webs of deceit, to an admirable extent in her first two offerings in the series, leaving the reader to imagine the depths of careless malice that Tom Ripley’s sociopathic tendencies could take him. Here, in the third installment, it is clear that he isn’t done yet - ruining lives at his whim - with a callous disregard for right and wrong, if he even understands the concept. Here we catch a glimpse of his more malignant inner workings. He isn’t content to simply commit crimes, but also quite amused by the harm to others who, although less guarded against the danger to which they are exposing themselves than they might be, are nonetheless disarmingly susceptible to the masterful schemes Ripley dreams up. In a phrase, I find Highsmith’s series to be refreshing and satisfying. This is in part because of the times - 30 years into the last century - and in part, because of the charming European village settings she employs, where the naïveté she depicts is quite believable. Although an American author, Patricia Highsmith is also a veteran of a bygone era of (relatively quaint) European life and she uses her experience on the continent to give a refined depth to her well-chosen settings.. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
