Swerving between reactive and active, Maldoror makes his way from God to Man, but much in him is still God. There's power in affirming the other's terror, falling so deep into their conception of sin that you corrupt yourself and the others around you with jouissance. Becoming-evil is a visceral and viable strategy towards contesting hegemony. It's why we reclaim terms like faggot and tranny and bitch—to delight in the visceral theft of a word once used to dispossess you of your being. Yet mere inversion of the other's morality is still entrapment in their morality. If nothing is resignified beyond inversion, we remain reactive beings. Maldoror is often that, a reactive edgelord who revels in inverting Christian tropes. All that is holy is profaned: children are tortured, virgins are raped, God is drunk and covered in shit—the entire repertoire of death metal iconography is regurgitated in splendid detail. But as Angela Nagel asked in Kill All Normies , what are we transgressing towards? Because transgression without purpose quickly turns into a nihilistic death cult of incels, pedophiles, and fascists. I also find that the cruelty Lautréamont depicts pales in comparison to de Sade, because Maldoror's cruelty is directed at others, and in being directed at others, is therefore dependent on others. To be a master is to need a slave. However, de Sade showed in Philosophy in the Boudoir that cruelty can be self-negating, self-transgressing, and full of collective, joyous love. Cruelty can be life-affirming if it is employed towards rupturing the chains that bind you to any one singular form of being. Despite being written a century before Maldoror , Philosophy in the Boudoir is a far greater positive statement on becoming than Maldoror . There are glimmers of a positive project beyond mere transgression in Maldoror , though. There's a strange, cute chapter where Maldoror's just riding a horse with his bro, vibing on their shared capacity for self-responsibility that frees them from Christian morality and the Victorian Big Other. There're passages of earthly delight, material affirmation, and monstrous multiplicity. These build Maldoror's project of Man, which often mirrors Nietzsche's Ubermensch. Here, Christianity falls away, and a new world emerges. The hideous face of Maldoror, whose power lies in its iconic perversion of angelic representations, becomes irrelevant to a bodily joy whose foundations resides in self-affirmation and sensorial being. Life becomes more than a negation of what you detest. The self is depicted as a bricolage of exteriority (multiple), which nonetheless is agential towards its own becoming (singular). Inheritance isn't radically rejected, but radically grasped—steered towards a project of one's own making. In such a move, Maldoror mirror's Marx's understanding of history as a circumstance not of one's choosing, yet capable of dialectical transformation. Through self-reflexive creation, we become active forces in a reactive world, capable of pushing and pulling the material forces around us—as well as ourselves—into new forms.
