Playing for the Ashes is the 7th book in the Inspector Lynley mystery series. Like all of her books, even a seemingly open and shut case is vastly complicated, as the motives for murder, and equally unhelpful suspects, slowly amass. “The Ashes” historically refer to the prize that is awarded in a Test cricket series played between England and Australia, and is fitting for a title, as the victim in this case turns out to be Kenneth Fleming, a late rising star on England’s team, murdered on the eve of the test matches. Reputable among his loved ones and colleagues, Lynley and Havers set out to flush out a cunning, remorseless killer. The characters are slowly fleshed out, and you have to be patient with all of them as they relate their side of the story. I think this is where George is an expert in her craft and style. You feel like you’re working the case with the detectives; sometimes you even start to feel loyalties and prejudices toward certain characters. I found myself drawn to Fleming’s estranged wife, Jenny Cooper, and her turbulent relationship with her son, Jimmy. They just made my heart ache, and I completely understood her situation. Don’t even get me started on Lynley and Havers, possibly my favorite detective team ever. In this book, they really bridge the gap between colleague and possibly friend. By the end, it is never just a book about a murder, but it almost always leads to reflection on life and intimate relationships. George is one of my favorite mystery writers; I’m pretty sure that this is the only reason why I didn’t give up on this one. It also seems like as I get deeper and deeper into the series, the weight of her books increases! This probably slowed my reading down, as after the first few days of toting it around, I had to opt for leaving it at home. I would read about a chapter a day, and that’s saying a lot, as her chapters tend to be quite long. Still, it’s my opinion that this book didn’t need to be over 600 pages; the open ended conclusion was a bit upsetting as well. As much as I love her, it’s almost like every time I want to pick up the next book in the series, I have to mentally prepare myself for a long, long reading trek. Most of the time it’s worth it; other times it’s just meh. Here’s to hoping the next one will hit a homer out of the park.
