In this third book in the series, Tom Ripley, feeling insulted by a local Englishman, decides to play a prank on him--but since this is Tom Ripley, the prank goes too far, and Tom ends up entangled in the aftermath. About half the book is told from the point of view of the victim, Jonathan Trevenny, who has incurable leukemia and a wife and small child and is thoroughly likeable, so for a long time I was angry with Tom for mixing this guy up in trouble with the unlikeable and apparently (and unjustly) bulletproof Reeves. In the previous books, Tom's victims at least have it coming to some degree. However, Jonathan chooses to go along with the "opportunity" Reeves sets him up for, and that was entirely his choice, so Tom isn't totally to blame. And Tom shows up to save Jonathan at the perfect time, redeeming him in my eyes. I was seriously annoyed with Jonathan's wife Simone, who is unnaturally insightful (she always picks up on exactly the most damning details) and completely irrational in her belief that Ripley is to blame for Jonathan's immediate troubles (he's not, Reeves is). She adds to the tension, but in an irritating way. Aside from that, the book was entertaining. I like the more mature Tom Ripley than the one from the first book. But the ending is dissatisfying: Jonathan, who's already saved Tom's life once by snatching him back from falling off a train, takes a bullet for him and is killed. Granted that Jonathan is a walking dead man, but I hated seeing him die like that when I liked him so much. There's a feeling that Tom, who is a serial murderer and thief, doesn't deserve saving. Later, when Tom encounters Simone (who thinks Tom is evil) and she spits at him, the book concludes with Tom musing that the woman feels ashamed of having taken the money Jonathan earned from himself carrying out a murder. It's kind of a limp ending, and sad. I'm not sure if I'll continue with the series, as my library doesn't have the next book; I'm enjoying it, but maybe not enough to go out of my way to get it.
