"The wish to be a pig is a desperation arising from the inability to be human." - Sreten Marić on Les Chants de Maldoror The six chants of Maldoror are an untouchable literal success through the scopes of dadaist and surrealist intention and Lautréamont's personal artistic catharsis. It might be a somewhat subjective and unprofessional thing to say, but I am certain that the writing process was exhilarating, and it could not have been so had it not been "burdened" by its classic form, since Ducasse - as he expresses - "writes for himself," and the work, in all its vitality, sprouted from the author and his perceived epitomes of poetic beauty; he wrote like a fanboy, allegedly for himself, yet always in regard to an imaginary reader, stern and conservative, laregely so as to heal his lonely, troubled mind. Maldoror absolutely refuses any form of servitude either to God or to Man and accordingly acts out a total destruction of humanistic values, be they of Christianity or Reason, whereby Lautréamont's knot of neuroses disentangles itself and liberates the author. It is obvious from the start that there is no actual hate present in his expression. Once his mental "illness" (social abnormality) joins hands with tuberculosis (apparently a favorite of apocalyptic writers - this one here, Kamov, and many more!), he writes a repugnant prologue "for a future book" titled Poésies , much more realistically appaling than any of Maldoror's many fictive wrongdoings, as it is the equivalent of any old satanist embracing sweet Jesus on his deathbed in hopes that it will buy him a ticket to Heaven. Lautréamont is dying, and - in accordance to his writing - by that point it would be easiest to brand him a coward, if only his effort hadn't remained so sincere. But it is how it is, and very few important authors (who are also, coincidentally, famous) have remained true to themselves, untarnished by dead-end idealism; this is especially true in surrealism, from France to Serbia, and all the way to Russian futurism. There is no justification for turning oneself and one's most personal work into a function of the societal structures that induced massive amounts of frustration and alienation which originally gave birth to this pure, naive need for expression, for poetry, for protest (all the same) against those same old structures, yet this is what Lautréamont did with Poésies in an attempt to negate MALDOROR, his old self, his instinctive, unencumbered, natural inner self. A century and a half later, one of the two lives on.
