Armance was Stendhal's first novel; although not nearly so well-written or interesting as Le Rouge et le Noir , it already foreshadows Stendhal's style in the way it combines a romantic plot with a basically realist (though not quite realistic) social analysis. Unlike the later novel, however, it simply juxtaposes the two rather than truly integrating them. The plot concerns a wealthy French nobleman, Octave vicomte de Malivert, and a "poor" Russian noblewoman named Armance de Zohiloff; they fall in love but spend most of the book trying to avoid admitting it to each other, Armance because she is afraid of what people will think of her, and Octave because of an undisclosed "secret". (The main focus is on Octave rather than Armance.) The protagonist in this book, Octave, like Julien Sorel in Le Rouge et le Noir , is a liberal who has to dissimulate his ideas in a very reactionary society -- something I can relate to living in Utah. The difference is that while Sorel comes from the petite bourgeoisie and is trying to rise in the world of the nobility, Octave and Armance are members of the nobility who rejects the ideas of their own class. Stendhal may not be at his best in delineating the nobility. The romantic elements -- in this case a romance in the current sense of the word -- seem much less believable in this novel, but this may be simply because the attitudes of the early nineteenth century nobility are so remote from anything today. To make it worse, the "secret" is never explained in the novel, but depends on knowing what Stendhal wrote about the novel in a letter. (Although the name of the character and certain allusions to an otherwise forgotten novel by someone else may have made it obvious to the original readers.) It may have been considered "daring" when it was written, but today it seems more quaint, if not somewhat boring, especially for the first half of the book, which starts very slowly compared to a modern novel. The style is very romantic in the worst way -- authorial comments predominate over straight narrative, and the main character is an extremely unusual personality (although at least there are no improbable coincidences driving the plot.)
