This is the worst piece of crap I ever had the displeasure of reading. I buddy-read this with the wonderful Frede who made the smart choice of DNFing this trashy book halfway through, alas, I wasn't as smart, and powered through. Hygiène de l'Assassin is Amélie Nothomb's first novel and the fourth that I have read from her. This made me realize that I am absolutely done with this woman. Out of the four books I read I only enjoyed one ( Robert des Noms Propres ) and loathed the other three ( Les Combustibles , Antéchrista and now Hygiène ). If that tally doesn't speak louder than words, let me elaborate: I feel like Nothomb has some serious issues in her personal life that she keeps working into her novels, which lead all of her novels to be, at core, the same fucking story. There are so many reoccurring tropes and themes (especially in regards to adults feeling trapped and not wanting to grow up, adults having body issues, either over- or undereating, and in general just very, very, very unlikeable characters that you would love to punch in the face), it gets boring and foreseeable. Personally, I count Nothomb into the same category I count Murakami in. It's interesting to read one of their works and be exposed to the weirdness/creepiness/whatever, but it gets damn old real fast. I'm convinced that the only reason I enjoyed Robert des Noms Propres so much is the fact that this was my first read of hers, had I read it now I would have probably rolled my eyes as well due to its unoriginality. Nothomb publishes her books at an incredible rate: on average one per year for the last 25 years. That's just crazy. But let's talk a little bit about this fucking mess that calls itself a novel: Prétextat Tach is overweight (and more often than not just referred to as the overweight one) and about to die from cancer. During his lifetime he has published more than 20 novels (just like Nothomb now *cough* I might talk about self-fulfilling prophecies later because this bitch is headed in Tach's direction real quick) and so five journalists are interviewed for final interviews before Tach bites the dust. Yay. The first four interviews end in fucking catastrophes as Tach's unwilling to take the journalists seriously and spends his time offending them. These four interviews take up half of the novel and should have honestly been cut out entirely. They serve no purpose at all. They're incredibly badly written and all you gather from them is that Tach's an asshole. Yay. I knew that from the get go when he refused to be interviewed by women or Black people ... And the last interview takes up the second half of the story. It consists basically of a female journalist trying to expose Tach for a murder that he committed in his youth. Somehow it turns into useless quarrelling about the beauty of youth and how women once they get their periods should be killed off. Issa lot. Oh, and the fucking journalist then morphed into Tach and assassinates his ass. It's fucking crazy. And useless. And oh my gosh, why did I waste my time reading this crap??? Did I mention that this ENTIRE FUCKING NOVEL is written COMPLETELY IN DIALOGUE??? WTF?? BITCH? There are no descriptions. It reads like a fucking play, without stage directions. I want to die. Stylistically it's just bad, oh so bad. And thinking back on the only proper play I've read from her, Les Combustibles , Nothomb can't write plays for shit, her dialogue seems contrived and artificial. These characters don't feel real. But they also don't feel like caricatures or metaphors. They just seem like a heap of bullshit for Nothomb to sort her personal issues out. Ugh, it's been a long time since I've had a vendetta against an author (lmao ya'll know I'm crazy) but I'm just 100% done with Nothomb. I won't be reading another work of hers. She can continue being "pregnant with all of her novels" (her words, not mine, you guys) and I will spend my time and money on something more worthwhile. Peace out!
