I read this book yesterday while I was in the hospital, during my prep-wait before surgery under a blow-up blanket with toasty warm air.. wearing those cute hospital socks and a hospital gown. This is such a tiny ‘thin’ attractive-sweet looking book - vintage - 74 pages, 80 when including the ‘Afterword’ - it fit inside my mini shoulder crossbody bag. “The Reunion” was published in 1971. A timeless powerful - remembering back story- between two 16 year old boys - one Jewish - the other Christian - during the rise of Nazism in the 1930’s.....the setting being pre-war Germany. There is something permanently life shaping about a one-on-one special teenage friendship. I’ve experienced it myself. Character Hans Schwartz says that when Konradin von Hohenfel came into his life at age 16, “This Boy was to be my greatest source of happiness and my greatest despair”. A few weeks ago - I read another powerful - longer book: “The Air You Breathe”, by Frances de Pontes Peebles, about a life long friendship between two women. There was an excerpt in that novel - universal & experientially felt that feels appropriate to share in relation to this novella too: “When we are young, we give ourselves completely. We allow our first friends or lovers or first songs inside us, to become a part of our unformed being, without ever thinking of the consequences, or the permanence within us”. “The Reunion” is narrated by ‘middle aged’ Hans twenty-five years after having lost contact with Konradin. Hans is Jewish. His father was a doctor- and his grandfather a Rabbi. Konradin was welcomed into Hans home....but those times that Hans went to Konradin’s house, his parents weren’t home. Konradin’s parents were Hitler supporters. “Jews didn’t exist for her people” was the way Konradin’s mother felt. Hans and Konradin’s friendship was connected by sincere love and enjoyment. They had wonderful discussions: they debated about the existence of God in the face of horror - they enjoyed coin collecting- hiking-and growing up together They talked about girls- books & music. They were inseparable- yet anti-Semitism colored their friendship even from the first day they saw each other- in 1932-in the gymnasium in Stuttgart, Württemberg’s most famous grammar school founded in 1521. As I started the exquisite book- I was immediately moved by *Jean d’ Ormesson* who wrote ‘The Introduction’. Then after reading this exquisite story myself - breathless, speechless, and watering eyes - at the end...I went back and re-read *Jean’s* Introduction again. To me, Jean’s words expressed such truth -it’s the greatest gift I can pass on about this story.... ....in the same way I was gifted a review by Goodreads friend Laysee. I never heard of the author Fred Uhlman until Laysee. — many thanks, *Laysee*. I treasure this book I hold in my hand - the story that’s in my heart and thoughts. I end with *Jean d’ Ormesson’s words from her Introduction: “The book’s ending, in a few lines, is a masterpiece with in masterpiece. It transforms, suddenly, what has been a long short story into a novel of epic dimensions; it adds a further luminous, dramatic quality, like the swell of an organ, to what has been a ‘Bildungsroman’, a story of growing up, while retaining the powerful grace and simplicity of the short story”. ...Fred Ulman wrote this in 1960. It contains autobiographical elements. Ulman was educated in Württemberg - sharing his protagonists’ love of Swabia....which he claimed left him a ‘Romantic-for-life’. He left Germany in 1933 - as a young anti-Nazi lawyer - settling in Britain and established a career as a painter, and poet. He died in 1985. Overflowing Richness!!!
