“There's no such thing as a perfect murder,” Tom said to Reeves. “That's just a parlor game, trying to dream one up. Of course, you could say there are a lot of unsolved murders. That's different.” Ripley’s Game is the third book in the 1970s Ripley Series about Tom Ripley, an ambiguous criminal and sociopath. Ripley’s Game takes place about 15+ years after book two, Ripley Under Ground . Tom’s (50ish) and still married to Heloise, the heiress. They live in the same small Parisian town, same house as before, Belle Ombre. Tom’s lavish life has been quite for years now. He paints, gardens, and wants to learn the harpsichord. He still maintains old contacts but does little work for the fence, Reeves Minot. It is Reeves that starts the ball rolling in this third book. He has expanded his business affairs to include gambling and two outside mafia families are encroaching on his area. He calls asking Tom if he could do a simple murder or two and some theft. Tom says no to this, yet he promises to give Reeves a name of someone that might do the tasks. That is how Jonathan Trevanny gets on Reeves’ radar. It is Tom who gives Reeves the name of a man he met at a party who Tom felt was rude to him. Tom does this as a little game of revenge and convinces Reeves that he should press this man into doing it since Trevanny needed money and was in poor health. Ripley’s Game was well-written but lacks the tension and suspense book two delivered. And I was disappointed that up to a third of this book was not focused on Tom. It was on Trevanny, and he was a boring character. And neither book two nor three came anywhere close to being the fascinating mind-trip that was The Talented Mr. Ripley . In Ripley’s Game , Tom isn’t calculating. He doesn’t try to justify his actions. He’s not out for any gain. He never juggles situations that seem like he could be caught at any moment. Instead, he has this idea that he is doing a good service. I never quite understood Tom’s motivation for his actions in this book. Just like the ending of book two, Tom’s actions here were not plausible enough and that’s why this book was such a letdown. And while I am grumbling, let me add that there was no further mention of Dickie Greenleaf’s cousin, who had stayed with Tom for several days in book two. There was build up about why this cousin may want to meet Tom, yet in book two, it was not answered. The cousin, Chris, dropped hints about knowing some of Tom's secrets going on in book two, but Chris left Tom's house by the two-thirds mark in the book and his purpose for being in the story wasn't followed up. I assumed it must be a teaser for action that would occur in this book. Nada. The ending in Ripley’s Game just fizzled. Is it believable that Trevanny’s wife would not turn Tom in for the mafia murders when she hated Tom in this book? It ends with Tom assuming she could not alert the police about him since she planned to keep the money her husband gained via illegal acts. She had refused any of the tainted money and had made plans to leave her husband because of it. Is it plausible that the police would not question Tom about the shooting that happened in the street where neighbors must have witnessed something suspicious? My advice: read The Talented Mr. Ripley . It is on Boxall’s 1001 Books to Read list for a reason. It is an excellent book where you are privy to Tom’s thoughts (deliciously creepy), and it builds tension to a fevered pitch and that suspense continues to the last paragraph. Then, skip the rest of the books in the Ripley Series.
