*this review contains spoilers* After reading The Charterhouse of Parma in 2017, I said it would be at least a decade before I gave Stendhal another shot. It turned out to be seven years. Stendhal's first novel, which has almost entirely fallen off the radar among English readers, is almost more interesting to discuss than to read, due to the secret of the protagonist Octave, which is very similar to the discussion of Henry James’ infamous “obscure hurt”: Is it impotence, a physical deformity, or homosexuality? In the case of Octave, André Gide would suggest it’s the latter, but Stendhal claimed it was impotence. In any case, the ambiguous problem leads Octave to vacillate between rueful pining for Armance and lashing out at certain men who remind him of his inability to consummate his love (or who, perhaps, stir his love?). For that alone, one could argue that Stendhal, in his first novel, is decades ahead of the curve in his investigation of psychological realism. If only he hadn't included the absurd "forged letter" conclusion, which is the most "of-his-time" gimmick imaginable. It’s a fair-to-middling novel, and one that is surprisingly easy to read, which might be due to the excellent translation by C.K. Scott-Moncrieff (who also translated Proust). It’s also relatively short at 300 pages, compared to The Charterhouse of Parma and The Red and the Black , both of which suffer from being “loose, baggy monsters,” to borrow a phrase from Henry James (he of the other “obscure hurt”). And in the end, what is Octave’s mystery "crime" that makes him a "monster"? I am almost certain that Gide is correct. I don’t know how anyone could interpret the ending otherwise. “There he had informed her (Armance) that he had made a vow to go to Greece, where he would shew that, not withstanding his distaste for military ways, he knew how to wield a sword.” That doesn't seem very subtle to this twenty-first-century reader. And then there’s Octave’s beautiful death among all the sailors as he finally arrives in Greece. Martin Turnell's analysis is entirely on the impotence angle – Stendhal’s own explanation in a letter – but he leaves the door open to the possibility of some kind of unconscious subtext.
