"Life, you see, is never as good or as bad as one thinks." Whew! There is a lot going on in this little book, a lot of it depressing. I do not presume to know what a 19th century Frenchman intended, but I found this to be a fiercely feminist story. Horribly so, but a stark critique of raising naive girls then trapping them in marriages where they are miserable and powerless. A Life (or Une vie ) is a truly quite horrible story about how a starry-eyed romantic girl becomes disillusioned with life and love. Raised to be “pure” of mind-- ignorant, basically --Jeanne follows all the rules and adheres to strict morals, only to witness the weakness of everyone else. Eventually, she starts to lose faith in those around her and feel a growing contempt for humanity. What happens to Jeanne is genuinely very upsetting. I found myself deeply invested in her story, hoping she would find happiness or, at least, peace. Her parents are absolutely useless from the get-go, and her idea of love, marriage and motherhood is quickly shattered. My one criticism is her lack of growth. I understood her naïveté as a young woman, and sympathised with her, but felt frustrated that it followed her into old age after everything she had witnessed and experienced. Maupassant is an interesting social critic; he obviously doesn't think too highly of rigid social mores, the aristocracy, or the church. In fact, there are two priests in this book-- one of them is a hypocrite and the other is a monster. There are a couple of other interesting themes. One is class-- when Jeanne professes her ill luck, Rosalie scolds her by reminding her how much worse it would be for a peasant woman. Another is a reflection on the value (or lack of) placed on aging unmarried women. Though a quiet minor character, Aunt Lison is a haunting presence in this book. Completely forgotten and ignored, she floats around in the background like an actual ghost, invisible to those around her. A very compelling, if bleak, story. Please note that it contains marital sex that would not be considered consensual today, and one horrible scene of animal cruelty.
