This book could be appropriately titled “Octave,” since it’s told more from his point of view than Armance’s. In the interest to not repeat what other Goodreads members have written, I offer the following. The read : C. K. Scott Moncrieff’s translation uses an older form of English that will make this slow reading, for some people. It reminded me of my first exposure to Shakespeare and Elizabethan English. Slower yet is the narrative’s pace in the first half of the book. Readers today are used to sentences with quick direction. Many sentences in Armance begin with a thought, then slow down and wander, adding other thoughts, using simile, and what I call “thinking on paper.” I read many sentences 2-4 times before they made sense. Having a dictionary at your side, or Google open on your computer helps for words no longer used and for bits of history. The time and place : The time is 1800-ish, and the French Monarchy is still felt. A strict code of human conduct is expected, even in private settings, and severe consequences are expected for not adhering. People were suspicious, compared to today. Families, even, lived in a state of tension and some of them policed their own members. All this imposed a restraint of personal expression in society, even between two people in love; it limited what they can say to each other and how much emotion is allowed to be shown. Octave’s secret : It’s expressly stated that Octave has a secret. This secret rules his life, much like the code of behavior. But without Stendahl’s letter to Prosper Merimee, included at the book’s end, modern readers will find few clear clues to guess Octave’s secret. Octave made a pledge at age 16 to never marry or fall in love, which, in chapter 23 he states was for his “honour.” In chapter 29 he decides to share his secret with Armance, but wonders if he has “the courage to utter that fatal word” because it “may destroy” her feelings for him. He also indicates he’d not hesitate to disclose his secret to her father or guardian before marrying her despite his “shame” and “embarrassment.” Such are the clues given. (Ultimately, he shares his secret with Armance not before marriage, but posthumously.) The Prosper Merimee letter not only reveals Octave’s secret, it offers a bit of epilogue and answers my question -- how could Octave conceal his impotence from Armance during the nights of their honeymoon? Armance was cutting-edge when published. The 191 years that have passed may make the material seem tame today, but it’s still fun to peek into what was cutting-edge so long ago.
