1) Before reading Rimbaud I thought I would see fireworks; the problem was that I had read Lautréamont first. (Michel Houellebecq) 2) After reading the last part of "Les Chants de Maldoror" I thought of giving up literature due to embarrassment of my own literary achievements. (André Gide [in a diary entry, in 1905]) 3) Lautréamont has been the biggest influence on my writing career. My books are toys for adults who have read Lautréamont. (César Aira) This book embraces both classical rules of art (craft, depth and beauty [beauty whereas in the classic sense, such as when writing about the ocean, or modern one, meaning Picasso's, Baudelaire's, Dalí's... diabolical one) and contemporary ones (modernity, originality and provocation) brillliantly. It was half a century ahead of its time, after all (surrealists in the 1920's were the first ones to consider it the visionary masterpiece that it is). It may not be as deep as Rimbaud's A Season in Hell (Caravaggio) ... but it's far more creative (El Greco). Rimbaud focused on psychological misery, introspection and analysis, in the work of art as a finished object, marble block, last will... On the other hand, Lautréamont focused on imagination, ideas, surprises, in the work of art in progress, as a process. Both Rimbe and Isidore were highly intelligent and crazy (in the words of Argentinian author César Aira: So many people write, but so little is worthy… Why? I think it’s because in order to write something valuable one must posses two opposite qualities: you must be as intelligent as possible (because writing is not easy) and, at the same time, as crazy as possible (for the writing to matter). The gate-master of tomorrow's literature , called it Nobel Prize Winner André Gide, this is a book which fans of modernism, postmodernism, metaliterature, etc., should totally savour as one of the precursors of those movements (with its many passages about the very process of writing) that it is (needless to say, a must-read for poetry lovers too). My review of Lautreamont's "poems": https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...
