"There's no such thing as a perfect murder," Tom Ripley declares in the very first line of this, the third in Patricia Highsmith's series of five novels about the charming, social-climbing sociopath. The joke here is that in the first two novels, "The Talented Mr. Ripley" and "Ripley Under Ground," Ripley killed four people, and got away with every one of those murders. Not only did he get away with them, but he's now living in France in a grand home, with a beautiful wife who knows better than to ask too many questions and a housekeeper who cooks him lots of good food. Before this novel is over, he will have bought a harpsichord and started learning how to play, too. Oh, and of course he will have killed several more people. While the police have never charged him with a thing, local gossip has tagged Ripley as a shady operator. That's why, at a party, a man named Jonathan Trevanny greets Ripley by saying, "Oh, I've heard of you." That bit of rudeness stings Ripley into what turns into a massive retaliation. Ripley's fence and sometime friend Reeves Minot wants Ripley's help in killing a couple of mobsters because it will spark a mob war in Hamburg, to the benefit of the cafe he co-owns. Ripley demurs, but then comes up with an alternative: Tevanny, the man who was rude to him. Ripley lays out a plan by which he and Reeves maniplulate Trevanny -- who has leukemia -- into agreeing to shoot one of the mobsters in exchange for a large sum of money being deposited in the bank for his family to use when he dies. The seduction of Trevanny, a family man who dotes on his wife and young child but fears leaving them in the lurch when he's gone, takes a while. Finally, unable to resist any more, he agrees. Then, when Trevanny hesitates to carry through with all of Reeves' complicated plan, Ripley appears suddenly to help him out. Before this short (267 pages) novel is over, Ripley will have killed a total of five people, drawn Trevanny so deeply into his scheming that he can't get out and, in the end, the only consequence Ripley suffers is that Trevanny's wife spits at him -- and misses. All in all, I'd say Tom's claim that there's no such thing as a perfect murder is pretty well disproven. I look forward to reading the next novel in the sequence, all in celebration of Highsmith's 100th birthday this year. Something tells me Ripley will get away with some more murdering in that one, too.
