- Excuse me? - Madame. 'Ow may I 'elp you? - I'm looking for a book. Une vie. - Envie, madame? - By Maupassant. - Mont Passant? - Here, let me write it down. - Ah! Une vie , de Maupassant. - Yeah, that's what I said. - Tout à fait, madame, tout à fait. Yes, we 'ave this book. - Could you tell me a bit about it? - Avec plaisir, madame. Jeanne, the 'eroine, is a naïve young girl. She knows nothing of the world, she is rich, 'er parents think they are protecting 'er by 'iding from 'er the verities the most simple of the life. She falls in love with an 'andsome young man, Julien. Three months later they are married. - I think I see where this is going. - I am sure you do, madame. They 'ave a romantic 'oneymoon on La Corse, 'ow you say, on Corsica. But as soon as they are 'ome, Jeanne sees a terrible change in 'er new 'usband. 'E is cold, 'e is mean with the money, then she finds out that 'e is deceiving 'er with-- - Hey, no spoilers. - Spoilers, madame? - I'm already sold. Put it on the pile. Was she a lesbian? - Who, madame? - The author. My girlfriend said-- - I fear that l'amie de madame is labouring under a misapprehension. Maupassant was not a woman. Alors, if 'e was not a woman then 'e was not une lesbienne. - You're saying that Maupassant was a guy? - Exactement madame, you 'ave expressed it with précision. - You're sure? I mean, apart from what Chantelle said, the subject matter-- - I am quite sure, madame. - So what else did he write? - The most famous novel of Maupassant is Bel-Ami . Georges Duroy is a good-looking, unscrupulous man. 'E becomes a successful writer but all 'is work is written by 'is mistresses. 'E-- - Wait a minute. So let me see if I've got this right, Une vie is supposed to be written by a man but reads like it was written by a woman, and the other one, what's it called, Bel-Ami is about a man who published books under his own name that were actually written by women, and-- - What do you mean, madame? - Well, you can't help wondering if in real life-- - I am sorry madame, I 'ave other clients to attend to. Does madame wish to buy this book? - Like I said, sold. I'll take Bel-Ami too. - That will be one hundred and thirty five euros, madame. - Thank you for the chat. - It was my pleasure, madame. - And I know they'll improve my French. - It is not possible, madame. - Well, ah, au revoir. - Au revoir, madame. [Ding!] - Another one, Henri. - You know Jules, you don't think that maybe-- - I do not think that, Henri. - Sorry, Jules. - That's alright, Henri.
