4.5 stars The Ladies’ Paradise This isn’t a perfect novel but I sure had fun reading it—and I don’t take fun lightly after my first Zola experiences, Therese Raquin and Germinal. First I had to quickly address some misplaced nostalgia, which this novel both inflamed and quickly dampened. It is about the growth of a big Parisian department store in the 19th century. I feel quite nostalgic about department stores…I loved going with the whole family, being dragged around “boring” departments (underwear, furniture) and “fun” ones (toys) and stopping at the café. But all the department stores in my home country have folded, leaving us with malls and Amazon. Zola’s “Ladies’ Paradise” is altogether grander, and it is the Amazon of its era, relentlessly grinding the small family shops of old Paris into bankruptcy and oblivion, even as Paris itself is knocked down and opened up into something bigger, brighter, grander. Owner Octave Mouret is a marketing genius, and he has the undeniable benefit of starting with capital. He pours it into his shop and into the seduction of Woman as a species, his aim being to create desire where there is no need, undercut the competition, create losses on certain items to earn greatly on others. He commands an army of sales men and women, a new class with much greater freedom than previously and an easy acceptance of loose morals. The story primarily follows impoverished sales girl Denise Baudu as she supports her two younger brothers, rises through the ranks of the shop, watches her uncle’s drapers shop sink into debt and as she becomes the one woman that Mouret desperately wants but can’t have. Zola’s strengths, as always, a) are crafting great big scenes full of movement and change and motion and b) description. His descriptive skills are maybe a bit too on display here; there are many scenes of sales and descriptions of fabric and particularly lace, and I did feel the middle of the book good bogged down a little in all this. On the other hand, this book also has: - Romance . I felt ridiculous being invested in this romance. These people were ridiculous and I wasn’t convinced either of them deserved to find happiness, but I was certainly very happy reading about them. - Modern resonance. A way of life being swept away to a bold new idea. My mind kept switching into double focus, with one eye on the page and one on current circumstances. Even Zola seems to be writing in two times at once. At one point he says “and that was the seed of the great labour unions of the twentieth century.” This book was published in 1883! - Urban transformation in real time , and a slippery authorial view. Anyone who has ever been interested in how cities change will be keen to read this. And with the Hausmann-era transformation of Paris, as with the capitalist takeover the shop symbolizes, Zola is clearly somewhat in both camps, criticizing both, acknowledging damage done, and yet compelled to follow. As we so often are, when something transformative comes along. - Some great vignettes: The compulsive shopper, the shoplifter, the meanness on the shop floor. - Glamour. There is an overabundance of lace descriptions. But when I emerged from the novel, I felt I had been bathing in the stuff. And god knows, modern shopping never feels so luxurious.
