Ripley's Game (Ripley #3) is the third instalment in the Ripliad: The Talented Mr. Ripley (1955) Ripley Under Ground (1970) Ripley's Game (1974) The Boy Who Followed Ripley (1980) Ripley Under Water (1991) Having thoroughly enjoyed the first two novels, I am now totally invested in the series and the character of Tom Ripley. Tom, as you probably know, was intitally an ambitious young American from a poor background who, having developed a taste for the trappings of wealth has no compunction in doing whatever is necessary to acquire and maintain his lifestyle. Actually, by the second novel his lifestyle is all but assured, however he seems irresistably drawn by involvement in murder and intrigue. Just like the previous Ripley novels, the plot centres around a relationship between Tom and another man, and specifically the psychological relationship between the two men. Whilst appearing to be antagonists they become inevitably, increasingly and inextricably bound together by a perverse logic. The up-close and personal Grand Guignol violent set pieces probably a surrogate for something more intimate. Whatever may or may not be going on in the subtext, Ripley's Game is another engrossing and blackly comedic novel about murder, deception and, in this instance, the Mafia, who here are hellbent on vengeance. If you know Tom Ripley then you know this, like its predecessors, is tremendous fun, especially if, like Tom and Patricia Highsmith, you can enjoy Tom finding inappropriate and sporadic humour in death, dead bodies and danger more generally. Now I know Tom Ripley better, I find myself shaking my head and chuckling as he thinks about, or does, something appalling. Another Ripley winner. Roll on The Boy Who Followed Ripley (1980). 4/5 Ripley's Game (1974).... Living on his posh French estate with his elegant heiress wife, Tom Ripley, on the cusp of middle age, is no longer the striving comer of The Talented Mr. Ripley . Having accrued considerable wealth through a long career of crime—forgery, extortion, serial murder—Ripley still finds his appetite unquenched and longs to get back in the game. In Ripley's Game , first published in 1974, Patricia Highsmith's classic chameleon relishes the opportunity to simultaneously repay an insult and help a friend commit a crime—and escape the doldrums of his idyllic retirement. This third novel in Highsmith's series is one of her most psychologically nuanced—particularly memorable for its dark, absurd humor—and was hailed by critics for its ability to manipulate the tropes of the genre. With the creation of Ripley, one of literature's most seductive sociopaths, Highsmith anticipated the likes of Norman Bates and Hannibal Lecter years before their appearance.
