An Angry Young Man in 1820s France More than 35 years after first reading it, I revisited this classic. And it's always striking how many other things you then notice. This, of course, has to do with my own life and reading experience, but certainly also with the rich content of this novel, the ultimate hallmark of a true classic. What struck me most this time was the unique character of the protagonist, Julien Sorel: his intense aversion to almost everyone superior to him, his boundless, Napoleonic ambition to achieve fame and fortune, and finally and above all, his manipulative behavior, especially with women. In many ways, Sorel is what we would now call a narcissistic character. A second striking feature of this novel: Stendhal constantly delves into the minds of the various characters, extensively presenting their observations, reflections, considerations, and endlessly meandering reasoning in the form of indirect interior monologues. I don't know if he's the first to do this so emphatically, because at times I saw a kinship with, for example, Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice , in which the protagonists' perceptions and internal ruminations also play such a significant role. I must add, however, that in my opinion, Stendhal does exaggerate this feature: the constantly meandering, tormented, and at times almost paranoid reflections of his characters, and especially the ebb and flow of emotional attraction and repulsion between Julien and his female "conquests"... it was sometimes a bit too much for me. This is also connected to the very exaggerated pathos we know from Romanticism. The third thing that really struck me is the socio-political context and message. Stendhal, like Balzac, illuminates French society during the Restoration, the period 1815-1830, when the monarchy had been restored, conservative forces seemed to have the upper hand, but the revolutionary fire still smoldered. He highlights the struggle between liberals (supporters of the Enlightenment and the Revolution) and the ultras (the mostly Catholic conservatives), even in the small provincial town of Verrières, where the first part of this novel takes place. In the second part, a veritable conspiracy of the ultras is revealed, in which Julien becomes involved. In these narrative elements, but also in many other places, Stendhal paints a disconcerting picture of the narrow-minded bourgeois, aristocratic, and clerical milieus in which Julien moves. What is particularly striking is that Julien himself, as a character, embodies the smoldering revolutionary fire that was not extinguished in 1815 and would undoubtedly resurface. This had already happened before 1830, the year this novel was published, it would erupt again that very year, and later, especially in 1848. To a certain extent, one can attribute prophetic gifts to Stendhal, but his merit lies primarily in the unique way he incorporated this into a novel. This brings us back to Julien Sorel: from the very beginning, it is clear that a raw sense of revolt prevails within him, a sense of inferiority compared to the "ruling classes", and the source of fierce hatred. Throughout the novel, this will surface in Julien's feelings, thoughts, and actions, culminating in the dramatic event at the end. But it is especially afterwards, during the judicial trial against him, that this revolutionary feeling is made explicit in the form of an unadulterated “J'accuse” addressed to his judges and by extension to the ruling class: “I see men who, without considering what my youth might deserve in terms of pity, will want to punish in me and discourage forever that class of young people who, born into a lower class and somewhat oppressed by poverty, have the good fortune to obtain a good education and the audacity to mingle with what the pride of rich people calls society.” With this fragment it seems that Stendhal attributes Julien an idealistic attitude. But nothing could be further from the truth: from the very beginning, he makes it clear that Julien is focused on making a fortune in everything he does. And fortune here must be understood in its dual sense: honor and fame, certainly, but primarily money. Almost every observation, almost every reflection, almost every action of Julien is aimed at acquiring prestige and, above all, a lot of money. He shares this with almost all the male characters in this novel: they are foremost concerned with everything and anything for what it will bring them. To the point of absurdity. Disconcerting. And so we arrive at what I believe to be the true protagonist of this novel: Napoleon Bonaparte. Long dead by the time this novel is set, but still all-consuming and, in that sense, alive. In this novel his name still burns on everyone's lips, especially Julien's, for whom Napoleon is the founding example, and his shadow is visible on almost every page. And I don't think Stendhal meant that in a positive way: his message is that power and wealth consumed Napoleon, just as they consume the characters in this story, and—in Julien's case—lead to their downfall. My second reading of this novel made it clear to me that it is considerably richer than I had perceived almost 35 years ago. At the same time, the exaggerated pathos and some less developed characters (especially the female ones are almost all consumed by their emotion and passion) also frequently caused irritation and frustration. But I certainly find Stendhal more digestible than most of Balzac's novels, and his stylistic genius is undeniable. In other words, this is still worthy of the status of a classic work.
