I love Maupassant and always find he tackles the timeless difficult issues of life, that resonate down through the ages, with masterly and devastating acuity. The ‘life’ we examine is that of Jeanne, a naive young country girl, born into a life of privilege and convent educated, but destined to misfortune and tragedy. Poor Jeanne who is slow to acquire any degree of self knowledge and never really understands the realities of the life with all its brutal contradictions, and so is a ‘victim’ in devastating fashion. Her early life is idyllic and she lives with adoring parents in beautiful seclusion in a chateau in Normandy on an estate by the sea, “..facing her was a broad lawn as yellow as butter under the night sky. Two tall trees rose up like steeples in front of the house, a plane to the north and a linden to the south….. Jeanne gazed at the broad surface of the sea, which looked like watered silk, sleeping peacefully under the stars. In the quiet of the sunless sky all the scents of the earth rose up into the air. A jessamine climbing round the downstairs windows gave a penetrating scent, which mingled with the fainter smell of the young leaves. Gentle gusts of wind were blowing, laden with the sharp tang of the salt and the heavy sticky reek of seaweed. At first the girl was happy just breathing the night air; the peace of the countryside had the calming effect of a cool bath.” From daydreaming and being a free spirited youth where ‘her whole childhood at the convent had been taken up with the future, and she had busied herself with fantasies’ but reality stalks her upon her wedding night, and all her illusions are shattered when her Father suddenly draws off our spirited young innocent to invoke her submission, “.. remember this and only this, you belong totally to your husband” , and from that point onward poor Jeanne is wracked by the vicissitudes of a cruel world she doesn’t understand and knows, only fleetingly, love and happiness, but experiences at great length loss, betrayal and humiliation. From this moment onward the life of the poor ingénue disintegrates and degradation follows, and after a short lived romance, surrounded by greed and avarice, she is given over to despair, “She believed herself to be so directly the target of unrelenting misfortune that she became as fatalistic as an Oriental; and the habitual experience of seeing all her hopes and dreams crumble and vanish meant that she shrank from all further endeavour.” The author shows the slow disintegration that follows and the complete demoralisation of the young girl now become the embittered middle aged woman, “Sometimes she would spend the whole afternoon sitting looking at the sea; sometimes she went down to Yport through the wood, repeating the walks of old days which she could not forget. What a long time it was since she had wondered through the countryside as a young girl intoxicated with dreams!” Those closest to her will disappoint and betray her and she is shocked and repelled, "at the cravenness of human beings, slaves to the foul procedures of carnal love that makes cowards of the heart as well as the body. Mankind seemed to her unclean when she thought of all the dirty secrets of the senses, the degrading caresses, and the dimly discerned mysteries of inseparable couplings.” Not just a coming of age novel but a slow crumbling of the edifices of love and marriage, organised religion and human greed; Maupassant lays bare the ugly side of life with all its degradation and disappointment, in chilling and controversial (too explicit for its time) fashion.
