““In England the term “the Ashes” signifies victory in test cricket (cricket played at the national level) against Australia.”” The preceding quote is from the book. However, if you, gentle reader, are thinking, “I bet actually the title of this mystery genre novel is a sly double entrende about a dead body” you are right! The only thing this book has to do with game of cricket is that one of the characters is a star cricket player. But if you really are a fan of cricket and are expecting a game in these pages at some point, you will be very very disappointed in this book. Readers who are fans of hothouse mysteries - which is what I call mysteries that tend to have a lot of doomed romances, diva performances and extreme angst along with murders and mystery - will find a lot to like in “Playing for the Ashes”. These hothouse plots do tend to lean to the chick-lit side of the scale, but they still are very entertaining for everyone, in my humble opinion. Both sexes are well represented as heroes or bad guys, the action is dark and deadly and briefly graphic, and it is difficult to quit reading at any point for the last 100 pages because the suspense of not knowing how it ends will drive the reader into missing work or staying up all night. This is the 7th book in the Lynley/Havers mystery series. There is a convoluted plot, a mystery, a murder, tons of characters who could have done the murder, and of course, Thomas Lynley and Barbara Havers, English CID police officers. Since you really should read this series in order (the personal lives of Lynley and Havers are actually at the forefront of the action in almost every one of these novels, as are the distraught self-immolating suspects), the emotional level might be reduced because a reader beginning with the newer books will, in my opinion, not receive the full blast of emo crazy Elizabeth George injects into each and every book in the series. Of course, if emo crazy annoys the crap out of you in the first place, you won’t like this series anyway. In this novel I could not guess who the murderer was, so I was in suspense throughout. I was highly entertained by the operatic plot. Best of all, one of the protagonists was a disgusting person who I would swear was an antisocial personality if she had been a real person, or at least an incredibly immature selfish ninny at best, so I felt free to despise her to my heart’s content, as well as feel superior in every way. What more can any neurotic shy damaged nerdy bookworm with no life such as myself need for temporary validation? I highly recommend this book. These books in the series so far explore realistically, despite the over-the-top self-destruction in each and every character’s life in each book, the emotional devastation that making and living with bad choices brings. I do not find each single instance of coming undone in these novels hard to believe, but the author does not do nuances. ALL of her characters tend to be in their heads as if they were still hormonal high school teens all of the time. I think for most of us readers, we have a friend, relative or acquaintance who did something like a George character once or twice, or we ourselves had a bad time once or twice. George likes to give readers their money’s worth by making sure EVERY character is screwing up really really bad. The character who provided me with so much positive and elevated self-regard was Olivia. Her narrative and life takes up half of the pages, so if she does not pique your interest the book won't be fun for you. Her part in the book was to Live Large as a young adult going on 4 years old. She chooses a life as a drug addict and a prostitute to destroy her parents, who really are very sweet, but for some reason Olivia can’t seem to see them as regular people because they are wealthy and a bit conventional and they want to enjoy an expanded and worthy social life. Everything they do, especially her mother, Olivia misreads as hate, vengeance and abusive control. She can’t seem to like or love them, no matter how benign or ordinary they live their lives or what their expectations are for their daughter. I think she simply has a horror of being controlled so strong that she can’t accept any kind of critical suggestion, much less a parental directive, so that being told it’s time for bed would have been enough to send Olivia into a room-breaking tantrum. Olivia also has a form of jealousy which is world-destroying, and a blinkered overly personalized view of why people expect her to follow directives and set goals. Olivia writes a diary in alternating chapters in 'Playing for the Ashes' about her life which shows how bent her viewpoint is, but I suspect some inexperienced or youthful readers may not see that she overreacts to the world, misreads simple criticism as dislike or hate, and is obviously too self-centered to understand her self-destruction is only important to her family but there is a big world out there that she could have chosen to enjoy on her own. Those of us who have known people like her will recognize the extreme diva mentality who think it’s all about them, no matter what the situation. Thankfully, only a few children, and I’ve known some, will go on to this kind of extreme self-degradation to punish a normal parent (it’s always been a parent in my real experience). In real life, usually normal parents do not entirely blame themselves, but when they do, many have the maturity to recognize, parental guilt or not, that the self-destruction punishes the child more than the parent. Setting oneself on fire because you hated eating Brussels sprouts once a week, or doing homework, can be kinda wasteful of one’s life. At some point, the recognition that living well is the best revenge one can have, if revenge is the point, but actually simply living well for oneself is nice, revenge or not. There was a 4 year old who used the technique of holding his breath to punish anyone who tried to make him do something or did not buy him a toy he wanted. Of course, any sane adult would understand: 1. if he did hold his breath long enough to pass out he would not die but he might bring relief to everyone by being quiet for awhile. 2. he would start breathing automatically again if he succeeded in holding his breath until he passed out. 3. he is an idiot child. Olivia was this kind of person. Boy, did I have fun dissing Olivia every time it was her turn to vent and practice the kind of self-destruction which is meant to rub other people noses in their guilt, but instead results in everyone wondering about that individual’s maturity or sanity, or in my case, thinking, “too stupid to live”. The writing is almost literary, but everything is too spelled out for the reader to be actually a literary read. Like I mentioned, I didn’t think it unreal, and I think George knows her emotionally impoverished families. Nobody is exactly polished or civilized, even when they are aristocrats. When I finished this novel, as I also did in finishing the previous books in the series, I felt satisfactorily sated with having lived within every character’s inner trailer-trash. So much fun!
