The recent political upheaval in my country where a referendum for the independence of Catalonia is to be celebrated presumably in November almost in parallel to the Scottish one prompted me to unbury my copy of this essay which I read many years ago and whose direct prose has often been misjudged as overly simplistic. Born in Lebanon within a family of Arabic tradition but of Christian faith, forced to exile from his natal land to France in the 70s, the journalist, essayist and writer of historical fiction Amin Maalouf is a man who has learnt to live at sustained crossroads. Straddling the East and the West, the author of this slim but substantial essay published in 1999 ponders the pieces that compound the puzzle of identity and rebels against the madness that incites mankind to kill each other in the name of nation, language or religion. Taking as a starting point his personal experience and focusing on the islamic conflict, Maalouf stirs up the murky waters of the elusive concept of individuality, the inborn sense of belonging, the instict for self-preservation, the aversion to change and the human tendency to assert one's beliefs in terms of unrelenting negation of others. "What makes me myself rather than anyone else is the very fact that I am poised between two countries, two or three languages, and several cultural traditions. It is precisely this that defines my identity. Would I exist more authentically if I cut off a part of myself?" Even though the historical frame that serves to delineate the author's concise analysis of such abstract themes might appear outdated --he addresses warfare zones like Afghanistan, Rwanda, Burundi, the old Yugoslavia and the inherent danger of the resurgence of segregationist ideologies in European countries like Great Britain, Belgium or Spain-- his conclusions cut across the threshold of time and acquire a premonitory quality that confirms the validity of his reflexions. The central idea of Maalouf's essay revolves around identity not coming from a single wellspring but from multiple ones that bear the personal circumstances and unrepeatable historical contexts that shape each one of us into a unique and unparalleled individual. One needs to pay respect to all the paths that converge into the process of creating one's identity, from one's ancestral heritage to religious or political views and preserve this rich diversity. But Maalouf’s initially tolerant approach turns into a passionate voice of protest when he firmly denounces the inherent perversity of obsessive delimitation regarding origin, belief or what is perceived as linguistic repression that can easily drift towards biased judgmentalism and indiscriminate prejudice that perpetrate human conflict giving way to mass killing or genocides. To Maalouf, being human means, above any other distinctive trait, being the carrier of undisputable human rights that prevail over any other component of identity and can’t be overlooked neither because of tradition, ideology, religion or any other piece that compounds the jagged puzzle of identity. With all its multiplicity, there’s only ONE humanity. In order to agree on such basic and overused principle, human rights have to be universal and concepts such as equality, freedom, access to knowledge or to a honorable or dignified life can’t be denied in order to safeguard any religious, ancestral or traditional practice or to cling to an idealized past. In the current context of globalization, the term universality can be dangerously confused with uniformity triggering determinism, resignation or victimhood in individuals whose feelings of alienation and marginalization fester in their distorted image of a multifarious reality. Looking back at the history of mankind, Maalouf is convinced there is a promising future ahead where human dignity, plural fraternity and diversity will co-exist overshadowing hatred, violence and racial segregation without stepping into the false conception of understanding modernity as a conduit to tame every individual’s special identity into an undistinguishable herd of narcotized clones. Aren’t we all migrants, members of minorities and the result of mixed breeding and cultural traditions? Can’t we conserve our idiosyncratic identity and belong to mankind’s universal one at once leaving hatred aside and be committed to what is our undeniable responsibility? “Few doctrines throughout History have been able to eradicate hatred, most of them have simply tried to deflect it from one object to another: to the infidel, the foreigner, the apostate, the master, the slave, the father. Naturally, hatred is only called hatred when we see it in others; the hatred which is in ourselves bears a thousand different names.” Naive utopia? Maybe. But I do respond to Maalouf’s stubborn resistance to succumb to despondency. Obvious concepts? Maybe. But I dream of a day when a human being, many years from now, might pick this volume from a dusty library and shrug his/her shoulders in amazement at how retarded civilization was in the 21stC to still have the need to write essays about such elementary concerns. Idealistic route to follow? Maybe. But that doesn’t justify that we continue walking in the opposite direction, does it?
