Au Bonheur des Dames brings us the tidal wave of late 19th Century progress as it washes away everything that stands in its path. It’s shown as inevitable and it will sweep away all that was, in favor of the new. Zola brings this inevitability to us through the emergence of the Department Store. This soulless entity functions as would a high pressure machine constantly vibrating in its perpetual activity from door to counter to cash register. This machine regulates and organizes, with mechanical precision, the passage of a multitude of women undifferentiated one from the other, as they are caught up in its gears. The description of the old versus the new is beautifully rendered. On one hand the dying family owned shops, the specialized craftsmen and their personal relationships with their customers, and on the other the modern, diverse, impersonal and low-priced Department Store. The former are doomed and they will become extinct as the latter flourishes. The description of the work force of the Department Store is extraordinary. It’s a micro cosmos of modern corporate culture, with its kowtowing to the executives, its back-stabbing, and the constant striving to achieve an edge on one’s colleagues by any means. One hundred and fifty years later, it’s so eerily recognizable, so contemporary, that one cannot but admire Zola’s conceptualization of what the future – our present - holds. The central plot, that of Denise and Mouret’s burgeoning love story, is traditional Victorian and I had little patience for it. We have the slip of a girl, moving from the country to the city to provide for her orphaned brothers, going hungry so that they may be taken care of, they being her sole motivation throughout the novel. She is the classic Victorian Angel in the House, small, slender, virtuous, naïve, constantly blushing, trembling, breaking down in tears and morally perfect. Denise never falters. Her counterpart is Mouret, the owner of the Department Store. He is handsome, adept, confident, talented, and morally corrupt in his relationships with women. He manipulates them all, the more sophisticated ones as well as the shop girls. But above all he is an entrepreneur in the most modern sense of the word. He recognizes that women are a great buying force and leverages his understanding of them to create a business that is based on his ability to draw them in and to create an atmosphere that will make them buy everything they see. Mouret has a vision and he implements it successfully and ruthlessly. One wonders why he would be so taken in by the bland Denise, but perhaps Zola is showing us that a moral high ground is also a power to be contended with. I found this aspect less engaging. For me this is one more step in my catching up with Classics that I want to read.
