I read this book because I had heard good things about this author, but I have to say that I don't understand the point of this book. Here's the story : Mistler, a 60-something director of an advertising agency, is told that he has liver cancer and has about 6 months to live. He decides not to fight it. Instead of telling his wife or son, he takes off for Venice. What exactly he hopes to do there is not clear, but we can assume that he wanted to spend a few days in a favorite spot, before his condition became too ugly. Waiting for him in his hotel suite is Lina, a young photographer he'd met once in NYC. Stalker-like, she had followed him to Venice, apparently with the hope of getting some photo assignments from his ad agency. Mistler and Lina start a short-lived fling that is remarkably devoid of romance, passsion or pleasure, and that has the reader wondering why Mistler even bothers. Inbetween some crude descriptions of sexual acts, the reader is then suddenly treated to high-falutin' discourses on the art and history of Venice. There are also some thoughts about Mistler's relationship with his wife (after he found she'd cheated on him with a co-founder of the agency, he bullied her mercilessly), his son (alienated), his father (idolized him) and various and sundry. There are also some highly technical phone calls to NYC that have to do with the fact that he is trying to sell his ad agency. On page 167 out of a 206 page book, he meets an old crush , so we have more sexual speculation. And somewhere towards the very end, it appears that the love of his life was actually his father's mistress. The last pages of the book are probably intended to be highly symbolic, in the sense that Mistler spends good money on a small boat that he will never use, with a reference to the obol and Chiron, the ferryman who ferried the dead souls to the underworld in ancient mythology. I read the whole book because I figured that sooner or later this book would make sense to me. But it didn't. Was the alternation between crude sexual terms and references to high culture intended to underline how complex Mistler is? Is the purchase of expensive chandeliers for his old love intended to be a gesture of reconciliation? I didn't get it. There were lots of strange descriptions like "that sleepless whisper" (page 175). Do whispers every sleep? Do colorless green ideas sleep furiously? The book also had the typographical peculiarity that there were no quotation marks or lines, so that the text went from description to person A speaking to person B speaking without any of the classical visual aids to help the reader follow what was going on. Again : why? An attempt to be different from your run-of-the-mill novel? Finally, there is not a single sympathetic person in the book. Mistler is a cold, manipulative man. Lina is ready to sell her body for photo assignments. Mistler's wife is described as borderline unbalanced. His father's mistress seemed a lovely woman, but she pops up only now and then in short anecdotes. Bottom line : a meandering book that managed very successfully to avoid any meaningful description of a man coming to terms with his mortality.
