"She didn’t know if she was going mad or going sane…" Well, this classic horror novel certainly hit the spot this month! You simply can’t go wrong with pure and ‘simple,’ subtle fright for some pre-Halloween entertainment. This is a book very firmly set in the period of 1966 New York City, yet it never feels outdated on the creepiness scale! It has such a nightmarish quality that seeps into your psyche and makes you wonder on whom you can truly rely. Are people something other than what they appear to be on the surface? Even those we most depend on – can they betray our trust in them? I absolutely loved the setting for this one. Rosemary and Guy Woodhouse are newly married, Guy is trying to establish his acting career, and the couple tosses around the idea of having their first baby. But first Guy wants to settle into a new home and make a name for himself. He is ambitious, and sweet Rosemary is supportive. When the opportunity arises to secure an apartment at the highly sought-after Bramford, the Woodhouses jump at the chance. "The Bramford, old, black, and elephantine, is a warren of high-ceilinged apartments prized for their fireplaces and Victorian detail." The perfect backdrop for what is to follow! For, the Bramford, despite its illustrious address, has a lurid history. And we all know that history has a way of repeating itself. I’m not going to tell you much more – likely, you are familiar with the story already. The movie was such a huge hit and is still popular even today. If you don’t know it, then suffice to say that this book should thoroughly scare the crap out of you! For me personally, this brand of horror is the ultimate. Forget about Jason, Freddy Krueger, Michael Myers, or even Chucky – grab a copy of Rosemary’s Baby instead and be prepared for some exquisite terror. While the overall plot is not dated, I should mention that occasionally the language itself is just that – some racist vocabulary which I could do without. This was sporadic and an unfortunate consequence of the time in which this was written, but worth mentioning for those that may be turned off. Other than that, I do like Ira Levin’s straightforward prose and his clever writing – in both this as well as Deathtrap . Next Levin novel up - perhaps The Stepford Wives .
