5/5 ⭐ King has done it ✨again✨ I don't even understand why I'm still surprised when another Stephen King novel becomes my new favourite, but here we are again...in utter shock and awe... Jokes aside, this book is fantastic and proves to me one more time that 70s and 80s King was something else. There is something about vampire stories in a junk food kind of way. You realise it's not good for your health, but you can't stop because it's just so good . That was me with vampire books this year. This one however was more of a Dracula-Nosferatu crossover rather than a Twilight-TVD one. But hey, it was juicy King is a natural storyteller and here, he managed to tell the story of a whole town by just having special chapters where we followed different inhabitants of this said town, Jerusalem's Lot, throughout their cursed little days. And you could very well see how, as the story moved on, the daily activities of the townspeople became darker and more unusual. You could really witness the change. The downside is that there were so many characters at some point you couldn't keep up with them, not really. But after some time passes, you start to get the hang of it so fret not! I loved the eerie atmosphere, I loved the mystery and the kind of internal pressure you get to feel right in your chest while reading something that you know very well that might frighten you. The psychological horror in this is extraordinary, the suspense is excellent and the scary bits come at you when you least expect them (aka when it's night and you are home alone and nothing really scary happened and you're allowing yourself one more chapter and that chapter proves to be the scary one). Given the fact that Salem's Lot is one of King's early works if you read it after you read his other masterpieces such as The Shining and IT , you realise what inspired what and where and how because there are many common ideas and leitmotifs in all these three works that really seem to tie all of his stories together in one big universe. I do believe that this is the perfect read for those of you who love spooky October reads and maybe consider celebrating KINGtober each year as I've been doing for the past few years. If this is on your list somewhere, move it to the top for this KINGtober, because it's going to be your new favourite!
