3.5 "To become oneself, with all one's strength. Difficult. A bomb, a speech, a rifle shot-and the world can look a different place. And then where is this "self"? In the novel, an unnamed narrator proceeds to reconstruct the story of her friend, Christa T, an East German woman who lives through the end of WWll and dies at an early age in the Communist state. In a poetic, fragmented style, narrator tries to make sense of her friend's life through her notes, lettters and people's recollections. Christa T led an unexemplery life in the times that bore witness to the historical upheavals(except for once blowing a trumpet in the middle of the street). There was terrors of war, quietness of peace and later assuredness of a new beginning. Finally there was disillusionment as well. Inspite of having done nothing extraordinary, Christa T, who gets disillusioned with the Socialist regime, implicitly symbolizes the non-conforming individual within authoritative systems. The individual who remains miserable and slowly decays in the banality of conformity that sustains the system. The individual who stands at the margins who gets entangled in the changing historical ethos. Ive read one work by Wolf before (Cassandra) found Christa Wolf to be an inquisitive author who tries to the answers to the "political" through the "personal". Wolf had her own share of controversial political life and political disillusionments. I think this novel was banned in GDR. Nevertheless, I find her writing impressive. That being said, I dont expect this book to be everybody's cup of tea. The prose wanders, and demands a constant attention from the reader to the memorization that it unveils. Narrative language constantly fluctuates between what the narrator remembers and what the narrator thinks they remember (rather imagines), resulting in sentences that do not voice an organic continuity. Perhaps, this disjointedness or the uncertainty better describes the "self" the narrator attempts to rebuild from the debris of memories.
