Joyce Carol Oates is so mysterious to anyone born after 1990 because she’s published sixty books and fifty short story collections, all of varying genres, and everyone’s read two or three but not the SAME two or three so she doesn’t have any obvious most popular book to start with. I heard this collection was a super safe bet if you like horror, though, which: I didn’t even realize she wrote horror!! I was half-expecting novels about Aging With Grace while solo hiking the Pacific Crest Trail. I owe you an apology, JCO! I wasn’t really familiar with your game!!!! It turns out Joyce Carol Oates is kind of like Lana Del Rey as Edgar Allen Poe. Like if at the top of National Anthem, Lana read The Cask of Amontillado out loud in a slow dreamy voice, and then screamed for a while. A lot of these stories are basically about a sexually sinister man of indeterminate age tying Betty Boop to some railroad tracks, and Betty Boop is thinking “maybe if I’m a Good Girl…maybe if I’m Good for him…he’ll let me go……!” And then just as she’s about to get run over Betty Boop wakes up because it was all a dream. Occasionally a bit antiquated, but I had a lot of fun reading this, especially since you can just IMAGINE the 9-12th grade English class discussion questions a teacher might ask. Why is the woman in the first story’s appearance so frightening? What do Miranda the cat and Alissa the human have in common? What are the physical traits Oates uses to describe Bibi? When is race emphasized, and for what purpose? Do you think the dreams really happened? Why, or why not? Side note: I haven’t read The Turn of the Screw by Henry James, so I didn’t get a lot out of Accursed Inhabitants of the House of Bly, but whenever someone writes a “response” story to another author’s work, I like to imagine like, Joyce Carol Oates watching Rise of Skywalker and immediately writing Reylo fix-it fic. Kylo Ren and Rey are raising baby yoda together but at the end Rey attacks baby yoda with hammers (ambiguously, and with feminine rage)
