One of his greatest works 🌳 I say nothing, I suppose, when I say this novel is sad, profound and beautiful. All Remarque’s works are that. However I can only emphasize all those elements are “in Extremis” with this novel. His most powerful and believable love story lies in these pages .. but once again there is no HEA, there never is a Happy Ever After with Remarque. I struggled with tears at the end. A love that should have grown and thrived does not. Meanwhile there will not be a second Munich either, a second and lasting “peace in our time”; the Maginot Line will not hold back the German tanks; the refugees and Jews and Romani and handicapped and leftists and those who resist the swastika will not all survive almost 6 years of total war. The human race repeats inhumanity to man and woman and child and beast again and again and it repeats it in the 21st century and it will repeat it in the 22nd as well after we are all gone. We have a sickness. A recurring sickness of war and hate and power and destruction. Sometimes the better angels of our nature prevail. But never for long and never without sacrifice. 🌳 Heartbreaking. Yet certainly one of his best. It is epic and deep. 🌙 A few taxi drivers were still sitting there. He sat down by the window where he had been sitting before and drank his coffee. The street outside was empty. The drivers were talking about Hitler. They found him ridiculous and prophesied his immediate downfall should he dare to come near the Maginot Line. Ravic stared into the street 🌙 Her eyes gleamed in the light from the street lamp; one could look through them and see no end. 🌙 Why are pious people so rarely loyal, Eugénie? Cynics have the best character; idealists are the least bearable. Doesn’t that make you think?” 🌙 Two people sat at the table next to him. A woman, with hair parted in the middle, and a man. A boy of about eight stood before them. He had been listening at the tables and now came over to them. “Why are we Jews?” he asked the woman. The woman did not answer. 🌙 🌙 🌙 🌙
