"This was the reason I loved the library. For me it was the centre of the world." The Centre of My World is a wondrous and touching tale of childhood and adolescence, that reminded me of Aristotle and Dante Discover the Secrets of the Universe . But better. Fight me. Update: I loved this book even more the second time around. The frustration that I felt when I read The Centre of My World for the first time was gone. Two years ago, the pacing was much too slow for my taste. Childhood flashbacks kept interrupting the main plot and drove me nuts. The romance was less romantic than I had wanted it to be. The ending was...not enough. Rereading it helped because I could take my mind off what was being told and instead focus on how it was told. That's also the reason why I added a star to my rating. You can also watch the film adaption of this book which is totally worth watching because the main actors are very nice to look at (and so are their butts). This is one of the few German books that I am really proud of. It was written more than 20 years ago but it feels timeless. There aren't many great LGBT books in the German YA category, and even less OwnVoices books (aka gay books written by an actual gay author). The Centre of My World is a rare gemstone and you shouldn't deprive yourself of this experience. Original review: Phil lives in an old and crumbling mansion named Visible, together with his twin sister Dianne and their mother Glass. They make for a rather unusual family. Glass despises being called "Mom" and refuses to enter into a lasting relationship with any of the long list of men that go in and out of Visible. Phil wishes for nothing more than someone he can call "Dad", and still, he doesn't even know his father's name. Dianne has a deep understanding of everything that flutters and crawls through their garden, and people whisper that she can talk to animals. No wonder the town folk warn their children to stay far away from these people. Phil and Dianne don't mind their unusual lifestyle. That is, not until they grow up and stop talking to each other, for a reason Phil doesn't understand. And then again, there's Nicholas, the new guy in Phil's year, and he may make things even more confusing. What makes The Centre of My World so remarkable is its outstanding prose and its fragile but headstrong characters. The writing is vibrant and nostalgic. Andreas Steinhöfel captures the feeling of youth, awkward discoveries of growing up and bittersweet memories perfectly. Phil is so relatable because he impersonates all of those feelings that come with first crushes, love, friendship and family. Here is one of my favourite passages from the book: "Imagine life as a huge house with lots of rooms, Phil. Some of these rooms are empty, and others are full of junk. Some are big and filled with light, and others are dark and hide terror and grief. And from time to time - but only from time to time, mind you - the door to one of these scary rooms opens and you have to look inside whether you want to or not. That makes you terribly frightened, like now. So you know what you do then?" I shook my head. "Then you imagine it's your life - your house, with your rooms. You have the keys, Phil. So you just shut the door of that scary room." "And I throw the key away!" "No, you mustn't do that, ever," replied Tereza. "Because one day you may realize that this scary room is the only way you can reach a bigger, more beautiful part of the house. And then you'll need the key. You can lock out your fear for a while, but at some point you have to face up to it." That, my fellow readers, was Andreas Steinhöfel spitting mental health advice since 1998. Now, I must admit that the translation doesn't do the German original complete justice, but the message is the same one. Personally, I would have wished for fewer flashbacks and a thicker plot instead. The ending didn't satisfy me completely. There was too much left unsaid for my taste. But then again nothing in life is certain. Luckily there is a collection of short stories, Defender : Geschichten aus der Mitte der Welt , that may answer some questions (update: no it doesn't. You'll only have more questions). The Centre of My World is one underrated novel. If you're looking for a new(ish) voice in LGBT books, a coming of age tale, a portrayal of strong and independent women, or just a good book to dive into, this is perfect for you. Life is ironic, funny, raw, sad and beautiful. So is this novel. Find more of my books on Instagram
