Bahnwärter Thiel is a novellistic study by Gerhart Hauptmann. Written in 1887, the story was published in 1888 and is one of the most important works of naturalism. Hauptmann explores the helplessness of the social class society and the threat of industrialization by means of his main character Thiel. The material goes back to an accident on the railroad line from Erkner to Fürstenwalde and is based on the poet's experiences during his life on the outskirts of Berlin. The central symbol in Bahnwärter Thiel is the railroad. In the 19th century, it was a highly visible sign of the dawning machine age, which was sometimes perceived as threatening, also in terms of the social problems that industrialization created, especially in the working-class milieu. Physical and social threats posed by the "power of machines" to which people are subjected in the rhythm of their lives are clearly expressed in the railroad symbolism of the novella. Thiel experiences the destructive power of the railroad several times: his silent devotion to Minna is interrupted by "passing trains", he himself is injured by a bottle thrown from a train, a roebuck is rammed, and finally, the train accident at the end not only leads to the death of Tobias, but subsequently costs the lives of Lene and Thiel's second son. Naturalistic Features : The main character of the story is an antihero whose everyday life as a worker (from the working class) is portrayed. Thiel is a main character trapped in his milieu, his life is determined by it. The aim of the novella is to denounce the misery of the workers and to draw the attention of bourgeois circles to it. The narrative is characterized by a very accurate and detailed description of the events, with precise indications of place and time, such as "Schön-Schornstein, Neu Zittau." Except for the dream sequences, the narrative is chronological. Secular style repeatedly flows into the plot. Personal opinion : We had to read this novella in the 8th grade in German class with Mr. Herkel (lumberjack shirt - Fleißbienchen). I don't remember much, only that the whole class hated this book, and I think I did too.
