131st book of 2022. Artist for this review is English painter J.M.W. Turner (1775-1851)*. "High Street, Oxford" — 1810 I’m an absolute sucker for campus novels and a sucker for Oxford/Cambridge novels, so here we are with Marías's Oxford novel, All Souls . It’s a strange and oddly wonderful little book; it is almost entirely plotless (there’s a vague plot of an affair with the narrator and a woman named Clare), but otherwise the book has a smattering of things. At once it is an ode to Oxford and academia. The narrator is a Spaniard from Madrid as a visiting professor. There are ruminations on the English, their mannerisms, their habits (interesting, sometimes humorous to read as an Englishman, example: ‘As is well known, the English never look openly at anything, or they look in such a veiled, indifferent way that one can never be sure that someone is actually looking at what they appear to be looking at, such is their ability to lend an opaque glaze to the most ordinary of glances.’**) There are long digressions about numerous topics, one is an ode to English bookshops, another to homelessness, another to the English writer John Gawsworth. The narrator at one point discusses the rubbish bins and being abroad. Marías's prose is careful, intellectually compelling, sometimes light, sometimes dense. At times I wondered why Marías had chosen to write the long digressions he had written but the novel felt personal, and because of that, very humane, so I was unbothered by the relevance or the distraction from the ‘plot’, and instead enjoyed his rambling descriptions of bookshops, Oxford cobbles, and the English professors at the university around him. Not a novel I would jump to recommend to someone, but a quiet, meditative, slightly peculiar read that tickled the academic-lover in me. "A View from the Inside of Brazen Nose College Quadrangle, Oxford" — 1803 _________________ *I miss the opportunity of looking at my favourite art pieces and artists when writing reviews, so it's likely I'll begin putting them in my reviews again when one comes to mind. I revel in the chance to connect the books I read to art I like. Who doesn't want to spend a moment looking at Turner? **When my Canadian companion from here on Goodreads, Alan, came to England with one of his friends we actually joked about this very stereotype as we wandered through the Underground on our way to Soho. He made the observation that the English don’t seem to ever look you in the eye, and I joked that I had yet to look at them or know what they looked like. And indeed it was true, their eye-contact was far more assertive than my own, non-existent, apparently, English eye-contact.
