‘’Our posturings, our imagined self-importance, the delusion that we have some privileged position in the Universe, are challenged by this pale light. Our planet is a lonely speck in the great enveloping cosmic dark. In our obscurity, in all this vastness, there is no hint that help will come from elsewhere to save us from ourselves’’ Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space It’s impossible to talk about this book without talking about the eponymous film, which actually came out before the book was published. On March 31, 1964 Stanley Kubrick wrote a letter to Arthur C. Clarke saying he wanted to make a film on the existence of intelligent extraterrestrials and exploration of space and that he wanted to collaborate with him. The two men mate the following month at New York’s Plaza Hotel, and the formative ideas for ‘’2001: A Space Odyssey’’ were born that day. The screenplay and its novelization were developing concurrently from 1964-68 after successive meetings in Kubrick's flat on the Upper East Side. Directed and produced by Kubrick and co-written by Kubrick and Clarke himself, the film premiered in Washington, DC, on April 2, 1968. It was unlike anything that had been seen before on the big screen. To say the film divided opinions is an understatement. People walked out in droves from premiers all over the United States, including executives from the film’s own production company, MGM. It was dubbed incomprehensible and dry. However, today it is widely recognized as being an exceptionally crafted genre defining work of immense stature. From its pioneering special effects to its use of classical music to its minimal use of dialogue, it is a film made by an obsessive perfectionist at the peak of his powers. It also endured Richard Strauss’s 1896 classic ‘Also Sprach Zarathustra’ as the quintessential ‘space theme song’, most memorably during BBC’s coverage of the Apollo missions. Even the choice of ‘Also Sprach Zarathustra’ is a very deliberate one. It alludes to the gospel of Nietzsche's Zarathustra , preaching the case for human beings as a transitional phase between animals ( 'man-ape' millions of years ago) and an Übermensch (' star child ' millions of years from now). However, Kubrick was insistent on the futility of giving out direct explanations to the different possible interpretations of the film. In an interview on the September 1968 issue of Playboy Magazine, Kubrick said; ''I intended the film to be an intensely subjective experience that reaches the viewer at an inner level of consciousness, just as music does; to “explain” a Beethoven symphony would be to emasculate it by creating an artificial barrier between conception and appreciation. You’re free to speculate as you wish about the philosophical and allegorical meaning of the film—and such speculation is an indication that it has succeeded in gripping the audience at a very deep level—but I don’t want to spell out a verbal road map for 2001 that every viewer will feel obligated to pursue or fear he’s missed the point.'' Michael Benson, who wrote a book on the making of the film, analogized it with Homer’s Epic Odyssey , saying; ‘’.... Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke’s ‘2001: A Space Odyssey’, is where the islands of southeastern Mediterranean became the solar system’s planets and moons, and the wine-dark sea the airless void of interplanetary interstellar, and even intergalactic space’’ Clarke was already a well accomplished professional when the book came out. He had received his first-class degree in Mathematics and Physics from King’s College London. He was chairman of the British Interplanetary Society on two different occasions, and also served in the Royal Air Force during WWII as a radar specialist. He was a prolific novelist, essayist and an undersea explorer. Yet, ‘2001’ will go on to be his crowning achievement, partly because of the popularity of the film but also through the book’s own qualities. There are few Sci-fi books that escape the common criticism the genre gets for lacking in artistic or aesthetic qualities. In my opinion, ‘2001’ belongs on this select list of Sci-fi books. This is reflected through its profound exploration of themes such as evolution, intelligence, and the role technology plays in our lives. In its writing, it seems to strike the right balance between imagination and realism. Just the exploration of the ethical implications of artificial intelligence alone would qualify it as a book before its time. HAL 9000 remains one of the most complex AI characters ever. The film and the book actually supplement each other. Kubrick's film is a cryptic visual experience, while Clarke's book details the story and deciphers the enigmatic elements of the film. The book and the film alike are admired by many scientists who underlined their scientific accuracy, attention to detail, ambition and vision. In many ways, ‘2001’ is the icon of the space age. Clarke does not hand out simple answers or moral judgments, but rather bids us to meditate on our own place in the universe and our relationship with other possible forms of intelligence. The vastness of space and time reflected through this book and the film will give you a humbling experience that shocks you out of a state Carl Sagan calls ‘’The childishness and narcissism of our pre-Copernican notions’’. Our pretension of grandiose is dwarfed by the immensity of the observable universe, and possibly what lies beyond that. Our pettiness, tribalism and squabbles are all but impertinent at the cosmic level, where we occupy an infinitesimally obscure corner. This is a call to be humane and kind to one another, instead of congratulating ourselves as being this specially privileged beings in a universe that couldn’t care less either way.
