“I was born in the breezes”(1844). Joshua Slocum was a unique character born in Nova Scotia and then naturalized as a US citizen. He came from a family with ties to the sea and boat building. After a life being everything from a cabin boy to a ship captain he was given what was basically the frame of a 36’ sloop, rebuilt The Spray by himself, and fitted the boat up on the cheap (a true Yankee). Slocum decides to sail around the world solo, something not done before. Reading his book you learn a lot about how the boat was put together and something about navigation. He had to have been more than lucky. His navigational tools were few and very basic. After testing The Spray he sails eastward in July of 1898 and arrives in the Azores without incident. Wherever he goes he is feted, takes on drinking water and is given or buys whatever food is fresh, available and cheap. After adventures in the Mediterranean with pirates he decides to head for South America and through the Straits of Magellan. The book obviously uses uses his ordinary ship’s log which he later developed into a “literary” piece. It works brilliantly. You can see from his writing how he charms people with his upbeat and humorous nature. He’s a natural story teller. Not to rush things, but three years and two months later he completes his adventure, the first solo sailor to circumnavigate the globe. He survived rogue waves in which he climbed the mast and was able to see his sloop completely submerged in water (like many in his time he never learned to swim) survived doldrums and avid fans. He makes money as he goes. In one case he salvages a load of tallow from a recent shipwreck and later sells it to people who had never seen fried donuts. “In this way I made a reasonable profit.” As the trip goes on he becomes more and more of a legend and people pay to hear him speak about his adventures. He meets celebrities such as the widow of Robert L. Stevenson, Stanley the African explorer/journalist and visits the island where Selkirk (Robinson Crusoe) lived by himself 4 years. I liked his style and humor. The book is good for people who are experienced and those who are just interested in the trip. Unfortunately on a later adventure in 1909 he disappeared off Grand Cayman but maybe that was the way to go for the old sailor.
