I have lived in Ivan and die in Malina. Happy with Ivan. I never knew her when she was living in Ivan. Maybe if I were standing across the street I'd watch her spinning out of control. Her Hungarian boyfriend who sends avalanches of stone cold epithets. Don't ask if I love you, don't say I..., don't make believe important, be fun, be happy, be the first time I saw you. Strangers, for the last time. A dead telephone in her apartment is visited by the spirits of everyone who isn't Ivan. I saw her with his two kids, their tugging arms and spinning happy. The rarest tummy butterfly bright and eye blinking crushed. I only saw her living in the never landing. When she has to make up everything about zoo animals (has anyone else noticed the phenomenon of men reading aloud from placards? Any botanical garden, zoo, museum or anything. They read as if the woman [it's always a woman] is supposed to think this is their combustible wisdom and not the same damn placard right in front of their same faces). If Ivan is out of their range she can be what they want. If the her of him and the her of they and the her of others collide pop goes the butterflies wings. Please let them have ice cream, I promised them ice cream. Dancing and spinning that is dizzy and on strings. If she is happy it happened before she thought about it. She thinks about it before it can happen, lives in here lies. Ivan is more important in his absence. And it was perfect this way. This how he doesn't belong to her if she sends him off to be him without her. I never wanted her to love Ivan. I begged her inside of me to just forget about him. When he tells her who she is. This isn't you, you're happy, you don't write like this. The unreal love pulled my butterflies wings off and shoved them under a microscope. I didn't want to hold my breath when she waits for that phone to ring and I did. She lives with Malina. It was perfect this deliberate I'm not living it because I'm pedestaling to the burning synthetic world stuffs. I don't know how Bachmann managed to weave this web of psychological life of stepping outside of yourself and then when you are actually living it. There's a big fat spider of wish fulfillment to eat you alive because you couldn't stop thinking. If it was on purpose she feels safe to tether to Malina as she strangles herself to wait for Ivan. Malina tells her Don't forget that not one of your enemies has ever seen you, and you have never seen one of them . I had this feeling that she performs that mime of sewing your lips shut and throwing the needle into the biggest haystack. The haystack of needles of the universe. You can't see the threads that sew everyone together because the haystack is too big for that. She and Malina talk about the war, what people got up and could pretend never happened. If people did a spontaneous dance of everyone knew the moves on the day you didn't want to wake up. It never happened. It happened. They talk about what peace is to war. The interlude between war. Crocodile tears evaporate in reptilian flesh. Tears in Austria for Bangladesh, for Syria. Her father murdered her, she murders them in her eyelids prison gate shut (cha chung) and her sister loses a name. Malina asks and she doesn't know. She's a survivor of real life and a prisoner of its memory. It is so much more to run from than if she can be rescued if only Ivan or Malina will hold her down. I had the feeling they were talking about everyone, or who could be anyone, Austria, the world. They don't talk about Malina. I think Bachmann was a genius in how Malina's silences and the not asking about him is spoken concurrently. She slips out of time into a fantasy of a princess and murder and riding. When she flies she is only spinning. I think Bachmann was a genius to do the way people name everything. They talk and talk and make important and they talk about what they talk about when they talk about everything. And what you think you are living is that foot in your over analyzing mental lands. I'm one of those intense mental life that overlaps real life like if you wore a sweat shirt with a skeleton on it for Halloween. It gave me chills to see it this way in a book that felt so real and so not real (it's experimental as fancy foot work goes. Not the "that looks easy!" dancing but you know they practiced that dance in their bedroom alone every night and dreamed someone would see it and at the same time it was a vigil for never, ever being understood). Malina is a strange book. I don't have a handle on it because it slips out of time. I've been thinking about what to write in a review for ages. It is if you lived past what you didn't think would ever end and then you don't know how to leave of world war II Austria and it is relationships are hell, man and it is a telling. Malina says this. I can't get over this. Once one has survived something then survival itself interferes with understanding, and you don't even know which lives came before and which is your life of today, you even mix up your own lives. I had this feeling all of the time that she wanted them to tell her who she was. Malina is the web beneath the dizzy spin of Ivan. I know that his face falls from her reach when she's not... I don't believe he let her burn to death. I know what the essay in the book says about his sudden apathy. I don't think that was it. She had to know who she was for herself. Forget about Ivan. I want to forget about Ivan even though she made him important so she can stay hungry. I think she slips into the wall because she murdered herself. Beauty is no longer flowing from me, it could have flowed from me, it came in waves to me from Ivan, Ivan who is beautiful, I have known one single beautiful human being, nonetheless I have seen beauty, in the final analysis even I became beautiful one single time, through Ivan. No alarm, no sirens. No one comes to help. Not the ambulance and not the police. It is a very old wall, a very strong wall, from which no one can fall, which no one can break open, from which nothing can ever be heard again. Malina haunts me. This killing yourself. When did it stop the death wish to stream into the drowning so you can suspend in freeze, over your face no direction. Only the other side of the invisible corners black dream.
