A ghost story about a literary detective obsessed with collecting books and souls. The nameless narrator is a Spanish visiting professor at Oxford college (which is a real place, I think?). But all this academia life is so overrated: in the narrator’s opinion, it equates to pretending and showing oneself busy with preparing and giving lectures, walking through corridors wearing a black cape and looking intelligent. There is time on his hands, so why not give in to his passion of hunting literary gems, have an affair with a married woman, so there is someone to think about, and maybe engage in some intellectual conversations with his highly respected college mates? Javier Marías doesn’t disappoint, there are philosophical reflections on life, death, memory and time, amusing digressions, witty dialogues, intriguing intertextuality and comic almodovaresque scenes. Marías’ effortless prose creates this addictive feeling of living inside the narrator’s head. Real and fictional characters - all souls - are amazingly interwoven. I’m manufacturing and storing up future memories in order to create a little variety for myself in my old age. Marías is so generous with absurdity here, because when true knowledge proves irrelevant, one is free to invent . There is a certain college dinner scene, where the characters have to respect a serious academic etiquette with wigs and black capes, which ends up in a hilarious farce. And it is precisely here that our narrator gains a life-changing insight. Who needs dark academia, when there is Marías academia? That feeling of temporary vertigo or of time annihilated that is provoked by holding in one’s hands objects that still speak in muffled tones of their past. The narrator’s obsession with rare books and elusive authors reminded me of the Critics trying to find information about an enigmatic writer in Roberto Bolaño’s 2666 . Furthermore, having recently traveled through space and time with W. G. Sebald’s The Emigrants , this novel felt like a mix of Sebald and Bolaño with unmatchable Marías’ humour. The ending took me by surprise, it was unbelievably vivid and beautiful. Since Marías himself was a visiting professor at Oxford, some critics identified him as the narrator of All Souls (how imaginative of them!). So due to many stirring reactions to this novel, Marías wrote a review in response to all those reviews - Dark Back of Time - probably my next Marías read. It isn’t only that anything still might happen, some unimaginable piece of news, a sudden turn-around in events, the most extraordinary experiences, discoveries, the world turned upside down… The other side of time, its dark back. Maybe I wasn’t as impressed by this novel as by Tomorrow in the Battle Think on Me (one of my favourites from last year), but it was a thought provoking reading experience and I laughed through many scenes. All souls are still alive. 4/5 Codrington Library at All Souls College
