This is such an odd book to review, in both story and consumption. It is exactly what it advertises: a detective story, but dinosaurs. That’s it, it really does feel like you’re looking at some old black and white tv with some PIs feet up on the desk and too much cigar smoke in the room. I guess a more detailed review is in order. Characters: Every character had their own unique spirit and flavor; personalities, emotions, and characterization were well individualized and never seemed to step on anyone else’s toes. There were even times when I said, “oh they’re interesting. I wonder when they’ll show up later,” and they never do. Sometimes that might be a criticism from me, but here, it’s really more of a testament to the author’s abilities as a writer to make every character compelling. Writing: As I said before: it really does sound like an old detective film. The writing is excellent in most every way and really is the glue that holds this together. The only criticism I have is that there isn’t more individualized behavior amongst the species. Realistically, the only info we receive is, spoiler alert: everyone hates compys. Just a missed opportunity on the writers part. I think the concepts he has are awesome and really well fleshed out for the most part, but it’s a hindrance at some points in the writing where the dinosaurisms are weak and just disappointing. Story: Really excellent stuff here; the entire plot moves along pretty well, though the third act does seem to have an abundance of twists and turns that, again, detracts from the overall story. I appreciate that there are clues to everything that the reader can pick up on as they go and many, may have solved it before they reach the end of the story. Again though, plot twists galore is nice and all, and very typical of a detective story, but it’s hard to manage all of those different points without some inevitable eye rolling on the way. Overall, I don’t know how to rate this; I like dinosaurs, I like puzzles, this book was abundant in both. For some reason though, there were some sour notes this hit for me. The problem is, it’s still a gosh darned well written book. An impressive piece and a remarkably odd premise combined with some fantastic characterization made something that was strangely enjoyable for me. I’ll probably read the other two books in the series sometime later in my life, but for now I’m happy to close the book on another dinosaur story, as imperfect, but lovable as it might be. 4.3 🌟
