Erich Maria Remarque (1898-1970) Erst seit wir wissen, dass wir sterben müssen, und weil wir es wissen, wurde Idyll zu Drama, Kreis zur Lanze, Werden zu Vergehen und Schrei zu Furcht und Flucht zu Urteil.() Erich Maria Remarque was a name known to me solely because of his famous Im Westen Nichts Neues (1928), which I avoided until recently because of its popularity and because I feared that some of the sentimentality of Lewis Milestone's Hollywood version(*) might have had its source in the book. I finally read Westen a few weeks ago, and it was admirable enough to send me to more of his books: the harrowing Nazi refugee novel Die Nacht von Lissabon (1962), in which is ensconced a most poignant and unusual love story and is at least as good as Anna Seghers' excellent Transit in evoking the desperation and dread of ordinary people chewed up by the interminable machinations of indifferent bureaucracies and spat back out to the impatient murderers on their tail; and now Der schwarze Obelisk (1956, available in English translation under the title The Black Obelisk).(+) I have a certain intellectual grasp of the incredible German hyperinflation that peaked in 1923, but understanding the numbers and the economics is not the same as grasping what it was like for the unfortunate humans caught in that misery. Stefan Zweig's story Die unsichtbare Sammlung provided me with a glimpse of those unquiet waters, but Der schwarze Obelisk pushed me into the breakers, whence I now emerge snorting and dripping and shaking my head in wonder. Like Westen and Nacht ,(**) Obelisk incorporates much of Remarque's own life; the first person narrator, Ludwig Bodmer, has Remarque's age and all of his life experiences. He works for a small firm selling gravestones (as did Remarque himself) and the city in which the story is set - Werdenbrück - is clearly Remarque's hometown Osnabrück (which I know rather well, as I lived there for five years). In fact, I understand that Obelisk is a roman à clef of Remarque's Osnabrücker acquaintances. Max Beckmann, Night (1918) Though one comes to a clear appreciation of the tragedy of the hyperinflation for many people - the retired, the wounded veterans, everyone with a salary, pension and/or savings in cash - and of the remorse- and consciencelessness of those who gleefully crawled up to the top of the ant hill on the backs of the rest, Remarque strewed his text with multiple themes, one of which is suggested by the book's subtitle: Story of a Delayed Youth. Remarque's generation fought in the first world war upon leaving boyhood, were transformed in the bloody, stinking trenches into something completely different, and then found themselves caught in the accelerating catastrophe of hyperinflation and the spreading brown plague of Nazism (whose growing appeal to certain kinds of persons is displayed in Obelisk ). Remarque's alter ego, Ludwig, oscillating between cynicism and idealism, is suspended in a state between child- and adulthood, a fact of which he is sometimes aware, which he mulls over again and again, along with the recurring motifs of identity and values - a commonplace among the young and unformed, but here pressurized by a most extraordinary situation. And, not unexpectedly in light of protagonists fresh from the trenches selling gravestones, another prominent motif is death: the event, the social consequences, and the many theories humankind has manufactured to try to deal with it, each of which is espoused by at least one of characters. Despite the underlying seriousness of the book, it is rich with life and humor. In fact, there are hilarious passages and set pieces throughout the book. I had the impression that the aged Remarque was making fun of his young self, but with sympathy, not with regret or bitterness. Though there is tragedy and threat, most of the characters are of Remarque's generation, and the young can adapt to almost any circumstance with a certain amount of aplomb and continue behaving as do those in whom life's sources flow the swiftest. After reading three of Remarque's books I know that I shall be visiting more, soon. For my taste he isn't a profound thinker or a gifted prose stylist like Mann, Böll or Handke, but there is more than enough thought and style to support the closely observed characters and engaging stories of twentieth century German life with which he regales the reader. () Only since we know that we must die, and because we know it, idyll turned into drama, circle to lance, becoming to decaying and cry to fear and flight to judgment. (*) At least in my memory - I haven't seen it since an age when I was even more allergic to sentimentality than I am now. (**) As probably everyone knows, Remarque was a soldier in the trenches during World War I, was wounded and spent a lengthy rehabilitation in hospital just as the protagonist of Westen did. He was also a refugee from the Nazis, escaping to Switzerland in 1932, but as a prominent author he was not one of the unfortunate majority described so compellingly in Nacht . (+) In the meantime I've read his Drei Kameraden (1936) - though beladen with a somewhat melodramatic ending, it is a hard-eyed portrait of life in late 1920's Berlin - Der Weg zurück (1931) - the sequel to Im Westen nichts Neues portraying the painful re-entry of the survivors of years of trench warfare into the political and social turmoil of a defeated Germany - and Arc de Triomphe (1945) - an expansive, multi-character look at the life of refugees from the many authoritarian regimes in 1938/9 Europe trying to survive in an increasingly threatened and threatening Paris. Though both deal with refugees from the Nazis, Arc de Triomphe and Die Nacht von Lissabon are very, very different books. As successful as the former is in its intentions and in keeping my rapt attention, at this point I must say that the latter's focus on a moving story of essentially three characters seems to have released Remarque's poetic gifts of language and insight; my judgment may be premature, but Die Nacht von Lissabon is Remarque's most artistically accomplished work.
