"The Climb" tells the story of the 1996 Everest disaster, in which a series of bad decisions and coincidences led to the deaths of 5 climbers, among them Rob Hall and Scott Fishcer, who were among the best in their professions. The focus of the narrative is the experience of Russian guide Anatoli Boukreev. To understand "The Climb" one pretty much needs to also have read "Into Thin Air", another account of the disaster authored by Jon Krakauer, who was also among those involved. In his work, Krakauer questioned certain actions taken by Boukreev, and "The Climb" is obviously also his defence. "Into Thin Air" is an obvious point of comparison for "The Climb". While Krakauer concentrated on his personal experience, Boukreev gives a wider and more technical account of the expedition. As a guide he has more to tell about the preparations of the trip and it is a matter of taste whether you prefer it to Krakauer's "human interest" approach. The approach is also dictated by the fact that Boukreev's English wasn't top notch and he most likely couldn't relate all the details of his experience to G. Weston De Walt who did the actual writing. I found the book as immersive as "Into Thin Air" and it gave me a better understanding of what transpired on the mountain in those two days. Opinion seems to be sharply divided about the causes of the accident between the Krakauer and Boukreev camps. While the text makes valid points defending Boukreev's actions, there are some unnecessary jabs at Krakauer, which fail to fully appreciate that he was a less experienced client, not a expedition guide. Krakauer was obviously wrong about Boukreev's inadequate gear. As for Boukreev's decision not to use oxygen and the descent ahead of the clients, I frankly can not make up my mind as there are too many variables. In my mind Hall and Fischer were most responsible, as they both failed to enforce turnaround times and use adequate communications gear. Both obviously paid for their oversights with their lives. Regardless of whether or not Boukreev acted correctly during the summit bid, his heroism in rescuing people during the night of 10th-11th May can not be denied. However, I do not feel that because Krakauer spent the night sleeping in his tent, he doesn't have a right to critique Boukreev. He was less experienced, he was a client, he would not have been an asset for the rescue. I would recommed "The Climb" to anyone who was fascinated by "Into Thin Air". Maybe not quite as well written, the book is still essential reading for anyone who wants a better understanding of the 1996 disaster.
