Again, the table of contents is needed, particularly for those looking for a specific story, and not sure where it is. (1) Introduction: rather sketchy, and later less interlarded commentary than in the other two collections. In this book, Bradley's comments only occur between sections, and not between every two stories. (2) A Gift of Love: A woman who doesn't bear laran (or thinks she doesn't) helps invent the role of barragana for her co-wife, but at great cost to herself, since she feels inadequate if she can't be in an exclusive relationship, however she loves her husband and junior wife. She also invents the custom of laran-gifted fathers going through labor in rapport with the mothers. (3) Dark Lady: A mortal girl becomes aide to Avarra in her role as angel of Death. (And who assigned AVARRA that role?). I have to say I strongly disapprove of these apologies for death. I don't WANT to be reconciled with death. I want all deaths to be meaningless and cruel. If they're not, what motive would we have to eliminate death? Even the concept of reincarnation doesn't really resolve anything. If one death is bad, what can be said for REPEATED deaths? (4) A Legend of The Hellers: A man fears to risk death because he can't father an heir. So an (eventually identified) supernatural force intervenes to make sure he DOESN'T get one. (5) In The Throat of The Dragon: A survivor of the Marelie Hastur incident abandons his role as Tower Worker (and warrior) to become a harper. I have to say that the question of 'outlaws' (from what law?) is rather badly handled in the series as a whole. The 'bandit' chieftains aren't substantially different from other 'lords' especially in the mountains. The argument that 'bandits' find it easier to rob passersby and households than to 'earn their keep' is belied by the fact that they're often stymied, and can be killed without remorse or blood-feud. And in many cases, it's evident that the 'bandit' communities are, in fact, the EXACT same people as the mountain lords and their followers they've 'displaced', or their lineal descendants. (6) Wind-Music: A boy suffering threshold sickness is bullied by his household (this seems to have been standard practice in the early days, especially among the Ridenow). As an attempt to explain the experience of threshold sickness, this is a little uneven. One wonders, btw, how many of the telepaths (especially Ridenows, who are xenotelepaths, or mostly xenoempaths) became vegetarians. Might not have happened though, since at least one person from the ship went into rapport with plants, too, in a Ghost Wind. (7) Escape and Rebirth: These stories, by different authors, are combined, because the second is a resolution of the first. A rather short-circuited version of a theory of reincarnation--and the notion that Varzil the Good was a reincarnation of a laranzu tortured to reveal the location of clingfire is...well, it's an attempt to explain, I suppose, why Varzil's attitude was so at odds with his contemporaries' understanding, at least at first. If it were true, why wouldn't Varzil just say so? But then, he's always been a character along the lines of Glinda the Good's description of the Wizard of Oz in the movie: "Oh, very good, but very mysterious." (8) A Sword of Chaos: A really awful story. I kept reading it in horrid fascination, hoping it'd get better: but no. The victim of the revenge fetish in this story eventually realizes the price she'll have to pay--but why did she never question the concept of endless revenge and counter-revenge before? At one point she recognizes that there's probably no real distinction between her own ancestors and the 'bandits' who took over--but instead of taking that as an indication that changes have to be made, she just heads down the same eroded path at breakneck pace. Is it any wonder how often necks get broken on Darkover? (9) Di Catenas: An explanation for the bracelets that's really no explanation at all. What kind of society lets its members be mutilated and killed to the point where they inflict these mad curses in the FIRST place? (10) Of Two Minds: A caretaker for a 'moronic' and severely disabled prince learns that the severely alienated (probably autistic) boy is NOT stupid, and is highly gifted with laran. I'm not spoiling any surprises by revealing this, since it should have been obvious from the start. Why did nobody even suspect it? I should point out that the term 'moron' is inaccurate in this case. Morons can talk. The child in question is the most literal sort of IDIOT, because he is prevented from communicating, and so must fend for himself, which is the original meaning of the term 'idiot' (unsociable). Once given a means of communication, he is able to develop into what will always be a high-functioning autistic. He can never be 'normal', but will always be better in some ways, and worse in others. If he'd been accurately diagnosed earlier, he might've made a better adjustment--but better late than never, I suppose. (11) Through Fire And Frost: A cristoforo priest begins to recognize that he hasn't really left the world, as he becomes the default escort for a new mother and her infant. Frankly, I think they'd all be better off changing a few diapers. Perhaps a period of retreat from the monastery before making final vows should be incorporated into the training. I mean, how could a grown man never even have seen his sisters naked? (12) The Way of A Wolf: The Free Amazon in this story is not a good choice of viewpoint character. Frankly, the attempt to characterize the mind of an abusive 'soldier' type is difficult, even for a person who suffers from the malady. The woman's attempt to justify her own abusiveness (as a necessary protection against the abusiveness of others) has, by definition, to be defensive. She knows she's behaving badly, so she accuses those who aren't of cowardice and evasion--including the Comyn lord who's abandoned warfare to become a healer among those devastated by the war. It's her OWN suppressed 'cowardice' she's railing against, of course. I should point out two things: (1) Dogs ARE wolves. and are behaving according to the nature of wolves when they join human packs, and (2) The argument that warfare with swords and knives is less immoral than war with clingfire and bonewater dust has always been an argument of degree rather than kind. The Free Amazon in this story does begin to realize this--but it's an incomplete transformation. (13) Cold Hall: A young (untrained) laranzu tries to damp down any sexual expression whatever. You'd think those trying to identify the cause would realize that the boy is trying to prevent others being subject to the abuse he was subject to as one 'six-fathered'. He needs therapy himself, yes. But so does the society that encourages license on feast days, then blames children for decisions they themselves had no control over. (14) The Lesson of The Inn: Covers the beginning of Hilary Castamir's rehabilitation. I doubt it would be conclusive. You can't undo years of conditioning in one day and night, as Callista Lanart-Alton later discovered. Hilary might have made a start here in undoing her isolation and causeless guilt--but she couldn't finish it in one gulp. (15) Confidence: If this is an example of the 'training' people underwent in Towers, it's no wonder the people came out of it so warped. Virtual torture is still verily torture. (16) Camilla: Not only is the character of Camilla presented inaccurately in this story, the basic argument that abusive 'education' is superior to any other sort is nonsensical. That it's remarkably persistent makes it worse. (17) Where The Heart Is: A story of Marja Alton. Not consistent with earlier or later portrayals (for example, who are the parents of Marja's 'siblings'?). If this story had been written as a non-Darkover story, it might have been a good start for another series. As it is, the characters are just given names, and don't behave as the characters they're named after would have. Why not just create new characters out of whole cloth? (18) Skeptic: It's not clear even to the title character why he became such a determined 'debunker'. Whether or not he suffers from a version of the Pauli Effect (practical physicists wouldn't even allow Pauli into their labs, because complex equipment would break down in his presence), why would he even care what claims others made? And as for disabusing him of his blind skepticism, why bother? When did Project Telepath become dependent on Empire funding anyway? and finally: (19) A Recipe for Failure: This is just a silly joke, and should be read on that level. I'd always thought that the reason the Darkover books were so grim and humorless was that Bradley herself had no sense of humor. Turns out it's not so. Apparently, she was just bad at framing jokes herself--but appreciated them from others.
