While browsing TV on a cold Friday night I left it on the film version of this book. It was a very lucky accident because I haven't laughed that hard at a film in a long time. And it was laughing at it, with its ridiculous premise (dinosaur PIs that wear fake human skins to blend in) and details (each dinosaur has a specific smell and they get high from herbs) and choice of actors (a dude from True Blood and a random Baldwin), not with it, for the film took itself quite seriously even though it was about sentient dinosaurs. When I found out it was inspired by a book I naturally had to read it. Our protagonist, Vincent Rubio, is a dinosaur PI from LA down on his luck. He takes a job, investigation of a night club arson, just to be able to pay some of his bills. However his investigation leads him back to the death of his partner in New York. Vincent, despite being warned against it, flies to New York to once and for all find out who was responsible for it, and in the process stumbles into something more than he bargained for. In the beginning it was everything I expected and wanted it to be. I love noir fiction and this fit right in. We have the PI with substance abuse problems who mourns the death of his partner. We have the seemingly mundane crime our PI has to solve to get the much needed money that turns into a hunt for his partner's killer. We have the femme fatale that messes with our PI's head. Never mind that everybody is a dinosaur, the author makes that work. Without it this would be a noir book like any other, but with it the story became much more fun to read. The exploration of the hidden dinosaur life is usually used as a buffer between some important plot points. Vincent, our protagonist, likes to explain the mundane day-to-day dino life to the readers, usually at least somehow connected to the story. There are many technical details of the human suits the dinosaurs wear, the way they are made and connected to the dinosaurs themselves, and I could pretend it all made sense because why not, you actually could hide a dinosaur tail into a leg, we will never know. However, I couldn't just ignore the illogical mechanics that preceded the ending. Trying to explain the combination of human and dinosaur DNA to create a combined offspring through science as we know it is just too big of a leap for me, and the explanation of why it was done simply didn't make sense in any way imaginable. Up until then both the plot and the motivations of the characters made sense and I was very much enjoying reading the book, but the last ~30 pages managed to diminish my enjoyment immensely. I loved Vincent as the protagonist and the narrator, however I'm sad to say that he was the one character with discernible personality. The rest of the characters fit their roles: the Femme Fatale, the Villain, the Crazy Genius, the Funny Sidekick. Themes of parenthood were explored but only with the female characters and honestly, haven't both male and female writers done that a million times before? In this case (as in most of the cases to be honest) it felt forced and was the main reason for the bad aftertaste this book left behind. On the other hand, by using character tropes the author had the chance to explore the setting in more depth, but he also used a lot of time to develop Vincent, he could have used a bit more time to develop the rest of the characters as well. Anonymous Rex was a brilliant, even if crazy idea that just wasn't executed as well as I hoped it would be. Most of the book was very enjoyable, with plot twists keeping me on the edge of my seat, and the setting was quite believable, but the end ruined the whole book for me. Not just the technical details but also the motivations of the characters made no sense, despite the fact that it was all sensible up to that point, but it's worth a read, at least for Garcia's worldbuilding.
