Once again, a solid mystery page-turner with tight suspense and well-defined characters. As the story progresses and the mystery deepens, the ground keeps shifting under protagonist Rita Morrone’s feet. Every new turn seems to bring to light a new clue or a new suspect, and the reader is alongside Rita as she tries to sort out the truth from a maze of dead ends. Quick plot summary (with some [hidden] spoilers ahead): Rita Morrone is a partner in a Philadelphia law firm, a trial attorney with a well-honed sense for the intangibles that come in alongside the law in any court case. For example, the opening scene has her playing on the sympathies of a jury that knows only that they are resuming the trial after a break occasioned by death of “counsel’s mother”. They don’t know which counsel, though – an ambiguity that Rita adroitly exploits to win points for her side. But it’s not this case that forms the backbone of the novel. The new murder case starts with a sexual harassment complaint, in which the defendant is not only a prominent judge, but her long-term boyfriend’s father. But then the accuser turns up dead, and it turns out that Rita’s boyfriend, the accused judge’s son, has also been the accuser’s lover. All of a sudden she is in the middle of a murder case where several people close to her turn into very plausible suspects. As always with a Scottoline mystery, it’s the character development that is the high point with me. Rita’s stomping grounds is that center of South Philly Italian Catholic daily life, the Italian Market on 9th Street – specifically, the butcher shop where she was raised, mostly by her father alone, and where he still tries to eke out a living. Her upbringing there has made her an expert on some unusual things: knives and poker. She joins her father and a small crew of his old, old friends in a weekly poker game, and it’s the wisdom she picks up at her father’s side, through life and through poker, which provides the insight to navigate the twist and turns of her legal cases. “Don’t watch the player, watch the cards,” her father admonishes her when he suspects a client is manipulating her. The other poker players become her allies when she needs to bluff her way to information as she investigates the murder. And they are the first people to come to her rescue in times of trouble. Rita is a well-drawn character, flawed, real, and easy to like, though not without her abrasive moments. She’s quick-witted and snarky, but she generally keeps her barbed comments to herself, prefacing many replies with unspoken zingers that we readers get to enjoy. (She hands a document to an opposing witness. “You want I should read it?” he asks. No, I want you should make a paper airplane, she retorts, mentally, before speaking the words, “Yes, please, read it.”.) She’s also smart and has good instincts, making her a character that readers want to follow.
