A Goodreads friend recently asked if Silverberg lacked the matinee firepower of Heinlein or Asimov because he had no masterwork, no centerpiece to which critics could point, no one work that served as an identity. Silverberg, Grandmaster though he is, lacks a Stranger in a Strange Land or Foundation or Dune. I submit here, to the court of science fiction literature, that Dying Inside is such a work. Dying Inside is Silverberg’s 1972 science fiction / fantasy classic about telepathy and so much more. Fundamentally, this is about communication and relationships, natural and artificial, and one man’s place in society. This could be seen as an allegory about community and how we can be defined both by what we show the world and also the deeper truths that can even be, and too often are, hidden from ourselves. Though it lacks the overwhelming theme of gestalt, I could not help comparing Silverberg’s Dying Inside to Theodore Sturgeon’s More Than Human for its sense of alienation amidst a greater sense of lost connections, of being separated from mankind, and superhuman ability representing hyperbole of distinction. Also, and in a weird, oblique way that is hard to accurately define, I thought of Philip K. Dick’s novel The Transmigration of Timothy Archer because of the themes of otherworldly isolation and an inability to connect with those around when one feels a greater sense of spiritual guilt and angst. My work requires a great deal of reading, and rapacious reader that I am, I usually need better than a week to get through a book. I burned through this one, I almost literally could not put it down. Selig’s denouement, his crushing catharsis and his repetition of “the silence” is akin to Conrad’s “the horror!” in his last words for the dying Kurtz. Finally, as I turned the last page, when I said goodnight to this magnificent work, I heard the opening strains of Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D Minort . I also thought of the end of A Clockwork Orange, not Kubrik’s end, but Burgess’ and of course, of course, Elliot’s description of how the world ends. Locus magazine called Dying Inside one of the best science fiction novels of all time. Yes? Yes. **** 2022 reread – This really may be one of the best SF / Fantasy books of all time. Robert Silverberg’s 1972 novel about telepathy and losing the gift is really more than just a SF book about a man who can read minds. In Silverberg’s able hands, this becomes a book about having a great gift, slowly losing the gift, about old age, maturity, relationships, family, voyeurism, paranoia and so much more. Since I read this the first time I have become a fan of Gene Wolfe and Wolfe’s multi-layered fecundity of prose is reminiscent of Silverberg’s ability here. Actually, if I think about it, a reader may also draw comparisons with Gabriel Garcia-Marquez’ work with magical realism and whereas Silverberg’s vision is dark and gloomy, the multi-faceted strata of allegory and metaphor is similar to Gabo. This also reminded me of Rush’s 1982 song “Losing It” off their Signals album. Both works are about the indignity of losing a lifelong gift and coming to terms with life beyond that gift. I also thought about the 1974 Francis Ford Coppola film The Conversation staring Gene Hackman. Both works deal with privacy and surveillance and the moral and ethical ramifications of living in a society where ones most private moments can become on display, stolen from a person. Telepathy as a form of sexual conquest, rape even, is also a theme here. Fans of Silverberg know that he also wrote erotic novels under a pseudonym and much of his writing displays a frank sexuality, here also. The protagonist, Selig, understands that his invasions of people’s minds is akin to a sexual assault and there are even incestuous undertones regarding using his gifts on his family. Modern readers may pick up on racist and sexist tones from this 50 year old novel, but I don’t think it’s so bad that would turn anyone off. Great, great book.
