When I finished this book I thought, "How satisfactory", and I meant that it was absolutely wonderful right until the end. I have no idea why this book is no longer in print. For me it's a bonus as I bought my first edition for a decent price, but for the rest of the world it is a loss. The beautiful, 50ish Lady Daisy MIdhurst is a wealthy widow with one beautiful (Alma-Tadema pure, thin, artistically dressed beautiful) daughter. Daisy is very upright. She has lived through a bad marriage to a man who cheated constantly and died young. She doesn't remarry, but she holds lovely parties and has gardenias in the drawing room and eats young ducklings, drinks champagne, and always looks perfect. We first meet Daisy during one of the parties. This delightful start to the novel describes all the guests becoming bilious after eating gooseberry pie/tart on an incredibly hot day. They become grumpy and bloated. Daisy, the ultimate hostess, must've gone mad, but no, Daisy is worried about her daughter, Lady Terence. And so the book gradually unfolds. We meet Rosie and her drip of a husband. We meet Torrens and are privy to his suppressed lusty ways, his rather cruel observations about middle aged women (he is bald and in his 60's! eg: "Besides, after a certain age, when they weren't being made love to anymore, all women, he understood, became greedy." We meet Belle - Mumsie - an ex actress who now lives with Rosie and Andrew (the drip). Mumsie is forthright, Mumsie takes no prisoners, Mumsie tells Torrens that he is bald - appallingly common of her! We are given access to every one of their internal worlds. It is clever and insightful, it allows us to get close and to judge just as they are all judging one another. Eventually Daisy goes to her jasmine farm to sort herself out. Von Arnim can't help herself here, always the keen gardener, she describes the lilies and the jasmine, the oleander's pinkness. This book is less fantastical than "The Enchanted April". Reality is in the bones of this book. Being human holds its disappointments. I felt as if Von Arnim's own failed marriages and privilege was close at hand as she wrote, which is also why it felt authentically wise, disappointed, tongue in cheek, and yet managed to buoy itself up. I'd thoroughly recommend The Jasmine Farm over nearly all Von Arnim's books. I love every single one of them, but this has a rawness to it that felt very authentic and I put this down to the fact this book was published in 1934, 36 years after her very first book. She died 7 years later at the age of 71. The Jasmine Farm, then, contains all the experience and wisdom of a very interesting woman and, as a result, it's fabulous.
