Interesting to see the counter-story, but without a doubt, Krakauer's has far more factual backing and truthfully presented research. This book was self-serving to a point of failing factually (and that is DeWalt's fault, not Boukreev's)... Since many people reviewing this book are using the space to argue Boukreevs skill and character, incorrectly assuming that this validates his account, I wanted to address some of those ideas. Some reviewers are failing to realize a few very important things, the first being a phenomenal climber DOES NOT necessarily make a phenomenal guide- in fact, guiding and climbing are two very different things!!! Next, I see a lot of people giving credit (rightfully so) to Boukreev for his undeniably heroic efforts in the early morning of the May 11th. BUT, how could anyone forget!??- that the tragedy BEGAN on the 10th... As a climber- i'm calling heroics not at all too-little but definitely TOO LATE! Yes, Hall and Scott were derelict in many ways in their leadership roles, but Boukreev made decisions early-on that directly jeopardized the safety of his entire team- and for one of those decisions (in my opinion the worst)-within this novel, he had NO meaningful rebuttal. Look, I'm an outdoor guide, nowhere remotely near the level of guiding skills required to lead this sort of undertaking, i admit- but even I, and every other part-time guide out there knows that, what you might do on a personal trip is not always what you would do as an acting guide!!!! ***bottom line: 'Guiding' without oxygen= stupid, negligent, and in this case, disastrous!!!*** true, this disaster was compounded by the many many poorly-made decisions and actions of many many people- but those decisions were mostly made with starving, half-delusional brains!!! Boukreev, however, doesn't get that asterisk next to his error: he made the decision to guide without oxygen looooong before he was at altitude- and that decision, without a doubt, killed people. period. I'm not going to get into the fact that lots of those people shouldn't have been up there in the first place, or who's fault that is- but whether or not he liked the role (he confessed in an interview he did not), he was a GUIDE, and despite his heroic efforts at the end, and the fact that i was really and truly emotionally moved by his attitude and actions post-disaster... while reading this, i simply could not forgive him for at least that one glaring and fatal mistake.
