If you're considering reading this book, and you are fluent in French then I would STRONGLY recommend that you read the French version instead of the English version. And even then, I wouldn't recommend the book for fear that it would only be a little bit better than the English translation which comes off very awkwardly. So much of it feels like it was written by a child but with all the potential grammatical mistakes corrected. But still coming off in a dully simplistic style. It's the dialogue that is damaged moreso than the prose descriptions of what's happening. The action description I suppose you can get away with some simplistic description since it won't violate real world verisimilitude, but when you start reading dialogue that bears no resemblance to how real people talk, then you're in trouble. It's also forgivable in the paragraphs in which we're reading the main character's inner thoughts, although traces of the awkwardness still persist. Here's just one example of the clunky dialogue, out of many. I'm sure there are even worse but I just didn't want to spend the time wading through it all to find the worse. But here: "I suppose you are exhausted and wish to rest. I must seem quite bothersome to you. But you must believe that I'm being bothersome to you only in your own personal interest I wasn't the only one whom someone tried to kill this morning. And it won't be me they'll try to snuff out tomorrow. Do you understand me?" I just read that sentence to my girlfriend, and she noted that if it hadn't been for the fact that I read it to her from this that she new I was reviewing, she would have said that A.I. wrote that sentence. The other cumbersome thing about the arrangement of the writing, is that all too very often we don't actually know who is talking in the quotes. After a paragraph in which we hear the inner dialogue of the mute protagonist, the author resumes the dialogue happening in the room, but we aren't given a typical, "Helene then said..." or a "To which Yvette responded...". No it just gives a quote without a source which followed by another quote without a source, and then another etc. So you wind up having to reread and try to figure out, "oh it must be so-and-so saying that because the other character would have said such-and-such instead, but wait a second who is saying the third paragraph? is it back to the first person, or a new person?" And that happens a lot. The premise of the book I admit is a very intriguing one. The main character is quadriplegic, blind and mute. So, it's cool, unique approach, and one in which I was eager to follow along as she tries to figure out who the mystery serial killer of little boys is. I just wish the author had been clever enough to devise a plot point in which this protagonist's handicap proved to be an asset in figuring something out. The author often made what felt like conspicuous commentary on Elise noticing the smell of cologne or tobacco or perfume on someone, and I thought, "Aha Elise is going to figure out a piece of the puzzle through her olfactory sense". But nope. Doesn't happen. or maybe her keen attention to sound will reveal a clue. But no, not really. How did Elise become, a quadriplegic, blind and mute? From an explosion that we learn happened to her and her boyfriend before the story here begins. That explosion killed her boyfriend so now her wealthy uncle has arranged a caregiver for her (Yvette), while she receives therapy. I could imagine how the blindness and quadriplegia occurred, but I wondered about the muteness affliction. but yes, a little research told me that indeed that is also possible. But I guess I would have liked at least a modicum of medical description. Halfway through the book Elise does at least gain movement in her index finger which allows for at least some welcome Yes or No question and answer dialogue involving her. Another bothersome aspect was an ability to exact what seems like overly effective physical ability in key moments. You slap your forehead saying, "Oh come on." And finally, this book has the single most convoluted and improbable and often illogical denouements I've ever read--the typical cliche description by one or more parties in a mystery that we're used to encountering in the drawing room as a detective explains "It was then that I realized that the culprit had to have been someone who...etc etc etc". And you read a few pages of overly expository description of the who and how and why. But this book takes the cake in terms of how over the top that time honored (or dishonored??) mystery book convention is taken. It was absurd on so many levels.
