This was Patrick McGrath's first book, and I actually recall first seeing his writing in some anthologies or literary magazines back in the 1980s. Here he sets out a mixed bag of tales, a few of which are brilliant, and a few which are merely oddities, but still attention-grabbing ones. At his best, he is a first-rate prose stylist who manipulates playfully the elements of his stories and comes up with stuff that is unique. To call him a literary horror/gothic writer fails to capture the range of his interests. He is literary, but never academic, and there is usually a dry sense of humor at work as well as an examination of things that go bump in the night. We could possibly apply the term post-modern to him as well, since he seems to delight in deploying twisted elements of traditional British fiction such as colonial-era missionaries to Africa and India, English boarding schools, and upper class families in their mansions. For some reason monkeys appear in many of the pieces as well. My favorites were: "The Angel" in which a drunken, would-be writer in the East Village of New York City befriends an older gentleman who is harboring a truly shocking secret. "Lush Triumphant", set in the same locale, a character sketch of an unapologetically selfish alcoholic artist who runs into some interesting situations. "The Arnold Crombeck Story" set in the 1950s, about a cheerful, Alec Guinness-like psycho killer giving an interview from prison ("Strange bird, the mind," he says). "Marmilion", a gothic piece about the decline into madness and mayhem of a proper Southern family, told by a scholar writing in the present, and featuring the fictional Louisiana spider monkey. "Hand of a Wanker" is also arresting and funny, about a severed hand running amok through the East Village bar scene. All of these belong in any collection of interesting gothic/horror short stories. The title story, although well-written did not strike me as being particularly fascinating, and I wondered why it was chosen for the honor. A few of the others did not particularly move me, but were still weird enough as to merit attention (i.e. the story of a fly, another told by a boot, another about an evil hand growing out of a man's head.)
