The second of twelve 'official' anthology of Darkovan stories, Sword Of Chaos is edited by MZB, features a couple of her stories, but is for the most part a collection of fanfic. Interestingly, many of the authors in this collection went on to become Names in SF (eg Susan Shwartz), though the writing is a bit dodgy in some of the stories. Though they are not 'official' stories of Darkover, many of these short stories are now accepted as canon, it's worth picking up these anthologies. Many stories explore minor characters in the other books (eg the lovely story about Hilary Castimir in 'The Lesson Of The Inn' in Sword of Chaos), others introduce new characters, explore popular themes (particularly the Renunciates and Towers) or flesh out myths or references in the books. These little stories gain importance in the Darkovan canon because the original collection of books weren't written in chronological order, and some of the main stories have even been re-written by MZB. MZB herself commented that she doesn't much care for internal consistency and chronological logic, pointing out that inconsistencies can be written up as individual characters' own misremembering or different interpretations of events. So the Darkover series itself is quite accommodating of fanfic, and these collections turn out to be more interesting and useful than expected. The importance of fanfic in the early stages of new authors' careers is quite clear in the Darkover world, and I'm wondering if these sorts of anthologies are now a thing of the past. I can't really imagine publishers today taking such risky punts on unknown authors in collections edited and managed by the authors of successful feminist SciFant series. MZB herself eventually restricted writing in the Darkovan world to suit her publishers' requirements, and there were only twelve published collections. NB There's an interesting article of the history of these Darkova anthologies and the Friends of Darkover fan group which discusses MZB's relationship to fan writing in the Darkover universe.
