Sock-em surprises keep on punching from page one; glib humor keeps on tickling till last lines. Narrator Vincent Rubio buys a trench coat despite record heat, and cigarettes to hang unlit from his mouth - for classic Bogart image. The Los Angeles detective is broke, kicked off governing Council for pursuing why partner Ernie run down when investigating tmurder of wealthy married New York playboy Raymond McBride. Next case, arson, leads straight back to Manhattan. Everywhere, looks decidedly deceive. Vince, a Velociraptor addicted to basil, can only reproduce with another raptor, inter-species limitation. But x-rated interactions "undulation"s p215 are possible, as are fights - razor teeth, spiked tails, ancestral demand to "grasp viscera" p95, rip throats, shred flesh, blood and gore. Pheremone-launching dinos hide in registered human "guises", and abuse herbs instead of drugs. "My ancestors could have .. stomped the little Neanderthals into pâté .. but they'd already decided to try to live in peace" p78. Buckles, clamps, epoxy, masks, are subject to failure. They are not Shrek ogres - green and roaring outside, cuddly inside - rather volcanos seething infinitesimally over the knife-edge of eruption. Powerful noses and individual scents separate them from hominids. Scents clue him to big surprise (to me): McBride and wife Judith are fake dinos p262. Vince finds a packet of chlorine, so someone was masquerading. I guessed the throaty luscious Sarah. Hints are lavish: voracious appetite and overly strong for petite size, drunk on wine or Greek spices p155? McBride, mistress Sarah, and wife Judith, all want their own progeny, connect to slum Child Care Clinic under Dr Vallardo who obviously conducts illegal cross-breed genetic experiments , intra-dino and inter-dino-human, cages full of failed mutations. Of course cussing PI Glenda Wetzel, charmed by sad baby eyes, should not unlock pens, but does. Fight. Glenda offers to stay behind, locked in, so Vince can handle egg cracking. Gun-holding Judith was obviously threat. Body count rises along with informants. Dr Nadel will bring McBride's autopsy records only to secret meeting. But passing cyclists slit his throat, steal file. His bank records show deposits - from whom? why? . Donovan Burke was severely burned in arson fire. He dies before revealing affair with former employer Judith. She paid for his LA nightclub startup; he died protecting something. He and vivacious Council member Jaycee broke off their enganement five years ago; she vanished a few months later. Big surprise when Sarah revealed to be vengeful Jaycee, scent-gland removed. Reader knows possible when Vince almost kills odorless Officer Tuttle for knowing dino secret, plot too complicated to pin down who, why. LA cop pal Dan pays Vince's airfare from NY, he has to see evidence in person. We don't need two pages breaking into silent house to know what Vince finds in den. Knife stabs "by someone Dan knew" p197. End is satisfying. Epilogue is set one year later. Villainous Judith and Vallardo die. What happens to her hit men? Sarah and baby send post-card from Costa Rica. Glenda is Vince's new partner in again successful business. His Herbaholics Anonymous (HA as in haha?) sponsor is Allosaur, former addict to celery salt. Author remarkably talented for 26, straight to fan shelf, x-rated. Bless GoodReads friend who suggested.
