A first JM read for me (thanks to Kris Rabberman for kindly suggesting a starting place!), and I fell instantly in love with his sentences, his indirection, his meanders. I won't say too much, as to describe this one really would be to spoil it, as though hardly anything happens , the way it doesn't happen unfolds in just the most delightful way possible, in that way that makes something happen in you. So, instead I will make one claim, and then leave you with two evidentiary, epitomic quotations (if you like them at all, you will love this novel). One Claim: Just as Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man forever closes-off the hell-fire Roman Catholic sermon for all future writers in every human settlement the galaxy over, early on in this novel, Marias fully-completely puts paid to any other novelist's burnin' yearnin' to portray an Oxford High Table dinner in all its pomposity/spleandour/mendacity/ flirtatiousness/triviality/hilarity. Finis, done. Fuggedaboudit. Two Exemplary Quotations: 1. And I enjoyed the great consolation (or perhaps even the immense pleasure) of proposing the impossible and knowing that it would be rejected: for it is precisely the recognition that it is impossible and the certainty of rejection - a rejection that the person who proposes the impossible and takes the floor first in fact expects - that allows one to hold nothing back, to be vehement and more confident in expressing one's desires than if there were the slightest risk of their being satisfied. 2. ... and I was surprised to find myself daring to say (much too early in the conversation) things I hadn't even foreseen myself saying or was even sure I wanted to say, either at the beginning or perhaps even at the end (the word "together", the word "son", the word "stepson"), but I thought, too, that my last sentences, including the very last, had been acceptable within the narrow range of possible varieties of behaviour in non-blood relationships. Now it was Clare's turn to be surprised, at least a little, although, inevitably, her surprise was only a pretence. But her pretence took the form of not being surprised, which is one way of handing back the surprise (or its pretence) to the other side. I have since bought four more books of JM's already. If ever you find yourself that way inclined, do seek out the handsome Penguin Modern Classics Editions. They just feel right somehow.
