The book is rather intriguing in terms of plot and writing style. It explores the fragility of relationships, specifically those formed on the basis of love, through a princess from another dimension that considers her mission to break those relationships up. The writing style is very fluid, with a lot of imagery and visuals. However it gets rather tedious and tiring to read with little variation in writing technique, and is almost slippery rather than fluid. But what makes it rare is the cynical, dark, brooding undertones, subtle and implicit, running silently parallel to the concrete happenings in the lives of the character. The references to many fairytales cannot be missed, and the author's intent in doing so does add to the cynical undertones. At first it hints at Sleeping Beauty with a princess that has no compassion because the Compassion Fairy was late to the blessing family. Then it gradually starts to read like a version of the Disney movie Enchanted with the characters travelling across their fantasy realms with so much ease and Prince David's initial awe and wonderment at the human world does remind of Giselle's fascination with our strange, foreign world, and also reminds of Ariel the mermaid's enthusiasm with getting legs. And the rather dense and slow King seems to have been inspiration from the nursery song "Sing a Song of Sixpence" with the King frustrated at his Counting House and much rather eating his bread and honey. But while all these references are fun to spot, they are not the point of the book, which is rather a pity, as there seems to be a lot of sub themes fighting for attention throughout the book with not much development on any one other than the main theme of relationships, and it all ends up a bit distracting and convoluted. The characters are disappointingly one dimensional too most of the time. Character development is perhaps hindered by the clinical handling of the book where stereotypes are attached to each character and consistently perpetuated throughout the book, getting a bit stifling. The ending was consistent with the cynical handling of the story, but admittedly disappointing. It is not a bad book, and rather fun to read, but at the same time, it could have been so much more and initially was full of promise for more.
