I read the English translation of this German language novel, first published in 1938 and, I believe, considered a classic of German literature. The novel’s setting is not specified, but it’s clear that it’s meant to be Nazi Germany. Horváth lived in Berlin during the 1920s and early thirties, but relocated to Vienna after Hitler came to power in 1933. Following the Anschluss he moved again, this time to Paris. He had only been there a few months when he was killed by a falling branch from a tree during a lightning storm, which is the sort of event that makes me wonder whether there is indeed such a thing as predetermined fate. But I digress. This is another short novel – I’ve read a few lately. It has 175 pages but in one way seems shorter, since there are a lot of one sentence paragraphs and a generally staccato style. On the other hand it’s not a quick read, as it provides plenty to think about. I’m not sure I got it all. None of the characters in the novel are named. The protagonist is a teacher, but he is invariably addressed as “Herr Lehrer”, in the formal German style of the period. His students are described using single initials. Another character, a former teacher, is referred to by a nickname. The book explores the choices that people are forced to make when living under dictatorship. Early in the book our teacher reprimands a pupil for making a racist comment. This leads to a complaint from the boy’s father, a baker, as the teacher’s remarks are contrary to party policy. The teacher is thus reprimanded by his Head Teacher, even though the latter is a liberal by inclination. "I know you only do it because they make you," I said, attempting to mollify him. He listened, stopped in front of me and looked at me carefully. "Young man," he said seriously. "Make no mistake: nobody's making me. I could swim against the tide and get arrested on account of that baker, I could even resign – but I don't want to resign. That's right, I don't want to! I want to reach the retirement age so I can draw my full pension." Later, the teacher watches crowds gather to celebrate the birthday of “the Chief Plebeian” as he is called in this translation. Observing them, he thinks to himself “better bread than dead”. The notes explain the original German is “Lieber Brot als tot”, a play on the Nazi slogan “Lieber tot als rot” (better dead than red). Given the book’s title, you won’t be surprised to hear that there’s a lot about God, but this God seems to be a god of truthfulness above all other things. “When individuality no longer counts, but only obedience, then truth leaves through the back door and lies come in through the front.” In the end, our protagonist has to make his own choice of “bread or conscience”, though not quite in the way I expected.
