Three Men in a Boat is part fictional travelogue, part love letter to England. It's a meandering tale that lacks much in the way of a traditional plot — our narrator is constantly veering off track to relay some humorous past anecdote or another instead of focusing on the boat trip at hand — but it's an absolutely delightful read nevertheless and I couldn't have loved it more. In fact, it just might be one of my new favorite classics. The premise is simple: three men (and a mischievous dog) decide to take a boat trip up the River Thames and hijinks ensue. There's no real action, no suspense, and no climax, but it's supremely funny and it paints a lovely picture of the towns and cities along their route. Well, mostly. This is not a book that lends itself to a quick read. It's under 200 pages and took me eleven days to finish. There are no thrills or cliffhangers to keep you turning the pages long past bedtime. Instead, it's a book to savor slowly and just enjoy for what it is — a funny tale about some clueless guys (and their dog) winding their way up a river. It's obvious that Jerome K. Jerome (whose parents were obviously not very imaginative on the child-naming front) had a great love of the Thames and England as a whole, and I learned a good bit about the history of various English locations in between laughs. The story is surprisingly modern considering this book was first published in 1889, and the humor is witty and undated. There is a lot of boat talk, which makes sense considering the book's subject matter, but I never had any idea what they were actually doing as far as moving the boat along was concerned because all of the terms used were completely foreign to me. It really doesn't detract from the story much, but it's something to be aware of if you're not up on your 19th-century boating lingo, I suppose. Overall, though? This is a brilliant little book and you should definitely consider giving it a read if you enjoy humorous classic literature. It won't have you biting your nails in anticipation of the next big plot twist and there are no wild love affairs or gruesome murders to be found within its pages, but there is a rascal of a dog and some bumbling Englishmen in a boat? 4.5 stars, rounded up.
