As a Nobel Prize winner, Canetti certainly speaks with authority when discussing the power of specific language. This, a collection of his essays, ranges widely across social and literary themes from Confucius to the influencers and actors of the 20th century. There is little that is purely unifying in this collection other than Canetti’s general observation. While much of the collection is intriguing, Canetti reserves much of his observation for the horrors of the age in which he lived. Talking about the purpose of words, Canetti begins with a quote from Broch’s speech “James Joyce and the Present”: Philosophy itself terminated its age of universality, the age of the great compendiums; it had to remove its most urgent questions from its logical space or, as Wittgenstein says, expel them into mysticism. And this is the point at which the mission of literature begins, the mission of a knowledge that embraces totality, that remains beyond any empirical or social contingency, and that is indifferent to whether man lives in a feudal, a bourgeois, or a proletarian age—the duty of literature to the absoluteness of knowledge per se. Still talking about Broch, he talks about the sense of defenselessness. He makes the point that “the average man feels all in all, more horror for the remote Middle Ages than for the World War, which he has experienced personally…Thus, people are defenselsss only when they have no experience or memory.” (13). Literature evokes passions and memory. He compliments the power of Karl Kraus in his words. He created with words a horror of modern warfare. “In this way, Karl Kraus was something like a forerunner of the atomic bomb, its terrors already existed in his words.” (34) In Kraus, you have someone who could create a vision of the future, and create memories before events. Canetti regards the new mechanized reality in which exactness and specialization continues to increase. “The verifying control exerted on anything and everything lives from its exactness. An interest in machines is shown by practically all young people. The precision of the annihilating instruments determines whether they wipe out their goal rather than, prematurely, their place of origin. Even the peculiar and rather ancient area of bureaucracy is changing in the same direction. One may assume that officials everywhere will soon be using apparatuses to understand precisely and immediately, and to react precisely and immediately. Mounting specialization is going hand in hand with mounting precision. Reality is departmentalized, subdivided, and can be grasped down to its minutest units from many directions.” (58) Canetti’s analysis of Kafka is simply brilliant. Kafka’s mindset is exposed in a letter to Felice, when he says, “if things are going well, I am utterly filled with the present; if things are going badly, I curse the present, not to mention the future!” (86) Later, there is an interesting discussion of Kafka on p. 121 describing him as the only essentially Chinese writer to be found in the West. Regarding Kafka and failure, there is a masterful psychological insight. “The absolute peculiarity of Kafka’s state of mind is shown by his inability to learn from mistakes. Failure after failure are never multiplied into success for him. The difficulties always remain the same, as though their invincible nature had to be demonstrated. His countless reflections and calculations always consistently leave out the one thing that could spell success. The freedom to fail is always protected, as a kind of supreme law, it is meant to guarantee an escape at any new juncture; one might call it the freedom of the weak man, who seeks salvation in defeats. The prohibition of victories expresses his true uniqueness, his special relationship to power. All reckonings derive from powerlessness and lead back to it.” (131) I feel that, as a reader, I now understand Kafka better after just a short essay. He is not the stereotypical misanthropic loser with prodigious literary talent…here is real philosophic insight. Canetti also has a riveting analysis of the power Hitler derived from words, and when the audiences or situations required substitution of language, he was unable to continue to use them as effectively. I’m not sure Canetti’s inference of causality is accurate, but certainly the correlation is strong. All in all, this is a great collection of essays by a master of language about language and its power not only to describe, but to reflect and influence.
