One of the great maritime autobiographies, beginning in New Bedford--well, across the harbor in Fairhaven where Slocum reworked an unpromising old 34' oyster sloop (for a year or slightly more). It had been out of commission since 1885 when seven years later Slocum was offered it for free, moving it from Poverty Point up to his house on the Acushnet River, and renaming it eventually the Spray. He shiped out for the world in 1895. I taught Sailing Alone a couple times to my Freshman Comp class at a community college with many students from Fairhaven, the last in a five book course that would include one Shakespeare play--usu a feminist one like Measure for Measure (because 2/3 of my students were women)-- a book of poems and songs, a book of short stories (often all by one author, like Vonnegut, VS Naipaul, Flannery O'Connor, Joyce or Katherine Mansfield) and one sustained narrative like Alice in Wonderland, Confederacy of Dunces, or Slocum. Slocum is a first-class ironist, and he parodies such voyage stories as RH Dana's: "I found no fault with the cook...There was never s ship's crew so well agreed"(43). Many passages are well known, such his politically incorrect (but life-saving) use of tacks, and his adding a rear mast to sail N from Magellan Straits into the Pacific. Then there are the barrels of fat he picked up and used to produce and sell donuts to the Islanders, at Valima, Samoa where R L Stevenson had lived. The Samoans thought he must have had other sailors with him, whom he'd eaten (153). Local descendants of Slocum vehemently denied that he'd ever made donuts; but I had taught the book several times, while they must not have completed it. Slocum needed money to continue his voyage, once catching a shark and charging the Melbourne Aussie residents to come aboard to view it. Many things we learn from Slocum's voyage include: how a wounded dolphn avoids sharks (along with yellowfin, darting in different directions), the author sometimes shooting their pursuers (59); flying fish caught on deck at night, picked up from the lee scuppers; where the island was upon which Defoe based Robinson Crusoe; the Sydney Yacht Club's requirement barring the Spray's recognition because no letter from an American yacht club--and despite Slocum having caught and saved one of their members in a barrel; a dizzying variety of nautical terms of which I have a separate dictionary, with depictions; and, human threats to the author, such as Terra del Fuegian Black Pedro, whom Slocum asks, "'Do you know Captain Pedro Samblich?' said the villain, 'Yes, he is a great friend of mine.' 'I know it,' said I Samblich had told me to shoot him on sight."(116) But Slocum shared his beef jerky and other food with the women who accompanied Black Pedro, and Pedro feared the other three men Slocum had impersonated with multiple rifles out of portholes when they first sailed by the pirate a week earlier. Late Victorian ceremonial aspects: even sailing Slocum dresses in a suit, sometimes with bowtie, his salutes to his vessel and the sunset. Chased by pirates off N Africa, a strong wind blew away his boom, but it entirely dismasted the pirates. On steep, rocky Ascension Island he learns from a Canadian and wife living near the top, "One cow would sometimes hook another over a preipice to destruction, then go on feeding unconcernedly"(260). He becomes a vegetarian, pitying the creatures in desolate waters around Cape Horn, and later Mrs Robert Louis Stevenson in Samoa agreed with him that were he to carry chickens on the Spray "to kill the companions of my voyage would be next tomurder and cannibalism"(256). Arriving back three years later at Newport Harbor on June 27, 1898, the harbor was mined for the Spanish American War which began a couple months earlier and ended a month later. But at night, he was also worried about being fired upon. When someone hailed him from the guardship at entry, "Spray ahoy!" he knew it to be the voice of a friend, so he could sail slower until anchoring.
