Timing is brutal! How come a teenage boy in 1990s Germany turns into a racist murderer? How come that story is told and retold in various settings and with different angles and more and more victims in our presumedly safe and liberal society, where grown-ups all do their best to teach their children love and charity, not hatred and brutality? How come fear of the unknown can grow to the point of no return where the only solution to personal misery seems to be to cause others worse misery? Marco lives in a small town where there are no immigrants, so his hatred is "theoretical" until a few people seeking asylum are allocated to the community. What reason could there possibly be for setting their temporary dwelling on fire, killing two children? The more caring adults blame themselves: if I had done this, said that, changed my tone, been less tired that particular day... could I have prevented hatred from erupting? The obsessively selfish majority of people blame others, push responsibility aside, and struggle to hide their own hatred from surfacing in the face of reporters trying to find the traces of racism into which a young boy got entangled. Being good, in his town, is being mainstream, socially adapted and homogenous. Everyone hates immigrants, but killing them is not the solution, that is the hidden message underneath a sparse polished political talk. Staying the same is not possible in a world that is invaded by diversity, they think, and therefore, the own identity is threatened by the existence of other cultural customs and other looks. Brutally good youth literature, never more important than today! And to the sole teacher who tried to make a difference: you are not alone, even if it feels like it - if you weren't fictional (and most of the time, you aren't, just in this particular story, you are, but you have a voice anyway!), you could read today's Guradian and find a fight to pick, against the brutal intolerance of fundamentalist Christian values in small towns, trying to prevent people from being openly themselves and sharing that: https://www.theguardian.com/books/201...
