As much as I don’t like to show support to Roman Polanski, I will always regard Rosemary’s Baby as one of my all time favourite horror movies. I’m surprised it took me as long as it did to read this book, but I’m glad I did! It’s a suburban tale with a strong sense of foreboding. It contains themes of witchcraft, satanism, demonic presences… I won’t explain how without ruining the plot, but it has one of the most shocking endings. I assume that most people are familiar with the film, but I do highly recommend this ‘60s horror. Parts are definitely unputdownable, at times you feel as though you want shake some sense into Rosemary - to say “wake UP !” to everything surrounding her. Once she does, will it be too late, will anybody believe her? Guy is absolutely detestable to me, just how he impregnates Rosemary is assault and wrong and enough to make me despise the character. If you’re stuck on what to read this spooky season - this is definitely one classic you need to get around to reading if you’re a horror fan and haven’t already! Rosemary and Guy Woodhouse are a married couple, who are just setting up a new home together in the famous Bramford apartment block. Guy is an actor, having been on Broadway and some television roles, but he has always dreamed of being a big movie star. Rosemary feels as though she is ready to become a mother, they want three children a couple of years apart, but she wants to be supportive of Guy’s career goals. They have been warned by Rosemary’s friend, Hutch, that the apartment block has bad karma, a series of horrific & grisly events have taken place there, but they do not take the warning seriously and move in there anyway. They quickly make friends with a neighbouring elderly couple, the Castevets, after an apparent suicide of a woman who lived within the apartment complex. They also decide to start trying for the first child and that’s precisely when this book takes a turn. When Rosemary becomes pregnant, the Castevets take an unhealthy, obsessive in her unborn child. Especially the wife, Minnie. Is this just them being interested in helping this young mother bring new life into the world? Or is something more sinister at play? 5, devilishly good, stars! 👹🖤
