Two seemingly unrelated events happen in this book: A woman is found strangled in Anderslöv, a small village in southern Sweden, an incident that takes about half of the book to investigate, but then a cop killing takes place, and the two crimes are linked. The series is really a planned, ten-book series about Sweden in the late sixties and seventies, a kind of close look at the underbelly of a place revered by socialists and hedonists alike: Free love! Cheap drugs! Happy happy! But author team Maj Sjowall and Per Wahloo pull the curtain back on this apparent wonderland. They are critical of cops and they are critical of criminals, but they are mainly critical of the social and economic system that makes decline and crime inevitable, social and economic issues that are largely unaddressed. In each book, the cops are getting more and more burned-out, and Beck’s best friend Kohlberg actually resigns with a letter that speaks the authors’ views. Free love, and a woman is strangled in an apparent act of misogyny? In the process, two suspects from former books are seen by higher-ups as suspects they insist should be arrested, but jumping to these conclusions is not good police work, of course, and underneath all the grime is the importance of careful, good and principled detectives committed to doing the right thing. Malm, the incompetent and effete snob police commissioner, is the cartoonish model for a guy in the same role in Jo Nesbo’s thriller series. Comic relief? I just can’t take these guys seriously. But I more and more like Beck, who after an eighteen-year unhappy marriage, seems to be in love with a woman named Rhea. Yay for a little light and sweetness. Beck is a model for so many tight-lipped, miserable detectives in a range of novel series in the decades that follow. And Sjowall and Wahloo’s overall purpose to examine society through the lens of crime, as intro writer and detective novelist Michael Connelly says, is a model for so many social critiques in the guise of mysteries ever since (though you could say that that was what Dostoevksy’s Crime and Punishment was also about: society seen through a society’s crime). Oh, and this one is in rural Sweden, not urbanStockholm, which now is touched by murder more and more. It’s not just about Stockholm, but Swedish society. And in these books, so much rage against cops and so much rage by cops against criminals. That ambiguous title. Cops as killers and cops killed by cop killers. In the early seventies? Prescient of our current cop/crime wars?
