The story about the lost generation, young men and women suffering from the economic collapse of 1920s Germany. They hustle to get any jobs when there are none and they drink their brains out every evening. Everything is very nihilistic, everyone is living just for today, and when the main hero, Rob, falls in love and thinks maybe there can be happiness after all, Remarque is ruthless and punishes him. Hope is futile. Very bleak story. Somewhere around 60 % I suddenly thought about The Magic mountain. Why? I’m curious about it myself. What do these books have in common? Both written in German! Two men who lost their country to madness. Ok, written in the interwar period and I would argue can be only written back then, not later. Getting warmer. Remarque was a working class young man of 18 when he was drafted into the infantry during ww1. Mann couldn't be further from the working class, a dying European aristocracy, old money, no idea where he spent ww1 but I assume somewhere in Switzerland. Ok, getting cooler. One was a lady’s man, for which Mann resented him, the other was… hm… thirsting for his pubescent naked son. Paging doctor Freud! Cold, so cold! Both were banned by nazis, Remarque’s sister was killed since they couldn’t get to him. Know almost nothing about the other guy’s history. Both wrote melancholy works, one is a very cinematic writer, for the people, the other one is an intellectual to be enjoyed by very very smart people. Both books about dying, time, nihilism, sanatorium in Switzerland. Ok, maybe that's it? See, I read only one Mann and never was interested to pick up another one of his, and almost all Remarque, so that tells you something about me and also I’ll be stopping here, cause I’m so out of my depth with Mann. Just a long way to say that I almost want to re-read Magic Mountain but then I remember that there was that second half. Sorry for rambling! Anywho, back to this book. It’s often good, lots of great observations, sometimes eye-rolly and melodramatic, on the whole a solid work of an early Remarque, not my favorite, not my least favorite. Sad book about sad times, perfect for a very sad moi.
