Even if we haven’t read the book everyone knows the plot. A painter paints a portrait of a beautiful young man. The portrait ages while he keeps his beauty. But the portrait also reflects his evil, not just aging, but turning eventually into a portrait of a devil. There are thousands of reviews so I’ll just copy the next paragraph from the GR book blurb: Written in his distinctively dazzling manner, Oscar Wilde’s story of a fashionable young man who sells his soul for eternal youth and beauty is the author’s most popular work. The tale of Dorian Gray’s moral disintegration caused a scandal when it ﬁrst appeared in 1890, but though Wilde was attacked for the novel’s corrupting inﬂuence, he responded that there is, in fact, “a terrible moral in Dorian Gray.” The various nuggets of philosophy and thoughts and acerbic wit that the author intersperses throughout are a pleasure to read. Just a few examples: On a painter’s reputation “…as soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about.” “The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.” About a hostess introducing her guests: “She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know.” “I make a great difference between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects.” “Words! Mirror words! How terrible they were! How clear, and vivid, and cruel!… Mere words! Was there anything so real as words?” “Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.” [She] is so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.” [of an uncommunicative old man] “…he had said everything that he had to say before he was 30.” “He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.” “Men marry because they are tired; women, because they are curious: both are disappointed.” “…his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we lived in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities…” Here are three vicious descriptions just going around a single dinner table: A woman with “…the remains of a really remarkable ugliness.” A man who is “…one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends…” A man who “…like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.” In his short life (1854-1900) Wilde was part of the movement called aestheticism – “art for art’s sake,” not for its deeper meanings. Wilde’s brief preface give us his ‘manifesto,’ bits of which are: “To reveal art and conceal the artist is art’s aim…Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated…There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well written, or badly written. That is all…All art is at once surface and symbol…It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors…All art is quite useless.” I should also say that the edition I read, 2018 by Read Books Ltd., had two errors in dates on the cover blurb. Does it matter? Not really, but it makes you wonder what else is sloppy inside the text. Top image from wikipedia London street around 1900 from cloudfront.net The author from thedailybeast.com
