Having thought more about this novel - The Quest for Christa T. in English - I have revised my overall assessment more positively. Still, I am in two minds about it: taking this as a novel written in 1968 by a young author living in East Germany, in what was then The German Democratic Republic (GDR) or reading it independently from this particular context like a work of literature. In the second case, the novel's story would leave me modestly interested while I would find the author's writing style and language too intricate and cumbersome to enjoy. But, I can't really read this novel outside its historical context. And for that time and place, Christa Wolf's 'reflections' (a better terms than 'quest' I believe) on Christa T. was a politically brave and literary innovative novel to say the least. Deservedly, the book established the author's reputation both in East Germany and elsewhere. What is it all about? In general terms, the novel is a coming of age story, painting a detailed portrait of a young woman, Christa T., as compiled from letters, diaries and other papers by a lifelong friend of the same age group. The group of friends at the centre of the book were born in the last years of the Nazi regime and grew up in the first decades of new East German State. Christa T. stood out among the group not only for her beauty and intelligence but, even more importantly, for her independent spirit. We know early on that she dies in her mid-thirties from leukemia, leaving husband and three children behind... and massive amounts of notes and other materials that her unnamed friend tries to bring together into a kind of cohesive story. The narrative, however, does not follow any chronological order, the voices switch from the narrator to Christa T. who herself is telling part of her story that is then re-told by the narrator. I have to admit that, reading it in German was at times a challenge, requiring patience and total concentration even by a parent-tongue German. The most interesting aspect of the novel, given its time of writing, was for me the more philosophical and political undercurrent of Wolf's story. Through Christa T. herself and the narrator, Wolf touches on or even delves into pertinent questions of identity and individualism in the face of the required "Anpassung" (adaptation), imposed by the school and the political system in general of East Germany in the nineteen sixties. How can one maintain a sense of freedom while benefiting from the opportunities offered by the State for those who are actively participating in the society? In that sense, Wolf not only created a portrait of one individual but one of a whole generation. A generation that tried, while adapting as much as necessary, fought for its one space of independence and individuality.
