In 1968, Christa Wolf reflected on time. In a hundred, or no, she corrected herself mid-sentence, in 50 years, she'll be a historical character on a stage herself, to be looked at in the same way she - in 1968 - looked at time past, time finished, time gone. Almost exactly 50 years later, I read her words, and think about how right she was, and how wrong. Her world, the world of socialist East Germany, had only two decades left, and she outlived the state she believed was built to last forever by another two decades. Her way of life was cut short in the same way her friend Christa T.'s life abruptly ended - in a sudden unpredictable turn. Her friend struggled with her country and with her body, both of which were destroyed from within themselves, literally mirroring Solzhenitsyn's symbol of disease in the Cancer Ward . It strikes me that I read Christa Wolf in the same way she writes, moving simultaneously in different eras, back and forth, turning time into a slippery, confusing mindset rather than a chronological scaffold. Starting with her later mythological works, I jumped into her childhood reflections in Kindheitsmuster , her opus magnum, the Gordian knot of her life - the early indoctrination with Hitlerism, the loss of that belief in her vulnerable adolescent years, the growth of a new state faith to believe in, until it too showed the totalitarian signs she was far too familiar with already. From her childhood memories, written in the difficult 1970s, and told through three simultaneous time prisms, I moved on to Der geteilte Himmel , her early novel, conceived during the odd German era when her state built a wall to lock in its citizens while it tried to convince them that they lived in a perfect utopia. Only a young idealist, schooled in flag-waving, cheering loyalty to dictatorship already, could choose love for doctrine over love for another human being. The disturbingly doctrinaire protagonist of Der geteilte Himmel deliberately chose the socialist state, and its author stayed within the regime as well, only to see it break down. Christa Wolf stayed in the church, but she lost her faith in the process. Her account of the slow death of her childhood friend and namesake is the natural bridge between the young idealist and the sad, disillusioned later Christa Wolf. All is in transition, everything moves, there is no control. Her friendship to Christa T. includes shared memories of a classmate who denounced his own father during the Third Reich, but the memories are kept at bay, held hostage at the back of their minds, not allowed to be fully explored: "We were strict with our memories back then", she writes. And her friend, dying prematurely, leaves her life to be explored by the surviving friend and writer. Owning her memories means controlling her friend: "She moves when I want her to". Memory is powerful. The alternative is forgetting. Christa Wolf writes against the powerful wish to forget, at least selectively, what life is like. There is no heroism in her account, there is no stringent plot leading to a satisfying dénouement. There is life. And it is cut short. This is one of the rare books that gain by rereading, especially after engaging in other novels by Christa Wolf. She spins a web of memories around herself, and each thread she starts adds to the whole picture, circling around the tragedy of German history during her lifetime. Born in 1929, she saw states abruptly begin, then as abruptly end, giving birth to new states, equally set to collapse within her memory's range. In Christa T., she wrote the history of the mortal fight between collective and individual humanity, between imagination and reality, between idealism and reality. She gave her friend a literary monument, and at the same time wrote a parable of the dying of her own beliefs. "Nothing is as hard as turning to the things as they really are", she says. Especially if you have lived for such a long time looking through a mirror of wishes, beliefs and ideas. From the insight she gained in her reflections on her friendship with Christa T., she would develop the bravery to move on to face the patterns of her childhood, as they really were. This was the bridge over which the young woman walked to adulthood and disillusion. Recommended! Again and again and again...
