After reading a succession of novels in the last year inspired by the brilliant Thomas Bernhard, it is fascinating to read one where the influence runs in the opposite direction. Austrian writer Ingeborg Bachmann was a mentor of sorts to Bernhard and the basis for the poet Maria in his final novel Extinction. Malina, published two years before her death (aged 47 in 1973) was her only novel, although intended to be the first of a trilogy called Todesarten (Ways of Dying) The translation here is by Philip Boehm, revisited in this new 2019 edition: interestingly one editorial decision in the revised edition was to cut out the footnotes and some glosses, on the grounds that the interested reader now has access to the internet. Malina is a wonderfully powerful work - intense, experimental, with a narrative that is both fragmentary yet compulsive - one that is difficult to absorb on a single reading, a novel that would repay much study and yet would still have its enigmas. At one point even the narrator admits: Something is dawning on me, I’m beginning to see some logic, but I don’t understand anything in particular. For example: is the eponymous Malina, with whom she apparently lives (platonically) yet who seems to not even acknowledge the existence of her lover Ivan, a real person or a figment of her imagination, a male alter-ego (“we’re as different as nights and day”) or rather is she his female alter-ego: merely the dispensable product of his rib ) or perhaps a figment of his. There are many excellent reviews on the internet ( https://www.thenation.com/article/ing... and from the ever-excellent Joseph Schreiber https://roughghosts.com/2017/11/26/li... ) and Goodreads, so I will content myself with some of my favourite passages: The narrator on reading: It has less to do with the books, above all it has to do with the reading, with black on white, with the letters, syllables, lines, the signs, the setting down, this inhuman fixing, this insanity, which flows from people and is frozen into expression. Believe me, expression is insanity, it arises out of our insanity. It also has to do with turning pages, with hunting from one page to the other, with flight, with complicity in an absurd, solidified effusion, with a vile overflow of verse, with insuring life in a single sentence, and, in turn, with the sentences seeking insurance in life. Reading is a vice which can replace all other vices or temporarily take their place in more intensely helping people live, it is a debauchery, a consuming addiction. No, I don’t take any drugs, I take books. ... Speed is important, not only concentration, can you please tell me who can keep chewing on a simple or even a complex sentence without feeling disgust, either with the eyes or the mouth, just keep on grinding away, over and over, a sentence which only consists of subject and predicate must be consumed rapidly, a sentence with many appositions must for that very reason be taken at tremendous speed, with the eyeballs performing an imperceptible slalom. ... I couldn’t list the books which have impressed me the most or explain why they made such an impression, in which places and for how long. What sticks, then, you will ask, but that’s not the point! there are only a few sentences, a few expressions that wake up inside my brain again and again, begging to be heard over the years. And the narrator's take (I would say Bernhardian take but actually his takes are Bachmannian) on Vienna and its decline post the end of the Austro-Hungarian empire (sentences that one fears may mirror the fate of London and the UK post Brexit): I get along well with this city and its diminished and disappearing surroundings which have retired from history. (Uneasy alarm of Herr Mühlbauer. Unruffled, I proceed.) You might also say that, as an example to the world, an empire, along with its practices and tactics embellished with ideas, was expelled from history. I am very happy to live here, because from this place on the planet, where nothing more is happening, a confrontation with the world is all the more frightening, here one is neither self-righteous nor self-satisfied, as this is not some protected island, but a haven of decay, wherever you go there is decay, decay everywhere, right before our eyes, and not just the decay of yesterday’s empire, but of today’s as well. Highly recommended (although far from an easy read). 4.5 stars - my only reason for 4 not 5 is that I don't feel I did the novel justice, rather than vice versa.
