there are very profound reflections on sin and virtue, love, etc. and a very interesting analysis of a somewhat incestuous and hebephilic relationship. a man who is friends with a woman who has a 10 year old daughter, becomes that girl's father figure, and, not surprisingly finds that the girl falls in love with him when she is 16, 17. he is in his early 50s, or late 40s. by the time she is 25, she loves him as if he were her child, because he is weak and feeble, of sorts, but she still loves him. i wonder if, had they stayed together until she was 35... would she still love him, or would her love have turned into duty, and be full of regret... i mean, one is capable of sticking to love, but a love felt at the age of 16 or 17 that is based on daddy issues... is that love truly lasting? it is clearly not based on anything healthy, but setting that aside, is it lasting? my father is 81 and his wife is 30, more or less. she was 19 when they married. i am 50. she is kind and loving and takes care of him, as she would take care of an elderly father. they have had two kids, thanks to modern medicine, and at least she has that (the girl in the book did not), in a society that prizes having children, and that is very traditional in its gender roles (the Philippines). i know that she loves my father, because he has rescued her and her entire family from poverty, and he has been good and loving and kind. but she has had to have sex with him, Christ. sex with a man she cares for as for an elderly father, and can only love as if he were an elderly father... at least in her case, my father didn't raise her since she was 10... can love be lasting, when there is such a huge age difference? can it be the kind of love that is based on sexual attraction and, when that has died down, as it always does, sexual affection? taking this, and the previous book i read from von Arnim, Father, in which a character ponders how horrible it is for another character, who has just married a man she does not want to touch or be touched by, i cannot but look at these father-daugther (or granddaughter) relations as, well. as queer, to use a term von Arnim uses a lot in this last phase of her writing life. it's not unnatural, not at all. men want young mates, that is sensible in terms of the species, of their role in it as male mammals. and women want stable mates, that is also sensible, mates who can take care of her and her offpsring. but they don't know that this is what motivates them, a purely animal instict, and they clothe it in the language of beauty and love--von Arnim does not, of course. but she doesn't use evolutionary biology or psychology, either. she looks at the emotions that the characters feel, the thoughts that they have... this books is not about this subject, mind you. it isn't, not really...
