On the side of the plot Youth Without God is a detective story but actually the novel is about society and those whom society tramples under its feet… “God is the most terrible thing in the world.” Yes! Charming were the thoughts that pierced my heart. My mind had bred them. Apparelled so becomingly, they danced along and scarcely touched the ground. A ball, a fashionable ball. In pairs they went gliding through the moonlight. Cowardice with Courage, Lies with Uprightness, Wretchedness with Strength, Malice with Valour. Only Reason and Understanding did not join in the dance. Reason and Understanding were wretchedly drunk. They had lost their virtue. But the dance went on, and I listened to the music. A song of the streets – the song of filth. According to language, race, or nation, we set ourselves apart, and each pile up our filth to overtower the other’s. It is a brilliant depiction of conformism… And God is high above and He is a rapacious predator. Through the streets marched the young girls who had searched for the lost airman, the boys who would have left the negroes to die, and their parents, who believed the lies inscribed upon their banners. Even the sceptical joined in the march and kept time with the rest – spineless divisions under an idiot’s command. As they marched, they sang – of a bird fluttering upon a hero’s grave, of a soldier suffocating in the fumes of poison gas, of brown girls and black girls who lived on filth, of an enemy that only existed in their minds. Conformity is a great force and it rules the crowds. And hypocrisy is a deadly weapon of tyrants. For if you are ruled by the lawless and the debased you had better adopt their methods or they might flay you alive. You must drape your home with flags – even if you’ve a home no longer. When submissiveness is the solitary trait in the human character that those who rule will tolerate, truth flies away and lies creep in – the lies that engender sin. If society is infected everyone in it must fall ill.
