During the last 15 years of her life Jean Rhys, one of the most remarkable writers of the 20th century, often spoke about how much she wanted to "get things right", i.e., to be as true as possible in her writing to place, speech, mood, the taste and texture of experience, and to achieve this precision without--as she once said in a letter--"any STUNTS". Indeed, she never used any words rhetorically, her language does what it needs to do with an elegance and economy which is perfectly natural and easy (Diana Athill). Christa Wolf, however, could not have written this book without any "stunts". It is in fact one, courageous, magnificent stunt. She demonstrates here the power of the UNWRITTEN words. What is written here is nothing, the real story one can get only by reading between the lines. And there is, of course, nothing written between the lines. So it is like reading an unforgettable novel from a blank page. Christa Wolf was an East German writer at the time when East Germany was still East Germany: communist, totalitarian and where the State is supreme above all else. Uniformity--as determined by State laws and policies--reigned as the only acceptable conduct. Individualism can get one a death sentence or land him in jail. The narrator here is a female friend of the principal protagonist, Christa T. From what one reads here, Christa T. has had an uneventful life. She studied, became a teacher, had her early loves, married a veterinarian, bore him three children, had her small circle of friends (including the narrator), scrimped and saved to build her dream house by the lake (which was never completely finished), then died of leukemia at the young age of 35. She lived in East Germany and died sometime in the early 60's. Behind this seemingly boring ordinariness of this life, however, is the fact that this simple East German, Christa T., is a free soul. She questions things, she does not simply accept things as they are. Her mind is free and wants to express herslf yet she's aware of the danger in this. Cryptically, the author Christa Wolf tried to write about this tension again and again. And you can't help but be in awe witnessing how she did this masterfully: she expresses her thoughts, but ever so subtly, so that while "saying" what she wants to say, she at the same time does not say it. An example is inevitable, otherwise no one will understand what is being stated here: "She (Christa Wolf) believed that you must work at your past as you work at your future; I find this in notes she made on books she'd read. A publisher had asked her to write something about this; but because of her increasing tiredness and sickness she never got further than making these notes; and I'm sure that she would have kept to the criteria which she sets in them, without fluttering an eyelid. Not that she'd have expected perfection, but she wants everything to be new and fresh, nothing should be colorless and fortuitous and banal as in reality, something else should be there, not always the same old events and worldwide announcements. Originality, she notes, and then: jettisoned, because of cowardice. She wrote: Perhaps in life one can make certain cuts; but not here. "The happy times of pristine thinking and open minds, always favorable for beginnings, belonged now to the past, and we kinew it. We tipped the last of the wine into the apple tree. The new star hadn't appeared. We were cold and went back into the room, where the moonlight was coming in. Her child was asleep, she went to the bedside and looked at the child for a long time. One can't have everything, everyone knows that, but what's the use of knowing? "Perhaps in life one can make certain cuts?...But when she was alone, she stood at the front door, looked down the long hallway, felt the silence beginning to clutch her, and she said aloud: No." The author did everything here. She was even able to criticize her country's rulers but, again, "between the lines": "But for another six motley months before marrying she (Christa T.) lives in Berlin. The reddish-brown notebook (her diary) simply goes silent; its last pages are filled with recipes and household accounts; it makes me laugh, her allocation of this or that tiny sum of money. She closes the book and says, We're off. Sometimes they travel far, sometimes 'druben'--over there. The trip there is unusual enough to make your heart beat faster: over there is where the opposite ideas for living are produced, where everything is the reverse--people, things, and thoughts; that's the real reason why you fell uneasy when you turn the next corner, full of weird expectation, to find always only the same smiling traffic policeman. But one might just as easily catch oneslef napping: this is a twofold country and, what's more, everyone in it is twofold, one part possibility and the other its refutal. One gets rid of the feeling of confusion at times by doing something violent. She spits on the memorial to 'the stolen territories in the East.' Memory's color is greenish-gold, it mustn't go black, mustn't go dry: black is the color of guilt. She spits on this black stone." While doing these silent protests Christa T. was aware of the danger: "To become oneself, with all one's strength. "Difficult. "A bomb, a speech, a rifle shot--and the world can look a different place. And then where is this 'self'"? Under this repressive atmosphere, what's the use of writing at all? Why not just conform and live a safe life? Christa Wolf explains herself by narrating the reason why the principal character Christa T. chose a particular poet to discuss in her school thesis. Through the novel's narrator she explains that the poet was chosen because his (poet's) attitude to the world is "predominantly lyrical" and because: "a nature like his, in a period of cultural inertia and derivativeness, is especially hard put to produce its proper work. So what interests her is the endeavor: she doesn't overrate the work itself, but she does value its having come to be...What matters is that he really did conquer his realm, against the worst odds." The author made Christa T. die of cancer, a disease which makes its victims progressively weak and tired, so perhaps she can take a snipe at the country's lack of freedom this way: "In the last years...There, I've said it, and I won't withdraw it as I've done before now--because these are the last years: in the last years we never saw her otherwise than tired. Today one can ask, to be sure, what this tiredness meant, but at that time the question wasn't asked because it would have been meaningless. The answer would have helped neither her nor us. This much is certain: what one does can never make one so tired as what one doesn't do or cannot do. That was the case with her. That was her weakness and her secret superiority." "Kung hindi tayo kikilos, sino ang kikilos? Kung hindi tayo ang gagalaw, sino ang gagalaw? Kung hindi ngayon, kailan pa?" So went the battlecry of Filipino student protesters during the Marcos dictatorship. But this may not have been an original. Pretending, again, that she is just talking about Christa T., the author ended this novel with this disguised call to action: "One day people will want to know who she (Christa T.) was and who it is that's been forgotten. They'll want to see her, and that's only natural. They'll wonder if that other figure really was there, the one we obstinately insist on when we mourn. Then people will have to produce her, create her, for once. So that the doubts may be silenced, so that she may be seen. "When, if not now?" This was on the very last page of the novel. But one can be sure there is more to it than meets the eye because earlier, somewhere in the middle of the book, sphinx-like as usual, the author disclosed her hope for a free tomorrow which, she suggests, can be achieved by self-examination and by taking action now: "It's very funny, she said, that we've all become something. "Nowadays, I suppose, this feeling calls for an explanation. But first I'll let her go on talking. She went on, or asked: Think--are you really living today, at this very moment? Really living? "Heavens, I said, where's this leading? "Today I'd like to be able to give her question back to her. For she was right, now I come to think of it. We never realized one might some day arrive somewhere and that would be the end of it. That one would be something, and think no more of it. We were traveling, and there was always a little wind behind us, or against us. We aren't anything yet, but we shall be one day; we haven't got it yet, but we shall: that was our formula. The future? The future is going to be Quite Different. Everything in good time. The future, beauty and perfection, we're saving them up, as our reward, to be paid some day, for untiring industry. Then we shall be something, then we shall have something. "But as the future was always thrust along in front of us, and as we saw that it was nothing but the extension of the time that moves with our own movement, and that one can't ever reach it--then we had to start asking: HOW shall we be? WHAT shall we have? "Time cannot stop, but one day there'll be no time, unless one stops now: are you really living now, in this very moment, really living? "When, if not now?" Very clever and brave, this Christa Wolf!
