Welcome to the journey. Marias spins us through time and isolation written in aquiline precise prose. The master of black comedy, his humor throughout much of the novel is tinged with a palpable sadness. The novel opens with the narrator telling us that while at Oxford two of his colleagues died but that he is no longer the same person who taught there for two years. Entering his building each morning he passes the ninety year old porter, Will, who due to some unnamed form of dementia lives in different eras each day, shifting back and forth, seeing the people who he waves a good morning to as those of that past time, the past that has now for that day become his present. The present for our first person narrator includes an affair with the beautiful Clare that is not only limited by his two year lectureship and need to return to Madrid but also defines its character and possibilities. The novel is permeated with a sad smile at life fixed and limited in time. The presentiment of aging, ill health, death weights time as a motif through the novel absenting the present not only for the aging but some of the young as well, on their downward tread. Oxford also is stymied rather than being the venerable institution of high discourse and the seeking of further and greater knowledge. It is a place of vapid stasis, stuck in time and space. Their lectures, "... would have been or would be conducted in the most absolute calm and tranquility, since classes were part of being, not doing or acting." The interactions of faculty were prescribed by never revealing emotions or any information about themselves. Their entertainment circles around gossip about each other, real or fictionalized. In the best of black comedy Marias tells of, high table dining, the faculty and administration are condemned to. Silently scoffing students are seated below. The meal is highly structured with each person at high table forced to talk for a specific number of minutes to the person on the right then when signaled to the person on the left. The narrator there as everywhere in this static campus feels unease and loneliness, out of sync with others who had chosen or all too willing adapted to living a confined life. "For the inhabitants of Oxford are not in the world and when they do sally forth into the world (to London, for example) that in itself is enough to have them gasping for air; their ears buzz, they lose their sense of balance, they stumble and have to come scurrying back to the town that makes their existence possible, that contains them, where they do not exist in time." Reading this novel for me was a delight due to the fineness of his prose and darkly comedic exposition of his theme. Where I felt he stumbled was his shifts of time which were harsh and at times threw me outside of the narrative's dream. I read this in conjunction with McElroy's, Night Soul and Other Stories, as a needed occasional break. McElroy made his shifts in time jarring yet fitting into a purposefulness which rendered it as a part of the overall work. Some of Marias' shifts called attention to themselves and thus became disruptive. The ending felt forced, contrived. I am completely open that on a second reading I might see what I missed and how this fit seamlessly with his tenured preoccupations with the difficulty of living within time, space. Also as I become a better reader it may become clearer. These were small stumbles and easily diminished by the overall polish and flow of the writing. I imagined him, a magic cloth held in hand buffing each word, sentence, paragraph, idea to a polished gleam. I am on soon to his, Dark Back Of Time, and to rereading, All Souls when the next time is right.
