Every story needs a villain, and it's human nature to look for someone to blame when a tragedy occurs. Sadly, Jon Krakauer chose mountaineer Anatoli Boukreev as his villain, and I--along with thousands, if not millions, of others--believed his portrayal of this incredibly courageous, talented Russian. After all, why would Krakauer lie? Why, indeed. After reading The Climb, which is Boukreev's side of the story, but no where near as defensive and biased as some reviews had led me to believe, I have a completely different impression of Into Thin Air and Krakauer's account of what happened that terrible night in May. First of all, Krakauer was NOT in Boukreev's group, so he had no idea what their plan was, and no reason to disbelieve Boukreev's explanation that his boss had TOLD him to descend to Camp IV and rest, in case he was needed later for a rescue effort. After reading Into Thin Air, I had the impression that Boukreev was lazy and having a good old time eating and drinking tea at camp while people died on the mountain. When, in reality, Boukreev waited a long time at the summit (over an hour) for others to arrive. When he descended, all of his group appeared to be fine. And far from being lazy, Boukreev was the ONLY person willing to go into the storm and save three people. No one else would help him, despite repeated attempts on his part. Boukreev also went back later to bury his boss and friend, Scott Fischer, along with a woman who had been part of another expedition--a woman he'd desperately tried to save. He even retrieved the woman's belongings for her husband. This says loads about his character. After all the mistakes that were made that day/evening that led to so much tragedy--late starts, crowding on the mountain, Sherpas not fixing the ropes as planned, not enough radios, not enough oxygen--why would Krakauer turn on Boukreev, one of the only people who acted selflessly and saved lives, of all people? It's a mystery to me, but Boukreev was Russian. His reserve, seriousness, and insecurity about his English gave people the impression he was cold or uncaring. His difficulty speaking in a language that was not his own made it challenging for him to defend himself or compete with an American journalist who could talk rings around him. It's very telling to me that all of Boukreev's clients survived, and that most of the casualties were in Krakauer's group. So if Boukreev did so many things wrong, according to a guy with far less experience on the mountains than the man he was criticizing, why did those on his expedition survive? Boukreev was a hero, and if he were an American, he would have had feature films made about him. It's a shame he had to deal with this slander in the last year of his life.
