Which do you prefer: to read the book first or to watch the movie? I’m definitely in the “read it first” camp, and love to then watch a film which brings it all back to me—provided they haven’t changed too much. (Then I might turn into one of those annoying people who says “What?” loudly, in the cinema.) In the case of Rosemary’s Baby however, I watched the film first. I’d never heard of it, not the book, nor the author. In fact when I did read the book for the first time a little later, I assumed the author to be Irish—and female. Witchcraft seemed to fit better with anti-Catholicism, and babies with women … but I need to start earlier. The film had been released in 1968, and about three years later it was showing at an avant-garde cinema in Oxford, called the “Moulin Rouge” . You wouldn’t get any blockbusters there, but “edgy” films such as Pasolini’s “The Decameron” or the extraordinary film about Wilhelm Reich “W.R.: Mysteries of the Organism” . Most had subtitles for an English audience, but this was a rare occasion: a double bill of two films in English. One was “If ….” , a satirical film directed by Lindsay Anderson about a group of pupils who stage a savage insurrection at an English boys’ public (i.e. in England, a fee-paying boarding) school. It was teamed with Rosemary’s Baby , which I learned was an American psychological horror film. At that time, my boyfriend was at Oxford University, and my friends were all Oxford undergraduates, and all male. Their backgrounds were either grammar, or public school, but their sexual orientation varied, and they were socially diverse, ranging from working to upper middle class. This was a time of grants, when academic ability determined who would enter universities. One friend assured the group that we must see this wonderful film about bullying and revolution in a public school. There was another film on with it—a bit trashy, he said, like a “Hammer Horror” film—but it was a double bill, so we might agreed we might as well just sit through it. It was probably showing because it was directed by Roman Polanski. Except that I didn’t just put up with it. I was alienated, then engrossed, then chilled to the bone, and when “If ….” came on I was still recovering from the first film. After the film, we talked a bit, but I seemed to be on my own. In fact there wasn’t much of a consensus. My friends’ backgrounds were just too different from each other. One’s experience was exactly like the school in “If ….” and it was not so long ago, either. Of course he dreamed of blowing it all up! The others just shrugged. Yes, it was good. Any counterculture was good. They were not typical Oxford students of the time: not Toffs, Pseuds, Hearties (admitted solely on their sporting prowess) or Freaks. They—we—thought ourselves different. And what made me on edge from the start about Rosemary’s Baby , was the mire of ordinariness. No, not the idea of giving birth to the devil’s spawn amid a conventional happy home, which seems to be what terrifies most readers, but what I saw as the futility of the characters’ lives, the self-limited boundaries of their experience, and their unimaginative aspirations. This alienated me from the start; these characters were trapped. Only now can I see that this was a deliberate strategy; an underlying theme. Ira Levin was subverting the stereotype of the American dream. It was not my world, not at all, but then I did not need to be a part of it to know I would run a mile from it. So we began with a typical all-American couple, Rosemary and Guy Woodhouse. Rosemary was a twenty-four year old woman from Omaha, Nebraska: a middle-of-the-road sort of place. She had been brought up as Rosemary Reilly, the youngest of six children in a Catholic family. But Rosemary disliked her family’s expectations of her, and left: “an angry, suspicious father, a silent mother, and four resenting brothers and sisters” all of whom had married early and made homes close to their parents. Rosemary though, moved to the bright lights of New York. She met and married Guy, an “ordinary guy” from Baltimore, who was a struggling actor. Now they were looking for a place to call home, and had just signed up for a charmless place without character, when an apartment in a much sought-after old building became available. This was the “Bramford” , an historic Gothic Revival-style New York City apartment building. * Rosemary was enchanted. It was old , and even had gargoyles. It was everything she ever dreamed of. She begged her husband Guy, to get them out of the contract somehow. Readers today complain how accepting Rosemary is of her husband’s dominance. But this is part of Rosemary’s essential make-up. Just as the viewpoint character in Daphne du Maurier’s “Rebecca” is a mousy young woman, easily impressed and persuadable, so is Rosemary. Yet in both cases some readers misread this, and assume it is an objectionable indication of an earlier male-dominated society. In fact that is only a partial truth. Daphne du Maurier’s heroine remains unnamed throughout, to indicate her low self-image. It is not “old-fashioned”, and nothing to do with women’s position in the social hierarchy of the time, but a point about her psychology. In his 1967 novel Rosemary’s Baby , Ira Levin too has not bought into the convenient stereotype of a submissive female, as in most popular novels up to the 1960s. He is exploiting it, so that he can burst it wide open. Ira Levin’s central character does have a name, in fact, but it is a carefully chosen one: “Rosemary” . It includes both “Rose” for purity, and “Mary” the mother of Christ. This feeds into the allegorical aspect of the story. As well as the mistaken criticism that the author’s ideas of female roles are dated in Rosemary’s Baby , a common criticism is that the views are racist. This idea comes about because the residents in the “Brampton” , and all the friends and theatre contacts of the young couple are white, although one key character later on is Jewish: Abe Sapirstein, a high society doctor. The one exception is Guy’s agent’s “negro girlfriend” who is a model, and very much an adjunct to the other characters. The word “negro”, as a simple description, gave me a start, but perhaps that is because I am English, and it was not an accepted term at the time. In Rosemary’s Baby , the service providers, such as a “uniformed negro boy with a locked-in-place smile” operating the elevator, or “a bevy of negro laundresses [who] ironed and gossiped” , are usually described this way. They have no individuality, but are seen in terms of their colour and their ensuing low-grade job. It seems obvious that this is not the author, but the culturally biased social system in Manhattan at the time! Rosemary has a burgeoning sense of racial inequality, feeling: “self-conscious, clumsy and Negro-oppressing” . Rosemary had had a convoluted dream after she had been drugged, ready for the Satanic ritual where she would be impregnated with the Devil’s seed . The later part was about the Pope and the Sistine Chapel, but the earlier part of the dream took place on a yacht. Various important people were there, such as President Kennedy, and also her family. The “Negro mate [was] holding the steering wheel unremittingly on its course” . She knew in the dream that that the mate hated her, and that he hated all white people. Far later, the lightbulb moment for Rosemary harks back to this specific fact in the dream. Near the end of the novel, when a heavily pregnant Rosemary thinks she had escaped, but has been taken again by the cult, she feels numb and defeated. But as she is led back into the Brampton, Diego, the elevator man smiles at her: “Smiled because he liked her, favoured her over some of the other tenants. The smile, reminding her of something in her, revived something,” and from then on Rosemary fights. Fights for her life, and for that of her child. And what has triggered this positive action; this strive for freedom and independence, has been a minor character from an ethnic minority. This is clearly not a racist, or even a dated book. It looks frankly at those social mores, and judges.** Into this microcosm of New York, and the ideal of the American Way, Rosemary arrives, excited at the idea of creating a home—hopefully complete with a baby. But Guy is ambitious, and wants to wait until he is better known, when his career will be more established. So far he has only appeared in small roles; in one stage play and various TV commercials. Rosemary is encouraging. Her husband is marvellously talented, and she tells him so over and over again. This first section of the book is all about her buying fabric and making curtains and loose covers, covering shelves with plastic, and similar domestic pursuits, though I seem to remember they employed a decorator. Odd, that. But the USA was different, I reminded myself. Just as cars, huge refrigerators and the latest gadgets were mandatory, the standard of living for a “struggling actor” seemed pretty lavish. Guy had managed to sweettalk the estate agent of course; the first indication we have that he will easily lie when it is convenient. Rosemary does not seem to notice this. She has got what she wanted, gargoyles and all. Their apartment is huge! It had been built during 1880 to 1884, so yes, it must have seemed old to the characters in the story, although not to English readers. Oxford’s colleges date from the 13th century, and I could see gargoyles—real ones not replicas—if I lifted my eyes from the page. Yet how could this couple afford to rent so much space? I had moved to Oxford by the time I read the book. I was disillusioned with the prescribed academic courses on offer, or “careers” in steady jobs. I wanted to think for myself, and got a job merely to pay the rent on my one room. It was tiny, just a bed, a wardrobe, a tiny “baby Belling” portable oven, a one bar electric fire and a washbasin. I had a “coin in the slot” meter, and shared use of the mouldy-walled bathroom in the basement. But I was happy, and free! I could change my room or my job at any time. I bought an old armchair from a junk shop, a card table and upright chair, and put up temporary shelves to hold my books, record player and art materials. I had my thoughts and my independence, and found Rosemary’s voluntary incarcerated situation, and those of her friends, horrific. It’s likely I was not typical though. Called in for a reprimand by the librarian, I was told I had “upset” a fellow assistant. “She just wants to get married and have a baby—and you’re upsetting her” , I was told, and forbidden to say anything. Not that I knew what I had said— it puzzled me—but I hated to be unkind, so kept quiet. I was different. Perhaps others then, would have viewed this story differently. At what point would the horror have started for them, I wonder. Perhaps with the arrival of some neighbours who are also on the 7th floor, Minnie and Roman Castavet. They are an eccentric, elderly couple, who do everything they can to welcome Rosemary and Guy to the Bramford. Rosemary likes Minnie at first: “enjoying this open forthright old woman with her loud voice and her blunt questions” . But soon she begins to think that Minnie is nosey and interfering, and “gets a smothery sort of feeling, as if they’re being too friendly and helpful” . The Castavets watch everything Rosemary does, and Minnie invariably thinks she has better ideas, often pressing food on them, or visiting. They seem to want to take over Rosemary’s life, especially when she falls pregnant. But Guy makes her feel she is being unkind to a lonely old couple. After all, they are harmless and amusing, a bit like like Ma and Pa Kettle. Surely she can put up with their meddlesome habits? It is only because they care. Guy begins visiting them regularly, and Rosemary understands. (Of course she does.) He does not have a large family back in Omaha, as she does. They must feel like substitute parents, to him. So the first section is full of little domestic details, and shopping for commercial items I did not know, as Rosemary makes her “nest”. If this had been written later, I might have suspected product placement, but it is really just a detailed account of a reasonably affluent, materialistic American couple. They are aware of current events, know contemporary styles and fashions in everything, and have seen the right plays to talk about with their friends—who are all exactly like they are. Rosemary and Guy are worldly-wise and sceptical, with no particular belief system. Minnie and Roman are similar in this, with Roman’s comments about the “hypocrisy behind organised religion” , and Guy loves to hear his old actor stories. Roman seems to have known everyone in the theatre world! When their visitors have left, the long-suffering young couple are polite to all the other elderly residents: friends of Minnie and Roman, who visit them, and have strange parties where they seem to chant and play the flute or clarinet. At least, that is what it sounds like through the wall. Parties. Bright conversation, artificial chatter and artificial food. And a hidden worry about the Brampton. Too many accidents have happened there. Too many cases splashed across newspaper headlines, of strange perverted people who have lived there. There have been accusations and claims of witchcraft, cannibalism, Satanic worship, suicide and infanticide, and earlier in the century it was called “Black Bramford”. But that was aeons ago! What about here and now? In the modern 1960s, with educated, rational people? This surely is mere superstition, Rosemary and Guy think. They are an enlightened, sophisticated couple, not living in the Dark Ages. Why, they even have a copy of the two volumes of the “Kinsey Report” on their bookshelves. But Rosemary’s friend “Hutch” (Edward Hutchins), a 54-year old English writer, whom Rosemary jokes is the Professor Higgins to her Eliza Doolittle (and who is the only appealing character in the book) is serious, and had warned them even before they moved in. And so it begins. A new friend Rosemary has made, Terry Gionoffrio, happy and devoted to the Castavets who had taken her under their wing, dies instantly, after apparently throwing herself off their balcony. The talented lead actor in a new stage play, Donald Baumgart, suddenly goes blind, and Guy is fortuitously cast in the role. His performance in the play gets rave reviews, and other increasingly significant roles follow. Guy soon begins talking about a career in Hollywood. Although Rosemary is pregnant, she loses weight drastically, and has “skeletal cheeks and black circled eyes” . She is in constant pain, yet her high society doctor tells her it is nothing to worry about. Hutch had urged Rosemary to meet him about some disturbing facts he had uncovered, but mysteriously falls into a coma. Rosemary later learns that the book he had wanted her to have, “All of Them Witches” shows that Roman Castavet was the leader of a Satanic coven. She now suspects that her unborn baby is wanted as a sacrifice to the devil. “The pain grew worse … and she stopped reacting, stopped mentioning it … stopped referring to pain even in her thoughts. Until now it had been inside her, now she was inside it; pain was the weather around her, was time, was the entire world.” “The stubborn fact remains … that whether or not we believe, they most assuredly do” . Do we believe? Aren’t we too, enlightened, educated, and far too sophisticated to be taken in by this story? The Castavets’ message is that all religion is like showbiz. All superstition aside, Science had trumped God: “In the obstetrician’s waiting room, a magazine headline blared, “Is God Dead?” The truth is worse than Rosemary ever suspected, and the ending throws the reader completely off kilter. Once again, Ira Levin has broken the rules, and the ending is not what you expect, and more unnerving that anything that has gone before. In Rosemary’s baby , the horror is not a monster lurking in the dark, waiting to cry “boo”, (or armed with a hatchet) but hidden in normality. We have references to Gothic tropes: the Brampton is evidently a parallel for a creepy old, haunted castle, with the “creaks and tremors” of the elevator, and the “eerie” basement, with passageways where footfalls whispered distantly and unseen doors thudded closed” . Yet we are modern sceptics, and laugh at these ideas. Other gothic references are to Rosemary, as the story’s maiden; there is the central theme of Catholicism, and blood rituals, artefacts such as a silver filigree ball containing the foul-smelling (invented) tannis root or “Devils Pepper” worn as a locket, and ornate candlesticks holding black candles, a black mitre and wand, plus elements of incarceration and torture. Yet there is no monster save in a “dream”, and no deranged murderer. This evil wears a smiling, everyday face. Ira Levin paces his 1967 novel (written in 1966) superbly. Once again, this second novel does not put a foot wrong. We are constantly on edge, wondering about the truth. The three sections parallel before, during and after, and the tension increases incrementally and precisely. Even when Rosemary seems to have discovered incontrovertible proof, what does this mean, after all? Isn’t it merely that a group of people have crazy beliefs? The ambiguity is maintained and perfectly controlled. Rosemary’s Baby can be read as a spine-tingling horror, or as a humorous pastiche of horror stories. The story is packed with symbolism. Essentially it is an allegory about the antichrist , and has never been bettered, although it has spawned many imitations. Satan-themed horror novels such as “The Exorcist” and “The Omen” followed Rosemary’s Baby . Its unnerving quality is due to the combination of the baroque and the Gothic, with the modern and the banal; the very “ordinariness”, which I found so suffocating back on my first encounter with the story. It has knife-sharp social observation, and pleasing constant references to other literature, such as: ““I’ll bet you still read Dickens.” “Of course I do,” [Rosemary] said, ““Nobody stops reading Dickens.”” Very true! But Rosemary’s Baby , far from being a tacky horror story, is for me a modern classic.
