This was another Marian Keyes book that I liked the sound of and was looking forward to reading. Straight away I got a sense of fun from the main characters, they had a great friendship and were comfortable and relaxed in each others company. Tara had a bit of a problem with food and I could totally relate to that! Any parts that mentioned her hunger either had me nodding my head because it’s something I do, or laughing out loud at how hilariously she behaves when she’s hungry. Seeing everyday objects as food was a particular favourite of mine and I found myself doing the same after I read this. Her relationship with Thomas made me feel uncomfortable because it was so obviously wrong, I just wanted to shake her to make her see sense. Katherine was interesting, she was a strong, confident woman on the outside but had obviously been hurt at some point in her life and this made her push people away. I really enjoyed watching Joe try to make his move on her – her responses were cruel but made very entertaining reading! Fintan was fabulous, I loved everything about him! His illness was one of the main things that stuck out for me in this book – it was a real turning point, not just for his character but for everyone. They all seemed to re-evaluate their own situations especially after Fintan makes a couple of difficult requests. I couldn’t figure out where Lorcan fit into the story, I knew he had to be important in some way but I couldn’t predict how. He was a horrible character and once I had discovered why he was there, it all made sense. I think I’ll have to re-read this at some point because now I can look at it from a different perspective. Fintan becoming ill meant that there were quite a few heart-wrenching moments but these were balanced out by some very funny moments, for example a disastrous mud wrap adventure for Tara that is not to be missed! A surprise twist near the end pieced everything together and it was something that I hadn’t seen coming which made it even more interesting to read. This is an enjoyable book that really makes you see things in a different way.
