Blood and Water is the debut collection of stories by Patrick McGrath, author of contemporary Gothic novels which I have recently read and reviewed, Spider and The Grotesque . The stories range from moody and atmospheric to downright hilarious, and among their narrators are not only men and women, but also a fly and a boot. The best stories in the collection come early. In The Angel , the narrator reminisces about his first meeting with Harry Talboys - an eccentric older man, who claims that he has once met an angel. McGrath uses the classic Gothic device of nesting stories, with the narrator relaying Talboys' story which he has not witnessed himself, but heard told by Talboys. The story is short and memorable because of the central character, whose story has caught me by surprise. In The Lost Explorer , a young girl named Evelyn discovers a small tent in the garden of her parent's London house. Inside the tent is a lost explorer, feverish and slowly dying from Malaria, constantly fearing an incoming attack of the pygmies. Young Evelyn is delighted by her discovery, and begins to care for the lost explorer right under the oblivious nose of her parents. Evelyn's parents have no idea what their daughter is doing, and seem to not really care. Boundaries between the real and imagine dissolve, and Evelyn is left alone to try to understand the explorer - whose otherness and strangeness reflects her own puberty and approaching maturity. Seen this way, Evelyn and her garden can remind the reader of Lewis Carroll's Alice and her Wonderland. The Black Hand of the Raj , set in colonial India in 1897, opens with a short reflection on the nature of imperialism and features a young woman, Lucy Hepplewithe, who travels to meet her fiancee - an English colonial officer named Cecil Pym. They are to be married with a wonderful ceremony, but her excitement gives way to surprise as she discovers that he has been afflicted with a strange and upsetting condition: a black hand has literally sprouted from his head. Physicians tell her that the hand is impossible to remove, as it is attached directly to the brain. The eponymous hand can be seen as a double metaphor: a projection of the British imagination of literally holding power over the strange, dark worlds of India and other colonies, and of the very same world taking hold over their own mind, eventually driving them to madness and tragedy - as it happened to colonel Kurtz in Heart of Darkness . Other stories in the collection continue to be intriguing: The Boot's Tale is the story of a decline of an American family narrated by a boot, set in an underground shelter after the nuclear holocaust has destroyed most of the planet; The E(rot)ic Potato is narrated by a fly named Gilbert, who searches for food along with other flies, including the eponymous potato - which is not what you might think it to be. Hand of a Wanker is an absurdly comedic and bizarre story of an escaped hand belonging to a chronic masturbator, and Marmilion is a reimagining of Poe's Cask of Amontillado , featuring a female photographer on a decaying Louisiana plantation. The complaint which can be made regarding these stories is that they feel more like sketches than actual stories, and are not as fully developed as the opening three. For fans of strange short fiction Blood and Water should prove a satisfying way to spend an evening or two, but not essential. In this collection the author was still experimenting with finding a voice, which he seems to have done well in his later and more successful novels.
