It will probably remain an unsolved mystery how come a brilliant, witty and besotting book which tickled me pink suddenly pivoted into murky waters of the narrator's exhausting self-analysis and soaked in a kind of limbo. Unfortunately, this is exactly what happened while I was reading All Souls (1989) by Javier Marías. The novel is an account of a young Spanish lecturer's two-year stay in Oxford, the static city preserved in syrup . Coincidentally, last September I read English Hours , a memoir by Ferran Soldevila, a Catalan historian who worked as a Spanish language assistant at the University of Liverpool from 1926 until 1928, so I have already seen a British university through the eyes of a visiting professor from the Iberian Peninsula. Both narrators are observant, curious and have a sense of humour. Ferran Soldevila is much more interested in the surroundings while Marías's protagonist tends to be submerged in himself. All Souls felt like a coruscating parody of a campus novel with satirical, hilarious portrayal of Oxford university’s pompousness and pretence, especially the eccentric scholars, and depiction of the narrator’s sentimental and sex education. My first reaction was pure awe and temptation to highlight almost everything in this novel. I especially loved the anecdotes regarding teaching and unforgettable fragments on obsessive book collecting which I could definitely relate to. Then out of the blue, the charm fizzled out. I am afraid portraying female characters is not Javier Marías's forte. The cringeworthy description of the girls the narrator calls fat tarts is an example. I wish he was able to see more in women than their alluring décollettages. The thing that bothers me most though is the coldness of this book. It was a struggle to connect and engage. Despite themes like love and death, my emotional investment was scarce. Quite ironically, sometimes I found All Souls soulless. Javier Marías's style is impeccable. No doubt he is an impressive virtuoso. Oddly, I cannot shake the feeling that he marvelled at his own prose while writing and that his exquisite style is the actual protagonist of All Souls , not necessarily the narrator. In the second half of the novel, I had the impression the monologue could go on and on and on effortlessly for hours and hundreds of pages, not caring too much if the readers are awake or still there. I had exactly the same feeling while reading Nabokov’s books. By the way, he is the narrator’s idol and the novel's premise made me think of Pnin . It felt so eerie to read the passages on death five months after the author had passed away: I can understand someone who regrets dying simply because they won't be able to read their favourite author's next book, or see a new film starring an actress they admire, or drink another glass of beer, or do today's crossword, or continue to follow a particular television series, or because they won't know who won this year's FA Cup. I regret we will never know what Javier Marías's next book would have been like. PS Huge thanks to Maryana whose compelling and insightful review made me reach for this novel in a flash. Artwork by Jonathan Wolstenholme.
