My rating for this book is actually 3.5 stars, but I put only 3 stars since I can't put a half star down. At first, I wasn't sure what to expect from this book. Dinosaurs didn't go extinct, but they actually walk around humans in a human skin to hide their existence. I actually really liked the concept. It's a funny and silly, but unique idea that I really liked. Of course, this book isn't meant to be taken really seriously, but I didn't have a problem with that. So, is the book good? It was definitely entertaining, but I don't know that I would call it a great book. For one, it's has all the cliches of a detective novel. You've got your washed up PI who's at odds with his supervisor with a dead partner. It just wraps up these cliches in the whole "but he's a dinosaur" situation. I'd rather that everything be more original instead of having it be just like 80% of the usual mystery/detective novels with a dinosaur thrown in. Also, it would have been nice to have more emphasis on the dinosaur part of life that was described in the book. Sometimes, I forget that Vincent is a dinosaur. He just acts so...human. I know that's supposed to be how they act, but it's hard to believe sometimes that this is a book about dinosaurs. More about dinosaur society and history would be nice. Just more emphasis on the dinosaurs would be nice in general, since that's the what makes the book interesting. The mystery and parts of the plot could have been put into another detective novel without any mention of a dinosaur and it would still be nice. The novel's entire shtick is that it's a novel "but it's dinosaurs". So, I think making the plot more connected to dinosaurs would have been nice. Another small complaint: It'd be nice to have Ernie and Vincent's past relationship fleshed out more. I have the feeling we were supposed to get emotional and care about Ernie, but he's barely mentioned throughout the book. Whenever his name popped up, I would just think "Huh, it's that dead guy that used to Vincent's partner" and nothing else. Some flashbacks here and there, more thoughts about him, things like that I think would have helped. It is a funny book though, and was pretty entertaining to read. There wasn't a point where I felt like I was forcing myself to stay with it. It's just like any other detective novel but...with dinosaurs. Kind of. Still, I enjoyed reading it. I just wish it did something more with the dinosaur angle. I really like dinosaurs.
