Sometimes, in order to make a certain kind of emotional sense, intuitive sense, you need a story that doesn’t make narrative sense—a story that obeys its own inscrutable logic, or no logic at all. I was about halfway through Malina —Austrian poet Ingeborg Bachmann’s endlessly confounding 1971 masterpiece—when David Lynch died. Lynch, one of the great artists of the 20th century, used fear, confusion, senselessness in the most paradoxical way—to cut through the white noise of modern culture and say, in a very direct way, something inexpressible. In the flurry of interviews, memes, and memories that filled social media in the wake of his death, a clip of David Lynch talking about intuition lodged in my mind: “If people think that I would get pleasure out of confusing someone or confounding someone, that is, you know, a bad way to think. Because it’s not that way. I’m trying to stay true to the ideas, translate them to film, in a way that feels correct. So some of these ideas are more abstract than others, but we have this beautiful thing called intuition, and abstractions exist way more in real life, so-called real life. And so we use this intuition to get a sense of things, to find the truth of something, like detectives.” I had set Malina aside a few weeks before. When I picked it up again, I was no longer lost. I could see clearly, as if a veil had been lifted, that Malina was not confusing at all. That its refusal to make sense was not meant to antagonize, but simply to be true. I saw, too, that Malina was not a novel charting a woman’s descent into madness. The idea that this was a novel about a woman losing her mind seemed, suddenly, a stupid and reductive oversimplification. Nor is it a novel about a passive, long-suffering woman, caught between, suffocated, or torn apart by men (although who am I to say, really, what Malina might mean to someone else?) What is Malina , then? A political novel? A novel about facism, war and peace, complicity and passivity, language and action? “I never looked and never listened very exactly,” Bachmann writes, “and now I listen less and less, but the less I listen, the more I am shocked by the connections I am beginning to see” (230). A novel about borders? The borders of the self, the borders of language, the borders of a nation yet newly cast from the slag metal of a fallen empire? A poem in novel form, written by one of the greatest poets of the 20th century? Malina is deathly depressing. Malina is far too brilliant, too nimble-footed, too simply glorious, to be depressing at all.
