I suppose this is my first P.D. James. I thought I had read something by James before, and perhaps I did, but this is definitely my first Adam Dalgliesh novel (which is the 7th in the series). From what I gather, Taste of Death may be the high point or one of the high points in the P.D. James catalogue. At 497 pages it's on the longish side, but James writes with a satisfying literary density that has me recalling another "genre" writer, John le Carré. Different sides of the street, for sure (particularly so, considering P.D. James' theological bent), but there is a matching seriousness at the core of both writers, which elevate their tale-telling. In this chapter, Dalgleish is summoned to investigate the murder (or is it suicide?) of a former British PM in the vestry of an Anglican church. Nearby is an equally dead tramp. The dead PM holds the razor that did the deeds, but he apparently died (nearly beheaded) before the tramp. Complicating things is Dalgleish's previous relationship with the PM. Although they only knew each other slightly, it's the PM's apparent conversion experience (complete with possible stigmata) that intrigues, even moves, Dalgleish. What follows is the methodical investigation of a cast of possible and often loathsome suspects. A cold and aged mother, a beautiful but air-headed widower, her partying actor-brother, a tired and faithless priest, a revolutionary or two, and other clever red herrings. I had no trouble spotting the murderer, probably because I was reminded of Caliban, and the literate James doesn't drop such a characterization lightly. That said, there is considerable murk regarding who else might be involved, and other deaths that need explaining by the cerebral Dalgleish and his capable team (who have their own problems). James is excellent at drawing characters, especially those eccentric British ones (I love Romance book writer). Published in 1986, you can't help but be reminded of what gray time it was in Thatcher Britain. Everyone seems a bit depressed, things are fraying and graying everywhere, and one can only sigh at the beautiful but ignored architecture, while knowing there's still a killer to be caught.
