As a fan of The Melvins, I've long since gotten used to their penchant for suddenly ending songs just when they sound like they're really getting underway. And, I was quickly reminded of this aspect of their music while reading Joyce Carol Oates' stories of murder and bloodshed, which often share that truncated quality. However, when The Melvins cut a song off, they simply proceed onto the next one without any demand on listeners to understand what they have just heard. This is not quite the case with short stories, though. When Oates' tales abruptly end, they can leave readers feeling like they have missed half the story or have not yet been given enough information to piece together what's actually going on. Since Oates does create some very memorable and realistic characters, perhaps she wanted to turn the focus from the outcomes of the story to the decision making processes the characters go through. This may work somewhat for certain stories—the story "Phase Change" about a woman who begins having violent nightmares comes to mind—but more often than not, it leads to frustration. "The Model," a more standard thriller about a girl asked to pose for an eccentric man in the park, and "The Guilty Party," a Barker-esque dark comedy involving a revenge-bent toddler, are both entertaining stories that suffer from having their endings hacked off. As interesting and character driven as what's there may be, these are stories that required resolutions and never received them. Aside from the endings and vague aspects, some of the stories are just too bland and expected. Even with fantastic descriptions, "The White Cat," a response to Edgar Allan Poe's original tale "The Black Cat," ends exactly the way most readers would expect it to. Similarly, "Poor Bibi" and "Blind" both give away their secrets far too easily without adding anything new. But, for as many stories as I disliked or felt let down by, there were as many that I found gripping and genuinely upsetting, much the way I imagine Oates would want. The creepiest story of the bunch is "Haunted," which tells the tale of two girls who, against parental advice, continually trek through abandoned houses and barns around their small hometown. While it begins as more of a tale of bitter childhood friendship, it quickly turns more sinister, ending in the death of one of the girls and lingering hints of child abuse. Perhaps the most famous story here, "Accursed Inhabitants of the House of Bly" retells Henry James' ghost novella Turn of the Screw from the point of view of the two alleged ghosts, Miss Jessel and Peter Quint. The flipping of the narrative turns the governess from a woman slowly losing her sanity to one who is correct about the ghosts but seemingly cruel in her ignorance about their motivations. The writing is superb; readers can feel the bleary and dissipating existence of the two ghosts as they helplessly watch their old world disappear. "The Premonition" is one of the few examples of a perfect amount of ambiguity. It recounts Whitney's visit to his brother Quinn's house due to a bad feeling and Quinn's history of belligerence. Not finding Quinn at home, Quinn's wife and two young daughters tell Whitney he has gone on vacation while they carry on with innocuous yet discreetly ominous activities. Without showing anything bloody, Oates intimates enough clues to paint a deadly picture of what happened to the supposedly vacationing Quinn. The best story, however, is "Extenuating Circumstances." It is pieced together in scraps of thought from a mother who is increasingly distraught and mentally unstable. While at first the scrambled thoughts seem to be nothing more than an incoherent jumble, they soon eke out just enough information for readers to understand the terrible and irrational action she has taken. Overall, Oates is clearly a talented writer, but too often she provides vague information and creates vivid worlds that disappear too curtly. I realize at times it's good to get in and out quickly and leave readers wanting more, but some of these stories feel more like passing thoughts than full tales.
