"It was the best of ideas, it was the worst of ideas." Three men who are the best of friends agree they are overworked and need rest. They hit on the best of ideas – to take a boating vacation on the Thames from Kingston upon Thames to Oxford and back to Kingston. Two weeks on ‘the rolling deep’ sounds like fun. The narrator, J. (the author himself), George, Harris, and Montmorency, make plans to go up the river for ‘fresh air, exercise and quiet.’ They expect to work up a good appetite and to sleep well. I wondered why the title was Three Men In A Boat when four names were mentioned. Then I learned in Chapter 2 that Montmorency is a dog and every inch as loony as the three men. That this getaway may turn out to be the worst of ideas began as soon the party sat down to pack for the trip. It was hilarious watching them throw together food, clothing, a kettle, and a whole barrage of paraphernalia they need. There was J. obsessing that he has forgotten to pack his toothbrush, with endless opening and closing of luggage to check and check again. I thought they will never get off for the trip. Finally, 'Home at last on the waters for two weeks!' I was really excited for them. As one would expect, they bicker and fight over who will scull and tow the boat, cook the meals, and wash up, and where to camp for the night. I laughed reading about three men who cannot peel a potato to save their lives trying to cook an Irish stew. And to think they half contemplated adding to the garish concoction a water rat offered by Montmorency. Then there is a tantalizing can of pineapples they long to eat and they have no can opener. Oh, that episode was priceless. Folks who have spent time boating down a weir will appreciate the demands of sculling and towing, and the misadventures that can happen. With the three men, everything that can go wrong goes diabolically wrong. I felt relief whenever their boat was safely anchored and they could finally settle down for supper. Comedy aside, this is an interesting travelogue that carries some gorgeous description of scenery along the Thames. I googled the Knight Templars and the Bisham Abbey, once home to Anne of Cleves and Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth). I looked up pictures of a double-sculling skiff and even watched a Youtube video of how to work a lock on a river. When the novel ended, I was sorry that the trip was over. But I suspect the three men and their dog were hugely relieved. What an unholy, madcap trinity plus one lovable dog! Some quotes which I enjoyed: A new day ‘It was a glorious morning, late spring or early summer, as you care to take it, when the dainty sheen of grass and leaf is blushing to a deeper green; and the year seems like a fair young maid, trembling with strange, wakening pulses on the brink of womanhood.’ Making tea ‘We put the kettle on to boil, up in the nose of the boat, … and pretended to take no notice of it… That is the only way to get a kettle to boil up the river. If it sees that you are waiting for it and are anxious, it will never even sing. You have to go away and begin your meal, as if you were not going to have any tea at all. You must not even look round at it. Then you will soon hear it sputtering away, mad to be made into tea.’ After a meal ‘How good one feels when one is full - how satisfied with ourselves and with the world! People who have tried it, tell me that a clear conscience makes you very happy and contented; but a full stomach does the business quite well, and is cheaper, and more easily obtained. One feels so forgiving and generous after a substantial and well-digested meal - so noble-minded, so kindly-hearted.’ Night ‘Night’s heart is full of pity for us: she cannot ease our aching; she takes our hand in hers, and the little world grows very small and very far away beneath us, and borne on her dark wings, we pass for a moment into a mightier Presence than her own, and in the wondrous light of that great Presence, all human life lies like a book before us, and we know that Pain and Sorrow are but the angels of God.’ Work ‘I like work: it fascinates me. I can sit and look at it for hours.’
