While I had difficulty relating to the somewhat mindless main characters in this book and their actions, I found the premise of the slowly crumbling infrastructure of the United States fascinating, especially at a time when I experience frequent internet disruption, drink only bottled water, worry about the consequences of global warming, see schools closing, wear a mask over my face in public and have been quarantined in my house for 5 months due to a world-wide pandemic. I found myself thinking, "Oh my gosh, that could really happen" ... or "Wow, that already IS happening!"… especially when the narrator states, "It's amazing how quickly everyone adapted to the changes. I suppose it's like the way people had already gotten used to having to drink bottled water, drive on overcrowded freeways, and deal with the automated voices that answered almost every telephone. Then, too, they cursed and complained, and soon adjusted, almost forgetting their lives had ever been any other way." At a time when we are all anticipating ‘a new normal, this book is really significant. This is a haunting story that will tap on my shoulder each time a phone call is answered by the automated response, "We're sorry, all lines are busy now. Please hang up and try your call again" ... or when the cable or electricity goes off unexpectedly ... or when banks foreclose and stores file for bankruptcy ... or when newscasters report that antibiotics are becoming ineffective against infection. It is not out of the realm of possibility that if we continue to live so carelessly, someday we too could be saying, "When I think of how we used to live, the casual way we used things, I'm both appalled and filled with longing. I remember emptying wastebaskets that would seem like fortunes now - baskets filled with the cardboard cores of toilet paper rolls, with used tissues, broken pencils, twisted paper clips, sheets of crumpled notebook paper, and empty plastic bags ..." What made this book interesting for me is that was written in 1996 and seems even more relevant in 2020.
