Frida Kahlo. To most people, she is the Mexican painter with the intense stare and dominant brows, known for her self-portraits. At the same time she has become an icon . I've seen people drinking out of Frida-cups, wearing Frida-socks and getting Frida-tattoos. This biography really made me understand what it was that made this woman so magnetising. A woman in love with life Frida never had it easy. She grew up during the Mexican Revolution, which certainly wasn't the easiest time to be a Mexican. At the age of eighteen, she became victim to a devastating accident, which left her crippled and unable to bear children. This affected her whole life, during which she consistently had to fight physical health issues. And still she was in love with living. She was a surprising, mesmerising and slightly macabre woman who couldn't help but to enchant those around her. She inspired with her radical and vibrant art as well as with her way of living, never afraid of showing her feelings or being kind those around her. "You know why they do all these crazy things? Because they don't have any personality. They must make it up. You are going to be an artist because you have talent. You are an artist, so you don't have to do all these things." A marriage to define The book focusses strongly on her relationship with Diego Rivera, a muralist much older whom she married at a young age. Neither can be described as faithful to each other in the most traditional sense - they both had affairs and other lovers - and yet they could not live without each other. Their relationship of nearly twenty-five years went through many ups and downs and Herrera describes those very well. To be fair, I found these parts of the book slightly repetitive and too long, as it shifted the focus from Frida the individual to Frida the wife, which is where I get to my criticism of this biography. A revolutionary It's easy to forget that Frida Kahlo lived in a time in which it wasn't common for woman to have a loud and outspoken voice. She, however, did. I felt like this book cut short on that fact a lot, making her seem less like the revolutionary she was. While many describe Hayden Herrera's style of writing as clear and accurate, I found it to be prosaic und even arbitrary at times. She analyses many of her paintings, trying to give them a context and deducting what can be learned from them about the life Frida Kahlo led, yet on various occasions I wasn't quite sure where her claims were coming from. Some passages felt clumsy to me, when she calls the painting My Birth "one of the most awesome images of childbirth" only to then note how dead the child looks. On other occasions paintings or photographs are described in longwinded texts which weren't included in the book, which was annoying, because I would have rather liked to see the images myself than solely relying on somebody else's interpretation of them. I also would have liked to hear more about her own views and thoughts, especially in relation to politics and Communism. After all, Kahlo felt most alive when she was able to talk for herself: "Let's go to work; I will be your so-called teacher, I am not any such thing, I only want to be your friend, I have never been a painting teacher, nor do I think I ever will be, since I am always learning. I hope you will not be bored with me, and when I seem to bore you, I ask you, please, not to keep quiet, all right?" To sum up, I think Frida Kahlo was a fascinating and eclectic woman, more so than this biography implies. It's a nice read and gives a wonderful insight into her life and times, yet I was left feeling unsatisfied on various occasions throughout the book, which keeps me from calling this a truly great biography.
