Strangely, I'm not exactly sure what I thought of this one. I mean, I liked it. I didn't love it though, except in places: the opening (the ancient porter who, memory ravaged, imagines himself in a different decade every morning); the hilarious 'High Table' dinner scene (in which I could almost imagine a half a boiled egg shooting from the throats of one of the Dons and lodging itself in the prominent cleavage of Claire Bayes (which I couldn't help reading as Claire Danes)); even, perhaps, the ending (kind of satisfying, kind of magical, kind of circular, feeding back into the body of the book and casting much of it in a new light). And Marias's use of language is, at times, flat out brilliant. But at times, and despite that he didn't come across (like so many 'virtuosic' writers) as a megalomaniac, I got the feeling he was skating on thin ice – a little too close to the precipice of self-caricature or just plain lack of inspiration, playing for time too transparently as he tried to conjure the next of his clause- and parenthesis-glutted sentences. An example: I saw the child Eric, Claire's son, only once and that was when the days of his unexpected stay in Oxford were coming to an end and my emotional instability was at its height (for if you have already been deprived of something for some time or – its real duration being of little importance – have experienced it as having gone on for a long time, as perhaps being endless, the fact that an end to it is now in sight pales into insignificance beside the continuing fact of your deprivation; I mean that the mere juxtaposition of these two things is not in itself enough for you to perceive as being at an end something which, though about to end, is still not over, and what prevails is the fear that by some ill luck – by some misfortune, the opposite of what you have foreseen – that long-accumulated, patient present might yet go on forever: you experience not relief but anxiety and feel only distrust for the future.) Now I don't know about you, but I feel as if I'd pretty much grasped what he was saying by halfway through that sentence, and that everything after 'I mean that the mere juxtaposition...' was just flash and fizzle, more about maintaining the elaborate rhythm than transmitting any meaning or illumination. To me that sentence sums up the best and worst of Javier Marias. Perhaps because I haven't read a bunch of other sentences like it recently, looking at it now I have to admit it frustrates me less than when I originally read it (and I let the book sit before writing this review for just that reason, to see if it would settle and become more satisfying, less frustrating, in retrospect). And of course there's the chance that Margaret Jull Costa's otherwise excellent translation has struggled here: that phrase 'the juxtaposition of these two things is not in itself enough for you to perceive as being at an end' is almost like some tongue-twister out of a scientific journal or owner's manual, and may well have been hell to transpose. But still, by halfway through All Souls I did start to wonder how much of this was just playing for time. By comparison, fellow Spaniard Javier Cercas uses a similar prose style in The Soldiers of Salamis , but his serpentine sentences, though at times maybe less proficiently rendered than Marias's, often left me with with a feeling I'd been kicked or struck with a whip – or bitten, to continue the serpent analogy. I winced. I gasped. He seemed to really be saying something. Now maybe it's just that my and Marias's temperaments don't knit so well, or maybe it's that I need to read more of him to put into a broader context this thin slice of his oeuvre, but for now the jury's out. I can't in all conscience say I love him like Cercas or Bolano, even though Marias may well have pioneered the style that the other two use so successfully. To be fair, I've had this sense that Marias might not be 'my people' from the first time I noticed him back in the nineties – when A Heart So White propelled him to fame. Why not? Try this: 'I have my cock in her mouth,' I thought at a certain point... 'I have my cock in her mouth or rather she has her mouth round my cock, since it is her mouth that sought it out. I have my cock in her mouth,' I thought, 'and it isn't like other times, all those other times in recent months. As I noticed the first time I kissed her, Muriel's mouth is absorbent but not as spacious or liquid as Claire's mouth. It lacks saliva and space. She has nice lips but they're a bit thin and immobile or, rather, not immobile exactly (for they're not, I'm aware of them moving) but lacking in flexibility, rigid... While I have my cock in her mouth I can see her breasts, they are large and white with very dark nipples... her breasts are soft, like new Plasticine... I used to play with Plasticine a lot... It's incomprehensible to me that I should have my cock in her mouth...' And so on and so forth. It's a one-night stand he's describing, granted. Probably it was never going to be scintillating. But why linger on it for so long? To me, it's just more playing for time. Add that to the long essayistic paragraph which accompanies it – 'When, over a period of time, one has become used to one mouth, other mouths seem incongruous, and present one with all kinds of difficulties,' etc, etc – and I guess I have to wonder if Marias is just some kind of a boffin. Zero punk rock in that passage, that's for damn sure, which I'm aware must sound like a pretty unintelligent criticism. But maybe it goes some way to explaining why he and I may never quite gel. A high three.
