Which one will you choose Bread or death? Human consciousness is really strange thing, it is what divide us from other animals it is what separate men from monkeys it is really what makes Moral animals. It is really double edged sword, it is really a great thing to be morally conscious when the world is going by but what would you do if you were the only consciousness one among your family among your friend and among your country. What would you do when you see your family friends have ceased to moral beings and became a cog for ideology? Will you risk it and fight against the Authority? Will you stick your neck for higher values and beliefs? Values you only believe where everyone else has surrendered themselves to the propaganda and choose to say what Authorities want to say and do what the authority want to do and most importantly stop thinking Sorry for my long introduction but this book is really enlightening novel where the author describes effects of brutalization which Fascism exercise on its population. We start with unnamed narrator in unknown country where the narrator is high school teacher and he corrects essays of his students and topic of the essays was why their country needed outside Colonies As the narrator correct his student’s essays one of the students wrote a racist remark “All niggers are dirty, cunning, and contemptible” The protagonist wrote a small remark on that essay (They’re human too, you know) and this small remark gets the protagonist into fight with student father because the student father blamed him for seditious act angst the fatherland. After that incident the narrator finds his student fighting at the top of school and what happened there is really uncanny and it showed how the brutalization of that nation lead to some student fighting for nothing. After that incident the school decides the student must go to camp not for vacation or tourism but for training into different kinds of army life but even then the narrator describes his depression at the mental state of his student “I think it’s an unbridgeable gulf. If these fellows merely rejected everything that’s still sacred to me—well, that Wouldn’t be so bad. What hurts is that they put it aside without even having known it. Worse still, they haven’t the slightest desire to know it. Thinking is a process they hate. They turn up their noses at human beings. They want to be machines—screws, knobs, belts, wheels—or better still, munitions—bombs, shells, shrapnel. How readily they’d die on a battlefield! To have their name on some war memorial—that’s the dream of their puberty. ” In the camp happens many thing and what happens after that is really amazing tale The crime The trial The bait the suicide the confession the travel the small student club Does these quote rings a bell “The Greatest Plebeian’s birthday meant a holiday today, and the town was decked out with flags and streamers. Through the streets marched the young girls who had searched for the lost airman, the boys who would have left the negroes to die, and their parents, who believed the lies inscribed upon their banners. Even the sceptical joined in the march and kept time with the rest—spineless divisions under an idiot’s command. As they marched, they sang—of a bird fluttering upon a hero’s grave, of a soldier suffocating in the fumes of poison gas, of brown girls and black girls who lived on filth, of an enemy that only existed in their minds. With their songs, the liars and the debased celebrated the day on which the Great Plebeian had been born. From my window too, a flag was waving. I noticed it with a certain gratification: I had hung it out the night before. For if you are ruled by the lawless and the debased you had better adopt their methods or they might flay you alive. You must drape your home with flags—even if you’ve a home no longer. When submissiveness is the solitary trait in the human character that those who rule will tolerate, truth flies away and lies creep in —the lies that engender sin. But don’t wait—hang out the flags. Better bread than death ”
