When I was in my teens, an interview advertisement kept coming up about this woman called Malika Oufkir on a Lebanese channel, and my mom said I want to watch this interview. So when the interview came, she and dad watched it and were astonished. We joined them and I didn't get what the problem was until I kept on listening. Mom commented "How sad her eyes are." I still remember that. The next day my mom bought the book (Arabic translation) and devoured it in the same day and told everyone about it. A few weeks passed and I finally got a hold of the copy and flipped in it seeing the black and white photos of her family and how they were all so young, and how rich she looked and... it scared me. I was so young and this woman went through hell, her youngest brother was three years old when they all went to prison! I finally went in and finished the book in three days, I even read it in math class and every free class I had! It was out of this world weird and good, I loved the description of the desert and the people who inhabited those lands, and the hunted deserted mansion, and oranges, and how their shoes melted to their skin when they escaped after 20 years in desert, then how they reached the city and spent another 5 years in prison. What she wrote about being forgotten, and how it's worst than death, that made me so sad, I understood at that young age that death is not the worst thing in the world to happen to humans. What kept nagging at me though is that I felt she didn't say everything that happened to them, even their history is blurry from before; I get it, their captors are still alive and waiting to pounce but I felt while reading that her mom was the king's lover and she is his illegitimate daughter, that's why she was treated differently and why she was raised in the palace and why her father was killed. Maybe. In any case, while I'm in the airport a year ago, I found this copy (translated to English) and I bought it, the story still played in my head sometimes. I read there has been a French movie about their story, I wish I could watch it, I can't find it anywhere, and some of her family members including her mother wrote biographies as well.
