Wow, what an ending! You know Rosemary’s Baby is a great horror book because you’re in shock about that ending and you’re still thinking about it hours later! Newsflash: Horror usually does not have a happy ending. Go read romance if you’re looking for that! It took serious initiative to go with that ending and I did not have any issues with it. Kudos to Ira Levin on that! This is the first book that I’ve read by Ira Levin and I was impressed. Rosemary’s Baby is wrote in 1967 so it will be a bit dated with terms and language. The plot was creepy and I despised about every character in this book. Well, except Hutch! I think that’s the point. Are we suppose to like a character in this book after all that transpires? We’re on the fence with Rosemary for most of the book and hoping for the best. I kept thinking, “Open your eyes Ro! Can’t you see what’s going on around you? You’re too trusting.” But if the scenario that’s going on in your mind is correct, are you crazy too? I believe that’s the appeal of this book. The whole plot is so damn bonkers that you would be put in an asylum right along with Rosemary. You could hold hands together while walking down the hallway and then braid each other’s hair at night, right before the orderlies put you in a straight jacket! I loved this effect in the book. I felt crazy and frustrated while reading it! I loved how the tension just keeps building. I wanted to yell at Rosemary so many times that you’re not crazy! It’s just brilliant with how Levin gets this right in the book. The stress of being a backseat driver and not having any control about helping Rosemary out. But then what do you know, she ends up being crazy in the end?! I guess everyone’s got to have one juicy justification in life to sleep like a baby at night. Speaking of babies, good ole Andy is going to have a hard time adjusting in school with those horns and yellow eyes! hahaha Definitely recommend this if you love classics and the horror genre. I’m really glad I finally read this and especially reading it before seeing the movie. To the other 2 people out on Goodreads that hasn’t seen the movie or knows what will happen in this plot, read the book first! I think you'll love the shocking ending even more.
