It is always refeshing and endearing to read about solid friendships. Tara, Katherine and Finton are best mates, moving to London, hailing from Dublin. Each have their idiosyncrasies, but always there for each other. This was a good audio selection, wtih all voices distinct, and accents fun listening. These lighthearded contemporary reads are not hard reading, so the stop start suits me. All in their early thirties, they seem to be flailing. What is their direction? They've been in London for ten years, what have they to show for it? The writing flows easily and points to many of their faults and foibles. Finton, seems to have everything together. Great boyfriend, the love of his life, brilliant flashy career in fashion and highly opinionated. His world comes crumling due to some health news. His girls are there for him. He is short of patience now though, and his girls are asking for it. Katherine, otherwise known as the Ice Queen at work, has a penchance for neatness and matching underwear, perpetually single and inpenetrable. But she is not happy. Surely she deserves some happiness. What has happened in her past to make her so reserved, boundaries tightly drawn. Tara. Tara is the hard to take one. This was a tricky female character. Needing a man, putting up with a rotton one. The type of man that her friends hate, and tell her so. He puts her down and treats her terribly, when he clearly is no catch himself. She questions her weight hundreds of times a day and this is so unhealthy. It was hard to take. It's pub date is 1999, and this is very obvious. These messy three make such great friends, but time has come to shake them all up, quetion their priorties, meaning of life and what matters the most. This was an easy read for me and I certainly did enjoy, but Tara's lukewarm and blandness caused one too many eye rolls for this reader. I am loving getting through my physical books by selecting audio, and will always go back to Marian Keyes . This author is a recovered alcoholic and writes the condition of addiction well, it is authentic and sad to witness. A well written novel, very light. 3 stars from me. I listened to this on the Libby app through my public library, at 1.80 speed.
