There’s a school of thought in cinema that a filmmaker can do anything with the western, as basically they’re all the same. Western films are a bit passé these days, but the same certainly holds true – in both book and film – when it comes to the hardboiled detective story. In recent weeks I’ve read about a lesbian PI investigating devil worship in the short story ’Dancing Like We’re Done’; shown my other half Jeff Bridges as a stoner, slacker Philip Marlowe in ‘The Big Lebowski’; and re-watched science fiction and chills in the Doctor Who episode ‘The Angels Take Manhattan’. Each of them a very different take on the same genre, and yet in many ways all the same. There’s a rhythm to a hardboiled gumshoe on the mean streets story, a beat that we all recognise, a cadence that each of us hears inside our mind – normally in Humphrey Bogart’s voice. Well, here’s another example of a strange detective story that marries those beats to instrumentation quite surreal. Vince Rubio isn’t your standard private eye in downtown LA. No Vince is a velociraptor in human disguise. Okay, this is obviously going to need a bit of background. It seems that millions of years ago dinosaurs decided it was easier for them to pretend to be human, to hide away wearing man suits so that they’d fit in with the new dominant species. Quite why some of the largest predators ever to stroll the face of the Earth decided to do this, as opposed to just treating the humans like hors d'oeuvre, is never really explained. It’s just something we have to go with. Fourteen species of dinosaur settled amongst mankind and have built their own secret society. They perform jobs alongside mankind, such as work in hospitals or the police force, but also have their own clubs and vices (Rubio himself is addicted to basil, while we also get a glimpse of dino porn). As we open our tale our detective hero is down and out – you know the drill, three day shadow and crumpled raincoat – but he gets given a case which leads him back to the most pivotal moment of his recent history: the death of his partner. He starts to investigate again. Coming a few years after 'Jurassic Park' hit cinemas, this isn’t so much standing on the shoulders of giants, as standing on the shoulders of brontosauruses. There’s a cheeky couple of paragraphs in which our central character critiques Spielberg’s movie from the point of view of a velociraptor, and – from the point of view of a velociraptor – finds it wanting. (Why would velociraptors suddenly be filled with rage and want to kill the humans with no idea whether they even taste good?) It’s an acknowledgement that this book couldn’t have existed with 'Jurassic Park'. ‘Anonymous Rex’ even goes so far as to steal the film’s version of velociraptors. It’s a fact I only found out recently, but those creatures in 'Jurassic Park' are a lot more deinonychus than they are rapter. So, Eric Garcia has the beats of a detective story and has the dinosaurs, but can he make this mash-up come together? Can he do something with it that makes it more than a sum of its parts? Well, yes and no. A dinosaur in a man-suit working as a private detective is a ridiculous idea, but then there’s nothing intrinsically wrong with ridiculous ideas, some of them here are a lot of fun – and Rubio does spend a lot of time having a great deal of fun with this. He’s smart and witty on the amusing details of the anthropology of it all; so we get a load of stuff on the way the society operates, how the dinosaurs live, the dangers of always being in disguise, mating habits, what they like in their nightclubs. These passages are never dull; Garcia has a great way with the joke and taking absurd and bizarre ideas and making them somehow plausible. And not only with the dinosaur stuff. Our detective, it transpires, was a fan of short lived 80’s TV show ‘Manimal’ (so was, but I was eight at the time) and at one point ends up with tickets to an all-singing, all-dancing ‘Manimal’ musical – surely a sketch from ‘The Simpsons’ yet to be made. Unfortunately something a hardboiled detective story generally needs – particularly one with such gruesome murders – is a sense of seriousness. The route is laid out: we all know we get to the bit where the detective rounds everyone up and does the spiel of who did what to whom and why. For the story to work, that has to mean something, it has to have a certain amount of weight. And the thing that Garcia fails to do is to join the silliness and seriousness together seamlessly. When the seriousness arrives it feels like we’ve veered somewhat into a slightly different novel, one where there’s a dinosaur as a private detective and we’re supposed to look at that as something which isn’t a joke. By the end the story (SPOILER ALERT) is tackling eugenics and fertilisation experiments and these seem overly weighty subjects for this book. A hundred pages or so ago we were at ‘Manimal – The Musical’, I’m not sure we’ve quite earned the right to end up at the ethics of playing god. But perhaps one shouldn’t be too hard – a dinosaur as a private eye is such a nutty, strange, peculiar and leftfield idea, that it’s probably never going to work as both a silly dinosaur romp and a serious detective story. Probably the only way the author could get to a proper serious conclusion and feel it merited is to have a sombre dinosaur private eye with survivor guilt over what happened to all his friends when the meteor struck = and to be frank, where the hell would be the fun in that? No, if one is going to try and pull off an insane cut and shut idea such as this one, then this book is going to be as good as it’s going to get. Far from perfect, but at times a rapturous, basil soaked ride.
