If the titles haven't won you over yet ( Anonymous Rex, Casual Rex, Hot and Sweaty Rex ), here's why you should give this book a chance: 1. The main character is a likable one. I like Vince Rubio more than Harry Dresden (Jim Butcher's The Dresden Files ). At the start of the book Vince is a mess. He's addicted to basil*, he just got kicked out of the Council, he's wrecked his reputation as a PI and therefore his career is suffering, so he's broke and hungry. * In this world, the intoxicants for dinosaurs are herbs. And not like MJ "herbs", but legit cooking herbs, such as oregano, rosemary and thyme. Alcohol doesn't affect them at all. But then you learn that he's still grieving over his recently deceased friend and business partner, Ernie, which was what drove him to go to extremes to investigate the supposed accident that killed Ernie. So that kind of fierce loyalty and desire for the truth has to count for something, right? He's also got some good fighting skills, defeating the giant mutant dinosaur he encounters , demonstrates he is a gentleman without needing to state it repeatedly like when he tries to keep in business mode even when Sarah Archer was literally throwing herself onto his lap, and even later on doesn't take advantage of her drunken state , and did I mention yet that he's a velociraptor? 2. The side characters aren't just meat shields. They're fleshed out enough such that when things happen to them, you feel for them. I got genuinely sad when Vince's police friend Dan dies, and felt relieved when Glenda survives the deluge. 3. I like the idea that each dinosaur has their individual natural scent, which is apparently very strong for other dinosaurs, but undetectable to humans. Remember this part because it's one of the things that trips up the antagonist. 4. There's a chance to view the issues of inter-racial and inter-species relationships, and the advances of biotechnology (genetic manipulation), in light of our current social climate. When is it a breakthrough of love, and when is it an abomination? It could also be a trans issue, maybe? Like is it bad for humans to want to be dinosaurs? And how a dinosaur who starts to think he's human is considered suffering from a disease. 5. It was fun learning about the stereotypes of each dinosaur in this universe. Like how the Brontosaurus is the quarterback type, the Ankies (Ankylosaurs) the used-car-salemen, and the Compys (Procompsognathus) are the small but aggressive simpletons. T-rex's seem like the demon bosses, and Triceratops are kind of the heavyset but common folk. You also have the sharp-featured Carnotaurs (Ernie and McBride), suave and wily Raptors (Donovan and Vince) and no-nonsense Hadrosaurs (Glenda). And so on. I used to watch the TV show Grimm , and this reminded me a bit of that. What I didn't like about the book: 1. Forget about rational thought from the very start. The basic premise is that dinosaurs faked their extinction and have been disguising themselves as humans all this time. Signing up for this book means you agree to let the laws of nature bend around. How does a creature the size of a bus squish itself into a stretchy suit to look like, say, being generous, a six-foot-tall man? Where do the snouts go? How do the claws turn into hands? More importantly, how do they go to the bathroom in case of an emergency? This book cajoles you into not looking too closely at it. Just be a bro and let these things slide. Don't let your pretty little head be caught up in petty details involving the Law of Conservation of Mass. 2. All that dinosaur sex. Ech. A few pages of detailed, though enthusiastic, reptile copulation does nothing for me. Also, re-read my point #1 above. Just thinking about dino-human sex is like trying to mentally draw an Escher diagram of Peg A fitting into Slot λ. 3. The climax suffers from Talkative Villain (Those Meddling Kids!) syndrome. As a detective, Vince has a few hunches, but these are all just confirmed when he conveniently catches most of the baddies in a single room and they explain their entire nefarious plot to him. In that same scene, Vince talks for an awful long time, in a dramatic fashion, and I can't help think that if I were a more impatient villain that would have been the perfect time to just kill him off. 4. The plot twists feel like they're just making fun of us at this point. Dinosaurs pretend to be human, but surprise, there are a couple of humans pretending to be dinosaurs. At one point, said human dresses up as a dinosaur at a costume party. So she's a human pretending to be a dinosaur pretending to be a human pretending to be a dinosaur. WHAT. There was also a device where Person calls Vince up with some Important Information, but instead of relaying it over the phone, they decide to meet up. But before they do, Something Happens. I think the author was aware of it though so he has Vince say at one point "You can just tell me over the phone you know." All in all, if you obediently suspend your disbelief, and weather through some of the genre's tropes, you might end up still enjoying this, as I did.
