By storm and wind I’m tossed and driven But still my little ship outbraves The blust’ring winds and stormy waves. Instead of thinking about retirement and bored with life ashore after decades of roaming over the oceans of the word, Joshua Slocum bought a ruined fishing sloop and set about rebuilding it from scratch with his own hands. His long experience as a navigator and as a ship owner came in handy in preparing for the voyage he had in mind. I had resolved on a voyage around the world, and as the wind on the morning of April 24, 1895, was fair, at noon I weighed anchor, set sail, and filled away from Boston, where the ‘Spray’ had been moored snugly all winter. I knew about his name and about his extraordinary first solitary voyage from my favourite Romanian writer – Radu Tudoran – who as a young man was inspired by Slocum’s account to go to the Danube Delta with a couple of friends, there to build a ship with their own hands and take it to the far corners of the world. Mr. Tudoran’s adventure ended prematurely with a shipwreck in the waters of the Levant, but his frustration was then channelled into a fictional adventure to the Tierra del Fuego, probably the most popular chap book in local literature.[Toate Panzele Sus] So I was understandably eager to find out for myself what fired the imagination of this writer, more than half a century after Slocum’s circumnavigation. I have read more than my fair share of sea books, both fictional and biographical, and the thing that really stands out about Joshua Slocum is his amiable personality and his true talent as a writer. There are no words wasted in this slim book that covers amazing feats of endurance and determination. His sense of humour, his modesty and his passion for the sea jump out of the page in evocative scenes that often make light of the hardships and the loneliness to focus instead on the unexpected friendships in far away places and on the moments of grace that make the whole gigantic effort worth while. The captain may be fibbing on occasion, like any good spinner of fishing tales, but I was never bored for one second in his company. The impression he made on the people he met speak more truth about his personality than the occasional embellishment that plays to an eager audience. At the age of eight I had already been afloat along with other boys on the bay, with chances greatly in favor of being drowned. One of the most extraordinary aspects of the man, something mentioned also in the Patrick O’Brian novels, is that old-fashioned sailors never learned how to swim. It is probably the closing chapter that he wished for that Joshua Slocum sailed off one day in his beloved ‘Spray’ never to be heard from again. He is a true legend and an inspiration. >>><<<>>><<< I am not going to describe the stages of the journey, neither the peaceful days, nor the terrible storms around Cape Horn and Cape of Good Hope. I believe Slocum’s own words are the best advertisement for picking up this book. Don’t be afraid of the nautical terms: the book has an extended glossary of terms, and beautiful pen illustrations to enhance the experience even for landlubbers. The waves rose high, but I had a good ship. Still, in the dismal fog I felt myself drifting into loneliness, an insect on a straw in the midst of the elements. I lashed the helm, and my vessel held her course, and while she sailed I slept. ><>< The time was when ships passing one another at sea, backed their topsails and had a ‘gam’, and at parting fired guns; but those good old days have gone. People have hardly time nowadays to speak even on the broad ocean, where news is news, and as for a salute of guns, they cannot afford the powder. There are no poetry-enshrined freighters on the seas now; it is a prosy life when we have no time to bid one another good morning. ><>< My time was all taken up those days – not by standing at the helm; no man, I think, could stand or sit and steer a vessel round the world: I did better than that; for I sat and read my books, mended my clothes, or cooked my meals and ate them in peace. I had already found that it was not good to be alone, and so I made my companionship with what there was around me, sometimes with the universe and sometimes with my own insignificant self; but my books were always my friends, let fail all else. Nothing could be easier or more restful than my voyage in the trade-winds. ><>< As I sailed farther from the center of civilization I heard less and less of what would and what would not pay. Mrs. Stevenson, in speaking of my voyage, did not once ask me what I would make out of it. When I came to a Samoan village, the chief did not ask the price of gin, or say, ‘How much will you pay for roast pig?’ but, ‘Dollar, dollar,’ said he; ‘white man know only dollar. Never mind dollar. The tapo has prepared ava, let us drink and rejoice.’ ><>< ... with a good stack of books on board I fell to reading day and night, leaving this pleasant occupation merely to trim sails or tack, or to lie down and rest, while the ‘Spray’ nibbled at the miles. ><>< Sailing on, the sloop was at once in the Arafura Sea, where for days she sailed in water milky white and green and purple. It was my good fortune to enter the sea on the last quarter of the moon, the advantage being that in the dark nights I witnessed the phosphorescent light effect at night in its greatest splendor. The sea, where the sloop disturbed it, seemed all ablaze, so that by its light I could see the smallest articles on deck, and her wake was a path of fire. ><>< on Keeling – Cocos Islands there will be ... children yelling: ‘The captain is eating coal-tar! The captain is eating coal-tar!’ ><>< On Christmas 1897, I came to the pitch of the cape. On this day the ‘Spray’ was trying to stand on her head and she gave me every reason to believe that she would accomplish the feat before night. She began very early in the morning to pitch and toss about in a most unnatural manner, and I have to record that, while I was at the end of the bowsprit reefing the jib, she ducked me under water three times for a Christmas box. I got wet and did not like it a bit: never in any other sea was I put under more than once in the same short space of time, say three minutes. A large English steamer passing ran up the signal , ‘Wishing you a Merry Christmas.’ I think the captain was a humorist; his own ship was throwing her propeller out of water. ><>< about a goat he was gifted: Except for the first day, before the beast got his sea-legs on, I had no peace of mind. After that, actuated by a spirit born, maybe, of his pasturage, this incarnation of evil threatened to devour everything from flying-jib to stern-davits. He was the worst pirate I met on the whole voyage. ><>< about hardships, days becalmed and terrible storms Anyhow, a philosophical turn of thought now was not amiss, else one’s patience would have given out almost at the harbor entrance. ><>< She was again among her old old friends the flying fish, interesting denizens of the sea. Shooting out of the waves like arrows, and with outstretched wings, they sailed on the wind in graceful curves; then falling till again they touched the crest of waves to wet their delicate wings and renew the flight. They made merry the livelong day. One of the joyful sights on the ocean on a bright day is the continual flight of these interesting fish. One could not be lonely in a sea like this. Moreover, the reading of delightful adventures enhanced the scene. ><>< Was it all worth it? As for aging, the dial of my life was turned back till my friends all said, ‘Slocum is young again.’And so I was, at least ten years younger than the day I felled the first tree for the construction of the ‘Spray’. ><>< What was he trying to prove? The sea has been much maligned. To find one’s way to lands already discovered is a good thing, and the ‘Spray’ made the discovery that even the worst sea is not terrible to a well-appointed ship.
