“The painter, poet, and prominent critic José Moreno Villa struck in Novedades the note that would resound over the years: “ It is impossible,” he wrote, “to separate the life and work of this singular person. Her paintings are her biography.”” Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calderón (1907-1954) was a medical student when, at the age of eighteen, she was critically injured in a bus accident. “Before that we had taken another bus, but since I had lost a little parasol, we got off to look for it and that was how we happened to get on the bus that destroyed me." Her injuries were horrific: “Her spinal column was broken in three places in the lumbar region. Her collarbone was broken, and her third and fourth ribs. Her right leg had eleven fractures and her right foot was dislocated and crushed. Her left shoulder was out of joint, her pelvis broken in three places. The steel handrail had literally skewered her body at the level of the abdomen; entering on the left side, it had come out through the vagina. “ I lost my virginity,” she said.” Prior to the accident she had already been a victim to polio. She suffered many illnesses and ghastly treatments; “at least thirty-two surgical operations” and twenty-eight special corsets, one of which was made of steel. There were times when she survived on alcohol and pain killers. In 1929 she married the very famous artist Diego Rivera . “The Riveras had much in common: humor, intelligence, Mexicanism, social conscience, a bohemian approach to life.” But the marriage was not plain sailing as Diego was an inveterate womaniser (he even had an affair with her younger sister) and Frida retaliated by having affairs with people of both sexes. The Riveras even divorced at one stage, but later remarried. Frida maintained that she loved him and that “”For me he is my child, my son, my mother, my father, my lover, my husband, my everything.”” However, these calamities did not crush her spirit. Dressed in long flamboyant native Mexican costumes with heavy jewellery and elaborate hairstyles she dazzled those around her with her wit, her sense of fun and her outspokenness. “She had the Byzantine opulence of the Empress Theodora, a combination of barbarism and elegance. She had two gold incisors and when she was all gussied up she would take off the plain gold caps and put on gold caps with rose diamonds in front, so that her smile really sparkled.” When her leg was eventually amputated she ordered red leather boots with gold decorations and little bells and “…danced the jarabe tapatío with her wooden leg.” When she was ill in bed she kept her visitors amused and they came away feeling uplifted. When she had to remain flat on her back she continued painting using a special easel that attached to the bed. It is through her art that she expressed what she really thought and felt. She repeatedly painted herself, and it is in these pictures that she reveals the 'other' Frida, the Frida who suffered both physical and mental pain, the Frida who was desperate to have a child, the Frida who at times was depressed and tried to commit suicide. But to the world around her she was the vivacious Frida who loved to joke. In her last days she insisted, against doctors' orders, in attending the opening night of a solo exhibition of her art, and she arrived on a stretcher in great pomp and ceremony and dressed to the nines. Author and art historian Hayden Herrera does an excellent job of analysing Frida's paintings. The book is very well illustrated and documented. Leon Trotsky and his wife lived with the Riveras for a period of time, and Frida actually had an affair with Trotsky. The author briefly recounts this history, but the focus quite rightly remains on Frida. Frida's last painting was of a watermelon: ”Eight days before she died, when her hours were darkened by calamity, Frida Kahlo dipped her brush in blood-red paint and inscribed her name plus the date and the place of execution, Coyoacán, Mexico, across the crimson pulp of the foremost slice. Then, in large capital letters, she wrote her final salute to life: VIVA LA VIDA .” ### Frida on her art: “”I never knew I was a Surrealist,” she had said, “till André Breton came to Mexico and told me I was. The only thing I know is that I paint because I need to, and I paint always whatever passes through my head, without any other consideration.”" - Diego maintained that she was a 'realist'. ""I paint myself because I am so often alone,” Frida said, “because I am the subject I know best.”" ""Since the accident changed my path, and many other things,” she told Antonio Rodríguez, “I was not permitted to fulfill the desires which the whole world considers normal, and nothing seemed more natural than to paint what had not been fulfilled. . . . my paintings are . . . the most frank expression of myself, without taking into consideration either judgments or prejudices of anyone.”” ### Gallery: Self Portrait with Necklace of Thorns The Wounded Deer Diego and I ### There is also a film based on this book with Salma Hayek portraying the role of Frida..
