Into the Forest was a random book find. I picked it off the shelves and decided it sounded like something my sister would like. Two young sisters hiding from the rest of their post apocolyptic world that is rapidly become further rings of apocolyptic mess, learning to survive and make a new world out of the old. I, um, pretty much talked her into buying a book that I kinda wanted to read. (I'm sneaky that way.) Lauren devoured it in one sitting. I did the same, but in my case it turned into more wanting to get it over with so I can start another book if and when they finally arrive in the mail. We had one of our long book talks about something one of us has read. I love those talks. She told me most of it (it would be churlish of me to complain. My spoilage ratio is infinitely higher than hers. I could move to L.A., start a detective agency, and still never make up for the book souls I have stolen from her). I wish I had stuck with her retelling than reading it because now I'm feeling disturbed and restless. Kinda pissed off. Laur, we are going to have some more words. (Don't you just hate Eva? She's a pod person!) By the way, the book jacket liessssssss. They don't create anything. Eva lives in her self-obsessed dreams of ballet. She would doubtlessly have perished without her sister to take care of her (ahem hover in an annoyingly well meaning kinda way in fruitless hopes it would ever be reciprocated). Nell talks the talk about wanting companionship, holding the torch of all the ideas that came before (when the world was a world of more than the two of them). She just wants to own facts, I think, like those encyclopedia entries she attempts to memorize, or her sister's time. The only walk she'd do is two giant steps behind Eva. The apocolypse is neither here nor there. The girls live in the forest. It's rare that it touches their fringes. Their hell is the waiting room variety. Worrying where your next meal is going to come from (Nell) and no dreams (Eva). When the worrying becomes action a new worry about not being needed enough takes its place. Eva dances without music. It's a pointlessly feverish dream like if someone lost their legs and can still feel them. What the hell is she expressing anyway? She wants to be great, but c'mon it isn't going to happen. There is no one to see her dance. She has no emotions to express, other than her own desire to be "great". She may as well wear a wedding dress or put on outfits for parties she's never going to go to. I felt that Hegland tried to hard with the rotten dreams of Eva. Being "great" doesn't really mean anything. Sure, I could write here right now that I performed an awesome John Lennon frog legs dance. If you can't see me doing it what does it matter? Applause, please! I could write about some story I plan to write that no one will ever read, as Nell does, that doesn't even do anything for me. Pity, please! Eye rolls. Nell has been desirous of a life and company before there was an unnamed apocolypse (this is like The Road misery. The hows and whys don't come into it). Life with the fam was always like how it must be for a dog. It's cute when people want it and then it's a pat on the head and on your way when they have other things to do. Maybe dress up time in cute outfits when an ego needs to be stroked (pets who look like their owners pageant day?). The shit was shit before the shit went down. I'm disturbed that Nell NEVER gets past this dog wagging. Look, I brought you your slippers! Please notice me! The mom says "You're your own person" repeatedly. They should have let her go to school and be around other kids. It wasn't fair to keep the dog - whoops, I mean girl- in their wings in case they wanted her around. The point of the book was kinda bullshit because in the end Nell is still just collecting facts and cowtowing to her sister. How is that creating anything? It's the meaninglessness of Eva's dancing. What exactly is it expressing? Some pretty vague concepts about what ifs the luxuries were over. But these are PEOPLE in the story not what ifs. Food does change as it is spoiling... Eva has a baby after she is raped. She just doesn't want Nell to have anything to do with him. Nell wants to have a claim on someone and gives. They take and that's that. Someone on amazon wrote that they grow up and finally leave the house they lived in. They burn it out of fear of the rapist returning. It had nothing to do with growing up. Nell still goes with Eva into the forest where she'll continue to take care of the person who would never care enough to set the boundaries in the first place. Ugh. A book about enablers? Eva's addiction would be herself. Jean Hegland and I are going to have words. "You're your own person" my ass. Nell never learned any such thing. Writing that and it being true are not the same thing. None of the above would have been a detriment if "You're your own person" wasn't written so many damned times. They lived outside every day life, right? But their own needs became the routine, the every day life. You don't get to call no society forever. Nell had the chance to BE her own person, away from Eva, and she did not take it. She stays in the same spot. Not her own person. Bullshit ending. Maybe I'll go through my (um my sister's) copy with a highlighter and scratch out every time "You're your own person" is written. P.s. Lauren gave this five stars even though she didn't agree with the ending. I knew the ending was coming because she told me. That threw the whole other book in a light that it was not going to be going anywhere than where it already was. Why did I read it then? I don't know. I was hoping the rottenness was gonna be the fascinating kind, I guess. The kind that takes on other rotten shapes.
