I should probably admit that most of what I thought I knew about Dorian Gray came from pop culture references. In my defense, I'm actively trying to branch out and read more than comics and trashy romance novels, but it's slow going and I've got a lot of catching up to do. Shockingly, I didn't bother to read the blurb, and it turns out this was a bit more complex than I thought it would be. Point is , I had no idea it was about gay dudes! And I'm always thinking that the guys in classic novels seem kinda gay, but then everyone tells me no, men were just more sensitive back then , and I just sorta pretend to believe them and we all go on about our day. But there's no way that's the case here. Anyway, I said that to say this: this book was waaaay more interesting than I thought it was going to be when I first decided to read it. I mean, having to hide that you're in love with someone is awful no matter what the reason, but potentially getting tossed in the clink and having your life ruined because people think it's wrong is a whole other level of horrible. Poor Basil! My heart just went out to that guy! He was so decent and so sweet. And yet somehow his love for Dorian, so pure it created a painting that seemed to capture the essence of Dorian's soul, became twisted by Lord Henry's influencing Dorian to desire youth and beauty above all else. Enter the wacky Crayola curse! And the really sad thing was that Dorian wasn't evil in the beginning. Selfish and silly, yes. But not truly bad . Which made watching him slip slowly at first, then eventually plunge headlong into villainy, even more tragic. The longer you live the easier it is to see what a slippery slope life can be, and how one bad choice left uncorrected can lead to far worse things. The only one who escaped relatively unscathed was the instigator, Henry. And isn't that just the way it always goes? There's always that fucking asshole who sets shit into motion and then steps aside to watch everyone else flail around in the mess they've created. Albeit, this time around it was a bit of a supernatural mess... This is one of the few classics that I've found to be meaty, interesting, and still has characters that ring true. Loved it! This is the cover of the audiobook I listened to which was published by Author's Republic and narrated by John Gonzalez. <--if you see this version, swerve to avoid! I've had great luck in general with classic audiobooks, but this was the exception to the rule. It seemed to me as though the narrator almost stumbled over words sometimes, and beyond that, the reading was just sort of off .
