All Souls is the third book I’ve read this year by Spanish author Javier Marias. It was written earlier than Tomorrow in the Battle… and Heart so White . He uses a characteristic style full of deeply probing sentences that search for whatever illustrative truth or impression or conclusion they can find in the lonely isolating world of the individual consciousness. That’s what I like about his work, he reminds that each mind is its own but always seeking out, or sought out by the wider world, always wanting, always interpreting those interactions, but always working it out alone. Or not working out anything. Because ultimately, we can hardly know anything. The loneliness of each consciousness becomes the theme of an isolated Spanish scholar translator on a two-year arrangement to teach at Oxford. The theme of distance repeats in Marias novels. Solitude is the distance from the circumstance of those around him. This distance structures the interactions at high table of the visiting scholars first Oxford College dinner, a multi-course affair of long held traditions, the rituals are absurd as they are alienating. There, our narrator encounters for the first time, the woman opposite who will become his lover, the wife of a don, they engage in a distant exchange of lustful glances unable to speak because of the ritualised order of conversation demanded. At the same time, the local nobility on campus sets in motion the timing of each course. He has a gavel he bangs on the table to usher in the interminable courses with accompanying wine. Yet this local lord with the gavel is also lustfully observing the same wife of the don near him. As he gets more and more concupiscent, his gavel bangs on the table wantonly, ushering in waiters to clear half eaten courses, serving wine on wine, piling up more and more chaos until the hall is either mad with drink or hypoglycaemic from hunger. This long, drawn out chapter is interesting in another way, it gives us the outsider view of a very English scene, but also satirises the campus type novel. It’s tone is somewhere between JP Donleavy and Kingsley Amis. Marias’ skill in capturing the moment makes it feel seamlessly English, as though there is no translation issues. Perhaps at this point, I should issue a warning that the following theory may be absurd. I sometimes thought during this novel whether Marias and his translator have played a trick on us. I wondered if the novel was in fact written in English and translated into Spanish, not the other way around. The writing is so well done in its idiomatic, rhythmic, syntactic style that it seems to me flawlessly rendered. Or never rendered at all. Perhaps one day, somewhere in the correspondence between editor and author and translator, the great joke will be revealed. Perhaps there’s more reasons to think this in the text. The narrator is a Spanish translator. Language is his study, there are regular educational injections about words, their usage and origins. Language is never seen as pure, complete, unadulterated, singular. Language choices alter meaning. Words themselves are unreliable, especially in English which carries vast level of nuanced meaning in so many of its words. Narrators and authors are unreliable, too when they translate the world from their perceptions to narrative. They only work in this unreliable medium. We are always confused by words and discussions; impose our own meaning on what people say; we never quite get to where we want to be. Our consciousness is not someone else’s, so misunderstandings never end. One long chapter concerns one of the narrator’s translating peers, Dewar, who is expert in Spanish and Portuguese, but also Russian which puts him in the employ of MI5 interviewing Russian artists who seek asylum. There is always a question mark when there is one translator at work. Can the information fed back to MI5 be verified, and if not is there an individualistic whimsicality or inconsistency to it that cannot be proven? Yet, no asylum seeker can enter the community without Dewar’s approval. The individual consciousness theme reemerges in a new form, the narrator cannot know everything, MI5 cannot know everything, the final version is just a version of what is possible. Simultaneous translation (I learned from my cousin who once worked in the European Commission) has methods to deal with this problem. Use two translators. But here, Marias suggests that the idea of a second translator/observer might cause further disruption to the narrative. A fun little thought. External verification is bad for art. There is only one prime mover at work on the narrative. So why not trick the reader into thinking the latest Marias is not translated by Margaret Jull Costa? After all, the very mechanisms of identifying the truth of a Russian dissident is the same set of skills applied to literature and language study, subtle uses of words, meaning, idiom, the texture of sentences, the style of speech, the consistency of character illuminated through words, always words. I enjoyed that speculation, which also came to my mind when I read A Heart so White recently. Our narrator observes people everywhere from a distance. A woman at the station, a man follows him around the bookshops of Oxford with his 3-legged dog, he watches the gypsy flower seller, he chases copies of books by forgotten English writers of horror stories, there is a second don suspected of being M15, he befriends him, the don finally tells him his story, but is it true, can it be verified? He tries to have it verified only to eavesdrop into another don’s conversation with a likely gay lover, listening in from the front door. He watches the ritualised behaviours of country yokels and local girls at the disco, he bumps into his lover, her son and the boy’s grandfather in the Ashmolean, he shadows their movements all day. Loneliness and sitting outside a society and its structures leads to painful behaviours. Our narrator studies his garbage for weeks when he has little to do, no friends, his lover is nursing her son returned from boarding school. A single man and his garbage bin, an eternal cycle of social despair, translating garbage into meaning, like sifting through an entire language for the right words to fit the narrative. NOTE: Marias loves to quote English literary classics in his works. The first two I read use Shakespeare's Macbeth and Richard III extensively. This one is less so, unless I missed something. Perhaps a Grand Tour in reverse? But Lawrence Stern's Sentimental Journey (through France and Italy) makes an appearance. A work Marias translated into Spanish. I know my theory that he writes in English not Spanish is far fetched. But you never know, do you? NOTE 2: Today I picked up a copy of Marias' Dark Back of Time. It's a conversation it seems about the nature of fiction in all things like history and memoir. It starts with a discussion of this book, All Souls.
