This is a standalone SF short novel, an unusual take on a superpowered person. I read it as a part of the monthly reading for November 2022 at Hugo & Nebula Awards: Best Novels group. The book was first published in 1972 and was nominated for Hugo, Nebula and Locus awards. This is the life story of David Selig, from his childhood during WW2 to the ‘present day’, which is, quite surprisingly, 1976, i.e. a few years after the publication even if nothing outside of a general timeline we follow is happening. David, who tells his story, shifting from the first to third person and back, is a telepath, a mind reader, who can follow not only the surface thoughts of people around him, but also their deepest selves. Unlike most superheroes, who see their powers as a blessing or at least an honorable burden, he hates his gift (curse?) and wants to be an ordinary man. When the story starts, he has another problem – he is gradually but unstoppably is losing his gift. You can take a reason for whining from a whiner, but you cannot cure him from whining, or it is his self. The story shifts back and forth between the present and the past. In the present, Selig, who was seen as a precocious kid and a bright student is living hand-to-mouth by ghost-writing term papers for students. He both despises and pities himself, and this constant whining would have made the novel a drudge, but it is intertwined with great stories of his past, from his hilarious session with a psychologist ( David studied Dr. Hittner’s mind while the psychiatrist wrote things down. Most of the words he picked up were incomprehensible, but he did rec­ognize a few, the grown-up terms for the parts of the body that David’s mother had taught him: penis, vulva, buttocks, rectum, things like that. Obviously, Dr. Hittner liked those words a great deal, so David began to use them. ) to his LSD trip, which followed his girlfriend taking the drug. I like this story very much, it is well paced, well-written, with an unusual premise and a solution.
