This one is filled to the brim with melancholy. This story follows refugees in Paris in 1939 and especially Ravic, German refugee doctor. The war is coming and French are in denial. “We have! We have one Hindenburg, one Kaiser Wilhelm, one Bismarck, and”—the landlady smiled—“even one of Hitler in a raincoat. It’s a pretty complete collection.[...] Do you want to see the picture? It is in the cellar.” “Not now. Not in the cellar. I’d rather see it when all the rooms in the hotel are filled with the same sort of pictures.” The landlady looked sharply at him for a moment. “Ah so,” she said then. “You mean when they come as refugees.” ***** Ravic drank his cognac. The Frenchmen at the next table were still talking about their government. About France’s failure. About England. About Italy. About Chamberlain. Words, words. The only ones who did something were the others. They were not stronger, only more determined. They were not braver, they only knew that the others wouldn’t fight. Postponement—but what did they do with it? Did they arm themselves, did they make up for lost time, did they pull themselves together? They watched the others going ahead arming themselves—and waited, passively hoping for a new postponement. The story of the herd of seals. Hundreds of them on a beach; among them the hunter killing one after the other with a club. Together they could easily have crushed him—but they lay there, watching him come to murder, and did not move; he was only killing a neighbor—one neighbor after the other. The story of the European seals. The sunset of civilization. Tired shapeless Götterdämmerung. The empty banners of human rights. The sell-out of a continent. The onrushing deluge. The haggling for the last prices. The old dance of despair on the volcano. Peoples again slowly being driven into a slaughterhouse. The fleas would save themselves when the sheep were being sacrificed. As always. **** “Everyone knows that there will be war. What one does not yet know is when. Everyone expects a miracle.” Ravic smiled. “Never before have I seen so many politicians who believe in miracles as at present in France and England. And never so few as in Germany.” I loved to read about his life, work, playing chess with Russian. I loved everything except... Joan. Oh, Joan and this love story. She never felt like a human woman to me. Superficial, insufferable, obsessive, dependent, hysterical. I just never bought that she woke him up and made him want to live first time since the horrors in German camps. Not the way it was written. And I cannot ignore it because this love story was the main plot, book started with it and ended with it. So that's that, this was my top favourite novel of his when I read it first time in my teens, perhaps because of the melodrama, and now it's my least favourite on reread. But it is still Remarque and I can appreciate his sadness and feeling of doom.
