UPDATED: Hmm... not exactly the "brilliant ending" that the publisher promised, but... This was my third read from Peirene Press, which I hope will be my new favourite small publishing house. I say "hope" because I'm now the proud owner of 10 Peirene books. Of the three I've read, only one has been a real stand-out ( Snow, Dog, Foot ). My first— The Blue Room —was a 2-star read and I've decided to give The Mussel Feast 4-stars. So, at this point, it's not looking too bad, but I'm hoping the remaining seven books are worthy of at least 3- or 4-stars each. But back to The Mussel Feast ... as other reviews have noted, this book is about a mother and her two teen children, sitting at the dinner table, waiting for the father's return from a business trip. The narration is handled by the daughter, and as their wait gets longer and longer, it becomes clear that none of them is particularly fond of the father who—according to their descriptions—is terribly controlling and physically abusive (I'm sure he'd be labelled a narcissist these days). And just as my GR friend, Lark, wrote in her review, I too "was once married to this guy".🤦‍♀️ In fact, just reading about this deplorable man brought back painful memories such that I found myself getting more and more anxious as I read on. And wouldn't you know it, I realized I was doing this very thing as I was reading this excerpt: With the telephone refusing to stop ringing I looked down at my hands and noticed that I’d chewed my nails over the fingertips to the raw skin; my chewed fingernails had red, bloody edges; when I couldn’t look at the red edges any more I balled my chewed fingernails inside my fist and gazed over at my mother. But, not only was I chewing my nails to bloody stumps, I was incredibly antsy and my heart was pounding. Luckily, this is quite a short book, so I didn't have to endure the nauseating flashbacks for too long and, in the end, my sanity was preserved. I found the book quite entertaining at first, and I'm certain I would have enjoyed it a whole lot more if it hadn't been for that revolting connection to the absent father.😣 (Who—despite never once making an appearance—was most definitely the star of the book!)🤷‍♀️ Regardless, the book IS very good, so despite the unfortunate pain it elicited, I'm increasing my rating to make it more in line with actuality. So... 4 stars! —⭐⭐⭐⭐
