Disclaimer : I am not marking this review as containing spoilers, because honestly, it's the 21st century and if you know nothing about the book or the movie, then that's just sad and shame on you (unless you don't like scary things, in which case you shouldn't even be on this page). If you don't want to know anything about the story, then please stop reading here. Disclaimer 2 : This is probably going to be a long review because I have a lot of thoughts. If you don't want to read a long review, then please stop reading here . I read this in honor of my friend who is pregnant and will be giving birth in approximately 26 dayds. I want to make a lot of references to Rosemary's Baby to her every single day but that would be cruel because she also hates scary books/movies. So that's a bummer. But this goes out to her. I'm a true friend. This is the story of Rosemary Woodhouse, a young woman married to a struggling actor named Guy (whose real name, I am sorry to say, is Sherman - a detail that doesn't come up in the movie, but I thought it was interesting enough to share) who is your standard Sixties WASP. Rosemary is your standard Sixties Housewife, all "Here's your dinner, Guy!" and "My poor husband with all his hard work..." They have an opportunity to move into the Bramford, a lovely apartment building that Rosemary's friend and mentor, Hutch, tries to discourage them from taking. "It's full of eeeeviiiiil!" They're all "Pshaw, crazy ol' Hutch" and they take the place anyway because that's what people do when their friends warn them of evil. They're befriended by a meddlesome elderly couple, Roman and Minnie, who live down the hall from them. Very quickly Guy's big break comes in the acting world, but at a price, as it turns out, because the only way anyone gets anything good in these sorts of books is if a deal is made with the devil. Rosemary, however, is oblivious to all of this because she doesn't know her husband has gotten in cahoots with their neighbors outside of just randomly hanging out with them and talking to them - which, I might add, wouldn't necessarily be strange on its own (some people really do like hearing old peoples' stories), but because Guy is a collosal prick (more on that to come), Rosemary is even a little confused by his interest towards them. But because she's a good Sixties Housewife, she doesn't really think much more about it. Or about anything, really. Guy gets a bug up his ass suddenly and now he's all "Let's make a baby!" and starts monitoring her cycle and being really creepy about it. They share a romantic evening, Minnie brings over some questionable dessert for them to share, and soon Rosemary is drunk and Roofied because she was forced to eat the dessert despite the fact she didn't like it. Her "adoring" husband puts her bed, but soon enough he's removing her clothes, and weird things appear to be happening but she thinks it's all a dream. The next morning, however, when she's all scratched-the-shit-up and sore she realizes that maybe something actually did happen. She questions Guy who is all "I was drunk too! I couldn't contain myself! You make a hot incapacitated lady, sort of like a corpse! Whoopsies!" That's all paraphrased. The exact quote is "I didn't want to miss Baby Night." Yeah, you're a dick. Rosemary feels pretty violated, rightly so, but convinces herself she's just being silly because Sixties Housewives aren't raped by their husbands, Guy has had a really hard time of things, she's sure she's just being sensitive. Her feelings don't matter, it was probably her own fault for looking so sexy as an incapacitated corpse, right? And he apologized , so therefore— And then Guy gets even creepier about it. "Hey, you start your period yet? No? You must be pregnant!" and they bet a quarter on it because that's what a healthy married couple does. It does turn out that Rosemary is pregnant and she goes to a hot, Kildare-type doctor that she feels really comfortable with, but then allows herself to be coerced by Minnie, et al to see their doctor, Dr. Sapirstein. Because Rosemary is not in fact in control of her own body, or the child growing within, she goes along with this plan because she's just a silly Sixties Housewife without a mind of her own. And Sapirstein! He's all anti-medication and "Come see me every single week" (because that's not creepy) and "Don't talk to anyone ever again ." He allows Minnie to make these creepy drinks that Rosemary can drink that's full of things like tannis root and who knows what else. And Rosemary is all "Hey, great, I'll drink this, YOLO!" since the last time she ingested something Minnie made she was raped by her husband . Rosemary doesn't make all the best choices. But don't get me wrong, I am not victim-blaming. Of course then she has weeks of pain and she gets all gaunt, and Guy becomes the worst. Signs Guy is an asshole: -As previously stated, he rapes his wife We don't yet know that in fact it was the devil raping her, but as far as I'm concerned it doesn't really matter because Guy let it happen regardless while she is incapacitated and unable to give consent. -Tells her the new Vidal Sassoon hairstyle that she got is "the worst mistake [she] has ever made in [her] entire life." That's pretty... harsh. I'm sure she's made bigger mistakes. Like, I dunno, marrying Guy . -Calls her friends "bitches" when they show concern and try to take care of her during her pregnancy when she's all "The pain! The pain !" A guy who keeps his wife from her family and friends and then calls them names or feels threatened by their concern is not a good guy, kids. -Throws a fit when Rosemary says she wants to go back to the Kildare-type doctor and uses money as an excuse and not wanting to hurt peoples' feelings and stuff. Uh, dude? Her body, her decision. I know that wasn't popular thinking in the Sixties, but you're still being creepy. -He throws away a book that was given to Rosemary by Hutch who had fallen in a coma and subsequently died. It was the last thing he gave to her, though does that even matter? You do not throw away your wife's books , especially on the pretense that you know better than her. Period. That's divorce-material right there, buster. Oh, there's so much more I'm sure, but those are really the highlights. Moving on from all of that, now. So it turns out Roman and Minnie are part of a coven, most of the Bramford is in on it, and Guy is the newest member of the gaggle. He made a deal with the devil that if the devil knocks up his wife and the coven gets to keep the devil-baby, then Guy will have all the best roles. Since he's an abusive husband who does not truly love his wife so much as he wants to control her, this seems like appropriate action. I've seen some reviews where people are all "This wasn't scary", to which I suggest maybe they're looking at the story in the wrong way... and I don't mean that pretentiously. (This time.) Yes, there's a demonic force and the book and movie land on all the Top Horror lists and stuff. But what makes it scary to me isn't the devil aspect (because I'm not a believer); rather because of all the stuff I discuss somewhat jokingly above. It's a scary novel because Rosemary is property . She has no control over her body, her decisions, her thoughts, her feelings. She turns back to the Kildare-type doctor and tells him all of her concerns and she thinks she's going to be saved and it turns out that he totally rats her out to Sapirstein and her husband. Imagine the betrayal! Imagine being in danger and not being able to turn to anyone (because your husband has isolated you from everyone). Imagine being forced to have sex with anyone (demon or regular human) and not have any say in the matter, and especially imagine that when the sole purpose was to create another human (or, rather, devil spawn in this case). Imagine then being told you have to see a certain doctor, you cannot talk to your friends, you cannot do any research on your own, you have to have these disgusting drinks your neighbor makes for you, you are just a little lady who has no valid thoughts on her own. Imagine then being told you're prenatally "crazy" (which I believe Guy tells her a couple of times towards the end). Imagine you're told your child has died. I may have a very flippant reaction to all of the above because I make jokes about Sixties Housewives and all, but the true, scary truth of the matter is this book is still relevant today. You hear about the "war on women"? Which is a real thing, but if you want to be picky about it, what is especially concerning is the "war on women's reproductive systems." Even now, in 2014, there are some people who are not allowed access to birth control. There are some people whose lives still mirror what Rosemary went through. (Hopefully without the devil-spawn.) Women are still being told what they should do with their bodies, how they should dress, how they should smile, how they shouldn't be offended or uncomfortable when someone on the street says anything to them ("It's a compliment, lighten up !"), and on and on and on. This all happens. Every day. Rosemary is given no choice in anything that happens to her throughout this novel. Is it frustrating to see how quickly she bends to Guy's will? Yes. Is it her fault? No. This is what makes this a horror novel. The part about the devil and the coven is almost secondary. Take those parts out and it's still a horror novel. The sex scene is one of the scariest sex scenes in literature because we know what's really happening: Rape. So, El, it totally sounds like you're super down on this book. Why the high rating? I know, it's contradictory, right? There's anti-Semitism, there are stereotypical references to women, blacks, and at least one Japanese character. It's dated, granted. The movie is one of my all-time favorite movies and I despise Polanski as a person. The book is still a thrilling read. It's not high literature, but it's a quick and engrossing read. I thoroughly enjoyed the book even though I found myself ranting at it. I think it's an important book, even if you want to pooh-pooh it for being genre fiction. There's more going on in these pages than just what everyone claims makes it a horror novel. All of the things I wrote about above are just as important today as ever, and I wish more people would read this book so they can understand that. Modern readers like to read this and laugh at it. Yes, it seems laughable, doesn't it? Except when you realize it's all so real, whether in 1967 or in 2014. There is a problem with our society, still, despite all of our advances. There's still a lot of work to be done. That's what Rosemary Woodhouse taught me.
