Having Satan's demon baby was a frightening thought when I was younger. Now, quite frankly, the most terrifying thing I can think of would be giving birth to a mid-life oops baby. But to be fair, Rosemary's ovaries aren't trying to cough out some leftover egg that will ruin her retirement plans. No, she's young and excited, and wants to experience the joys of motherhood. Spoiler Alert for all First-Time Mothers: Rosemary and her husband, Guy Woodhouse, have just moved into her dream apartment in NYC. He's a working actor who has had a few successes, and they're able to live comfortably, but his career could go either way. Honestly, she should have been suspicious of the turn her life was going to take the moment she married an actor named Guy. But she wasn't. Remember how it felt to be in love and invincible with all the promises of youth, just waiting for your life to start? Neither do I. I live in the land of cold adulthood, bad lighting, and too much wine in the evenings. Evenings start at 4, right? Don't answer that. But Rosemary hasn't experienced the harsh slap of reality on her still youthful face. She and Guy are a happily married couple who like to do all the normal things that young people do with other young people. Parties, theater, dinners, dancing, and all the other things that I remember fondly but no longer sound as appealing as being in bed by 8. But all that changes when they meet their elderly neighbors. After the initial wrinkling of his nose at having to dine with the old farts next door, Guy suddenly switches gears, insisting that all their time should be spent hanging out with Minnie and Roman Castevet. Rosemary's life becomes one endless slog of staying in, eating casseroles, and talking about the best sort of liniment to put on arthritic joints. On the upside, Guy decides that he's finally ready to start a family with Rosemary. And after a night of drinking too much booze, Rosemary passes out, has a nightmare, and wakes up pregnant. Supposedly by Guy. But hey, I was pleasantly surprised that Ira Levin had Rosemary get so upset and angry over Guy having sex with her while she was unconscious. I don't think that kind of spousal rape was much talked about when this book was written, and while she does eventually talk herself into trying to be ok with what happened, he brought up a lot of fantastic talking points because of that scene. So. Good for you, dude. You get a front-row seat to some first-class gaslighting, too. As little things that don't seem quite right to Rosemary slowly reveal themselves to be completely sinister. By the time she figures out what's happening, it's too late. As in, the contractions have started. The doctor she goes to for help calls her husband to come pick up his hysterical wife. And with that comes the dawning horror that her story of Satanists and magic spells won't be believed by anyone, and she's completely on her own. Of course, she assumes that this cult wants to sacrifice her child to the devil and fights like hell to save her baby. Oh, if only things were that simple, Rosemary. Turns out, it's not actually a scary book. A lot of weird stuff, but none of it is what I would call spine-tingling. I liked that ending, though. Narrated by Mia Farrow <--very cool, btw.
