"Es ist besser, zu sterben, wenn man noch leben möchte, als zu sterben und man möchte auch sterben." (it's better to die while you still want to live, than to die and want to die) The novel is called Three Comrades but there were actually 4 of them - Robert Lohkamp, Otto Köster, Gottfried Lenz and Patrice Hollmann whom they meet in the very beginning of the novel and who became an essential part of it. And there were also other people who weren't formally "comrades" but they could be called so because all they helped each other in this or that way. Ferdinand Grau, Fred, Gustav, Alfons... They all knew how hard the life can be sometimes and tried to help those for whom it was harder then for themselves. This is a novel about true friendship, when you can do anything for your friend. All the characters are memorable and very realistic that's why you get used to them quickly and immediately begin to feel involved in their life, you share their emotions and can't help smiling or becoming sad when they do so. I liked them all - Robby who is sometimes a bit childish and learns to love having met Pat, "the last romantic" Lenz, always so cheerful and optimistic, Otto, so calm and reserved but who can feel probably even deeper than all other characters, Pat, sometimes so elegant and charming, sometimes funny bu always very brave, kind-hearted Alfons, philosophical Ferdinand... And though in the end there are only two comrades of four you can't help thinking that this friendship will live forever. The language here is plain but very rich, I especially enjoyed the descriptions which were very colorful due to plenties of similes. This novel is not an easy one, especially the end, but still it is pleasant to read. I can't say that it's absolutely melancholic, but the time in which the characters live isn't too cheerful and of course it influenced the whole tone of the book. here you can see the real life of Germany of that time with all its problems - unemployment, poverty, people, who were broken down by the war both physically and morally, prostitution, political meetings which promise much and give nothing... But it has a kind of optimistic feeling about it too. There are characters who have lived through the war, but it hadn't broken their spirit, they want to live even more, want to have the time of their life. Their parties, dances, drinking and hilarity with all those problems in the background may seem insane, but on the other hand it was the only way to survive. I think the quote with which I began this review is the main idea of the book - you should live brightly, take as much as you can from your life up to the last day of it. And the main characters did so... It's okay if you haven't done everything you wanted during your life because it would take an eternity to complete everything. But if you haven't done anything because you were busy with pitying yourself... then did you live at all?
