It was murder! Twice! I just reread Malina. And weirdly, I liked getting murdered better the second time. Made more sense to me somehow. Maybe life has to catch up with Ingeborg Bachmann. I am adding a star because I can. The book is the same, but I have more stars to give this time. It took me five months to finish this novel of internalised female pain. I had to stop reading after a couple of pages to recover strength when I felt the swamp of passive negativity pull me down until I was choking desperately. Why did I finish it? Maybe I have a streak of masochism in me, like the narrator of the novel? Maybe I secretly identify with her loss of identity in a world where she can only exist as a foil for the men that navigate it around her? Maybe I am stubborn to the point of self-destructive behaviour, wanting to finish each task, no matter how idiotic it seems at times? That personality trait definitely gave me my PhD degree, and made me choose my profession, and become quite decent at project management, but it also made me finish books I don't like, step into the 13th church in Rome when my brain is disintegrating and I can't even remember the name of the city I am speed-touristing in. I even finish knitting shawls I know I am not going to use. There is something compelling in this novel of complete surrender to negative emotion and passive endurance, manifested in a lyrical language which convinces even when the narrative turns too bleak to be acceptable. What is it then? I thought about it a lot over the five months it took me to read it. What makes it a good novel even though I hated reading it? Sadly, the answer is that I recognised the type of woman. It is truthful. The generation Ingeborg Bachman describes has made female victimhood an art form. It grated on my nerves because I have been fighting my whole life both against the male attitude of condescension and property and the female passive voice of pleasurable suffering. "Look at me, I am killed by male dominance! Don't I look pretty in all my indignation?" I acknowledge that this kind of literature had to be written, and that Ingeborg Bachmann is a fabulous word magician. I am just allergic to the dynamics she exposes. That is not her fault - she is so-to-say the "faultless, passive victim" of my dislike. I think she would have liked that.
