Taste the prose: "Only the unhappy man appreciates happiness. The happy man is a mannequin for the life-feeling. He displays it merely; he doesn't possess it. Light doesn't shine in the light; it shines in the dark." “I did not want to think so much about her. I wanted to take her as an unexpected, delightful gift, that had come and would go again — nothing more. I meant not to give room to the thought that it could ever be more. I knew too well that all love has the desire for eternity and that therein lies its eternal torment. Nothing lasts. Nothing.” “Keep things at arm's length... If you let anything come too near you want to hold on to it. And there is nothing a man can hold on to.” “To forget is the secret of eternal youth. One grows old only through memory.” “The music enchanted the air. It was like the south wind, like a warm night, like swelling sails beneath the stars, completely and utterly unreal.” "The broad baroque spires of the cathedral towered beyond the rooves of the houses. They gleamed green and silver against the receding fosforescent sky where the moon hung like a great flaming onion." "The mountain walls towered steep and bare above us into the night. The engine roared in bottom gear, and curve after curve dropped downward. Suddenly the beam of the searchlight slid off the slope and plunged into nothingness." “It's no shame to be born stupid. Only to die stupid.” Somme lines are beautiful, others are exciting and put fear in your heart. Many offer food for thought. Besides the wonderful prose, there are two additional reasons awhy you should read this book. It does an excellent job of describing Germany between the wars and why Hitler came to power. The story is however at all times kept on a personal level. The title says it all—this is a story about comradeship, friendship and what you will do for a friend. A close friend, someone close to your heart! How much more should I say? Not too much, I want you to read the story rather than listen to me. For those who might want to know, part of the tale is set in a sanatorium . As the plot unfolds, I asked myself what Remarque would choose to do now. I was consistently pleased. Writing a story is a work of creation and imagination. Michael Braun narrates the audiobook very well. All the words are clear. I have drawn off one star because he at times attempts to increase suspense by his voice taking om a breathless tone. I dislike this overdramatization. I am giving the narration four rather than five stars as a result. Thank you, Rosemarie, for urging me to read this book! The prose is wonderful. The book too! **************** * Three Comrades 5 stars * All Quiet on the Western Front 5 stars * Arch of Triumph: A Novel of a Man Without a Country 4 stars * The Road Back 4 stars * A Time to Love and a Time to Die TBR * The Black Obelisk TBR * The Night in Lisbon TBR
