Sometimes the edition of the book you read makes ALL the difference. I got a copy that - no joke - had student responses bound in with the actual book. And the book was printed on computer paper and bound by one of those like... self-publishing companies. And not a very good one. It was like a teacher had a google doc version of this book, had students write responses at the end of each chapter, realized the book was in the public domain - deleted the student responses (but forgot two chapters) and published the book from one of the self-publishers. I'm almost certain that's what happened. From the end of Chapter One: "When you started reading novel at any part of the novel you are not realised that you boarded. While reading of the book you cannot fell lonely because the characters said a lot for a person not feeling lonely. When there is developing interest on the book it seems to be very curious what happen at the next. And the expectations level with the characters are very high at the time of reading. The language of the novel is very nice and simple and everybody can understand it and experience a nice story." ...There are 16 of those. And kudos to both the teacher and the student for giving it a shot, but I don't really want it in MY copy. I read enough of that when I grade my own student's work. Compare that to my friend Ben's edition. Hardback. Gorgeous pictures and maps throughout. When we met at book club, I had a hard time putting it down. It was FANTASTIC. Five stars just for the edition, even if I didn't read a word of it. And it would have been GREAT to have that book - if nothing else than for the map. Because he's sailing east. He's at the Straight of Gibraltar, he's going throu...wait... he's... approaching... Brazil. Wait? What? Did I read that right? I definitely should have bought a better edition than this. These chapters must be out of order. - They weren't. He crossed the Atlantic, then crossed again, this time heading west. He was probably a great father: all right kids, we're going to take a shortcut. It will save us a lot of time. So anyway, we did read this for book club - and it reminded me so much of several other books we've read together: Longitude, The Old Man and the Sea, Moby Dick, The Art of Fielding, Cloud Atlas. And I found myself looking back on other books I've read on my own, like The Travels of Marco Polo, The Goldfinch, Around the World in 80 Days, or The Life of Pi. I love it when books connect like that. (I'm also currently watching the show Alone - which I heard about at book club. Man, Joshua Slocum would definitely take the 500,000 prize. OH: Alexander Selkirk would DEFINITELY take the 500,000 prize. Selkirk is brought up in here. The Robinson Crusoe guy.) The technical aspects were tedious, but I loved them. I've only sailed a little, for a couple weeks - but it was enough for this book to evoke those memories of sailing around the Adriatic. It's crazy that everybody knew about the voyage, and came out to greet him everywhere. (Well, except where they thought he was the Anti-Christ.) Like... does this happen anymore? Maybe the Olympic Torch? Slocum wasn't really a protagonist. They were more just a bunch of little vignettes and anecdotes. This is where some guy created his own 40-woman seraglio. I've been travelling with a spider from Boston who kicked the crap out of this native species. Martin Alonso Pinzon (the pilot of the Pinta) is currently piloting my ship... That kind of stuff. It was a good book. Finally, I can't have read this book without mentioning Billy Collins' "Sailing Alone Around the Room." It's probably my favorite collection of poetry. That reference was my first introduction to this book and as books do, one made me want to read the other - if for no other reason than to say I had. (Like sailing alone around the world.)
