What shocks me most about reading Rosemary's Baby is what fantastic fiction it is. Published in 1967, this thriller by Ira Levin flew off shelves and was adapted to film in 1968 by Roman Polanski into not only a prestigious studio picture but one that stands the test of time as one of the best horror films ever produced. In an afterword penned in 2003 and included in this edition, Levin expresses surprise by how faithful the hit film was to his book--preserving virtually all of the characters and scenes and even much of the author's dialogue--perhaps because no one told Polanski, making his first American film, that he was allowed to make changes. Opening with the pop and the sizzle of a tabloid photo, the novel centers on Rosemary Woodhouse, a Manhattan wife in her early twenties who with her husband Guy, a striving actor, are notified that a four-room apartment has opened up in the Bramford, a 19th century building the couple has been wait listed for since their wedding. The available 7th floor apartment was once the back of a luxurious ten-room apartment, but even after being split, retains a large kitchen and bath, as well as five closets, one of which has been barricaded by a dresser it takes both Guy and the leasing agent to budge. Inside the closet they find nothing but a vacuum cleaner and linen. Rosemary falls in love with 7E and is already planning to change the wallpaper as she urges Guy to get them out of a lease they've signed on another apartment (he phones in a fib to the landlord about joining a four-month USO tour of Vietnam). Born and raised in Omaha to a family of rigid Catholics she has separated herself from physically and spiritually, Rosemary believes in Guy, struggling to break out after minor roles in a couple of big plays and some commercial work that pays the bills. He notes that the theaters are all within walking distance of the Bramford, but Rosemary's patriarchal friend Hutch, a writer of boys' adventure novels, warns them against moving there. "I don't know whether or not you know it," he said, buttering a roll, "but the Bramford had rather an unpleasant reputation early in the century." He looked up, saw that they didn't know and went on. "Along with the Isadora Duncans and Theodore Dreisers," he said, "the Bramford has housed a considerable number of less attractive personages. It's where the Trench sisters performed their little dietary experiments, and where Keith Kennedy held his parties. Adrian Marcato lived there too; and so did Pearl Ames." "Who where the Trench sisters?" Guy asked, and Rosemary asked, "Who was Adrian Marcato?" "The Trench sisters," Hutch said, "were two proper Victorian ladies who were occasional cannibals. They cooked and ate several young children, including a niece." "Lovely," Guy said. Hutch turned to Rosemary. "Adrian Marcato practiced witchcraft," he said. "He made quite a splash in the eighteen-nineties by announcing that he had succeeded in conjuring up the living Satan. He showed off a handful of hair and some claw-parings, and apparently people believed him; enough of them, at least, to form a mob that attacked and nearly killed him in the Bramford lobby." Rosemary enthusiastically supervises the painting, furnishing and carpeting of her dream apartment, while Guy goes on auditions in the afternoon, his wife confident that his big break is coming. Their neighbors are heard but not seen: Minnie and Roman Castevet, an elderly couple who Guy concludes must be recluses or keep odd hours. Entering the creepy basement laundry, Rosemary meets a young woman named Terry, who was found on the street by the Castevets and can't say enough kind things about them. She shows Rosemary an amulet given to her for good luck; it contains a moldy smelling substance Terry calls tannis root. When police find a jumper on the sidewalk, Rosemary and Guy help identify her as Terry. They meet Minnie and Roman Castevet at the scene and Rosemary offers her condolences. In the morning, Minnie Castevet pays Rosemary a visit to thank her. An energetic and nosy old bat, but kind, Minnie invites the couple for dinner. Guy tries to beg off, fearing that if they get too close to the old timers they'll never be rid of them, but over dinner, he's charmed by Roman's travel stories and his belief in Guy's potential. Guy cancels their plans with friends so he can visit the Castevets again. Rosemary finds it odd that their neighbors' bare walls showed signs of picture frames being taken down. Rosemary begins to observe changes taking place around her. Guy lands a big break when an actor he lost a lead role in a play to goes blind and Guy is offered the part. He proposes to Rosemary that they have a baby, breaking his pattern of resistance to children. On the night they're planning to conceive, Rosemary receives a strange phone call from her estranged sister, wary that something bad had happened to Rosemary. Eating a chocolate mousse that Minnie prepared, Rosemary detects a chalky undertaste. Guy brushes it off and urges his wife to finish the mousse anyway. Dizziness sets in and Rosemary is taken to bed by her husband, where she has a vivid dream. Below was a huge ballroom where on one side a church burned fiercely and on the other, a black-bearded man stood glaring at her. In the center was a bed. She went to it and lay down, and was suddenly surrounded by naked men and women, ten or a dozen, with Guy among them. They were elderly, the women grotesque and slack-breasted. Minne and her friend Laura-Louise were there, and Roman in a black miter and black silk robe. With a thin black wand he was drawing designs on her body, dipping the wand's point in a cup of red held for him by a sun-browned man with a white moustache. The point moved back and forth across her stomach and down ticklingly to the insides of her thighs. The naked people were chanting--flat, unmusical, foreign-tongued syllables--and a flute or clarinet accompanied them. "She's awake, see sees!" Guy whispered to Minnie. He was large-eyed, tense. "She don't see," Minnie said. "As long as she ate the mouse she can't see nor hear. She's like dead. Now sing." Rosemary's dream culminates in her rape by something inhuman and a conviction that it's really happening to her. She wakes to discover scratches on her thighs. Guy apologizes for having too much to drink last night as well, admitting that he had sex with her while she was passed out. Rosemary is offended and feels her husband has become distant. Late for her period, she visits Dr. Hill, a young obstetrician recommended to her by a friend and receives the great news that she is pregnant. Elated, Rosemary also shares with Guy her concerns over how they've been treating each other. He apologizes for neglecting her for his play and promises a new start. Guy rushes to share the baby announcement with the Castevets. Minnie offers to get Rosemary an appointment with one of the top obstetricians in the country, a Dr. Saperstein who is a good friend. While Rosemary is content with Dr. Hill, Guy urges her to accept the upgrade. Fearful of the unknown, Rosemary also accepts a good luck charm from Minnie in the tannis root amulet like Terry had worn. Visiting the elderly Dr. Saperstein, Rosemary is ordered to ignore the baby books or advice of her friends and to drink an all-natural milkshake he'll have Minnie Castevet prepare daily. When Rosemary experiences prolonged abdominal pain, Dr. Saperstein tells her it'll pass. Hutch visits Rosemary in 7E and is shocked by how much weight she's lost. He questions the black candles in the apartment (provided by Minnie) and her amulet, packed with what smells like a fungus to him. Hutch phones Rosemary and asks her to meet him in the morning, but suffers a stroke before she can speak to him. His daughter ultimately delivers to Rosemary a parcel he meant for her. Inside is a book titled All of Them Witches . It offers clues that "Roman Castevet" is an anagram for "Steven Marcato," Adrian Marcato's son, and their neighbors dabble in modern day witchcraft. She presents her conspiracy theory to her husband. Guy watched her for a moment. "What about Dr. Saperstein?" he said. "Is he in the coven too?" She turned and looked at him. "After all," he said, "there've been maniac doctors, haven't there? His big ambition is probably to make house calls on a broomstick." She turned to the window again, her face sober. "No, I don't think he's one of them," she said. "He's--too intelligent." "And besides, he's Jewish," Guy said and laughed. "Well, I'm glad you've exempted somebody from your McCarthy-type smear campaign. Talk about witch-hunting, wow! And guilt by association." "I'm not saying they're really witches," Rosemary said. "I know they haven't got real power. But there are people who do believe, even if we don't; just the way my family believes that God hears their prayers and that the wafer is the actual body of Jesus. Minnie and Roman believe their religion, believe and practice it. I know they do; and I'm not going to take any chances with my baby's safety." "We're not going to sublet and move," Guy said. "Yes, we are," Rosemary said, turning to him. He picked up his new shirt. "We'll talk about it later," he said. "He lied to you," she said. "His father wasn't a producer. He didn't have anything to do with the theater at all." "All right, so he's a bullthrower," Guy said; "who the hell isn't?" He went into the bedroom. Rosemary sat down next to the Scrabble set. She closed it and, after a moment, opened the book and began to read the final chapter, Witchcraft and Satanism. Guy came back in without the shirt. "I don't think you ought to read any more of that," he said. Rosemary said, "I just want to read this last chapter." "Not today, honey," Guy said, coming to her. "You've got yourself worked up enough as it is. It's not good for you or the baby." He put his hand out and waited for her to give him the book. There have been plenty of novels about paranoia, with a protagonist confronted by incongruencies--hinting at a mental breakdown or a massive conspiracy against him--but Ira Levin operates on another level with Rosemary's Baby . His protagonist is a pregnant woman heavily dependent on her husband and her social structure and thus vulnerable to them. She finally wakes up and comes to fear that both she and her child are in danger. Her evidence inconclusive and theory improbable, she's told she's overreacting. While witchcraft is implausible, society's frequent mistrust of women is not. This makes the terror of the novel plausible. As a protagonist, I don't cater sympathy for Rosemary Woodhouse, even as a woman of her era. Desperate to escape the control of her family, she surrendered control of her life to a husband, a man whose stagecraft comes with certain perks. Rosemary cut her deal with the devil at the county courthouse and Rosemary's Baby is about the devil coming to honor that contract. Regardless of one's views of marriage, the novel can be enjoyed as sinister, delightfully executed suspense. Levin writes with restraint and precision, introducing no detail he doesn't leverage later and engaging the reader's imagination to question whether anything supernatural is occurring at all. In 1966, schlock horror producer William Castle put in the highest bid for the film rights to Rosemary's Baby , but in need of financing, went to Paramount Pictures, where a young production head named Robert Evans bet that the material would be a match for a young European filmmaker he wanted to work with named Roman Polanski. Evans used Polanski's love of skiing and promise of a skiing picture to get him to Los Angeles, where he convinced Polanski to consider Ira Levin's novel instead. The film is a masterwork of unease, duplicity and slowly pulsating doom, with Mia Farrow, John Cassavetes, Sidney Blackmer and in her Academy Award winning role, Ruth Gordon.
