I’ve read this novel 2.5 times in two translations. The first time I could not stop turning the pages. I’ve swallowed the book or the book has swallowed me, I am not sure. I’ve raised through it like a car without breaks, totally engrossed by the words, the imagery and the flow of this text. I knew it is packed with meaning. But I did not care for the meaning that much this first time. I could not slow down and I did not wanted to. It gave me a lot of amazement, aesthetic pleasure and some adrenalin. The second time, I’ve read slowly. I’ve read for the meaning. I wanted to understand what was going on in this novel. And it was a very different experience, but as well powerful and intellectually unique. I imagine this book is a plant, something organic and unshapely that refuses to fit into any box and grows out of it pretty quickly sticking the new stems in various directions. I thought of Tropisms . But a tropism is the directional growth of an organism in response of an external stimulus. The organism of this novel stimulates itself more from inside. Reading this novel is more like interacting with this creature rather than a classic immersion. It reads more like a poetry in a sense that you can read it many times and each time it would be something different you would find, a new image, a new trick of the language, a new connection. It is evident that Bachmann has started as a poet. I do not think it would suit anyone who wants to know what is exactly going on. It is probably needless to say that those looking for a character driven plotted story would be disappointed. I cannot even tell categorically how many characters are there. It is fragmentary, it mixes lots of styles: letters, dialogues, dream sequences, proper nightmares and even a legend. But what holds it all together it is this cosmic desperate energy. The book is brutal, it is devastating, it is raging and darkly funny and it is terribly beautiful. The way of writing is very special as she manages to combine very rich symbolic imagery with the language that sometimes rational and practical and always very exact in terms of the choice of the words. It is the one of those books that is a puzzle on so many levels. But unlike Nabokov’s puzzles for example, this one does not have a single solution hidden by the author. There are hints and a lot of references left in the text, but everything is open to interpretation and any reading of this text would be different. I personally found it very rewarding, on the second read, putting my personal “version of events” together. But some might find this lack of clear path frustrating. I think it was wrong decision to get rid of footnotes in the last English edition of this book. I found them enriching my reading experience in my Russian edition. Bachmann called this book herself “a spiritual, imaginary autobiography”. So yes it is about her, but it is far from auto fiction as we now know it. In Malina, we meet with the woman, who narrates the whole thing from the first person “I”. She shares an apartment with one man, Malina. But at the same time, she is passionately in love with another, a Hungarian called Ivan. Those two seem to be not interested in each other’s existence. She idolises Ivan to such an extent, that the relationship becomes almost metaphysical on her part. It is strange as Ivan is otherwise a pretty ordinary divorcee with two children. While Malina remains more as a conversational partner, at least initially. Both of those male characters are far from fully flashed. It is clear that their roles are symbolic. But how far that symbolism is going? This is the one of the main intrigues of this book. And I do not think this question has got a single right answer. I put my interpretation and some background info is in the comment under a spoiler. It was a challenge, but it was a great pleasure trying to come up with the one. But I would recommend to read this comment only if you’ve read the book already. Here, I want to share a few ideas inspired by the book. A need to be naive. Once Ivan finds a few pages of her manuscript “Death styles”. Incidentally Bachmann planned to write a trilogy with such a name. But Malina is the only finished work. Ivan does not like the idea of it: “…why isn’t there anything else, there must be other books, like EXSULTATE JUBILATE, which make you mad with joy, you’re always mad with joy yourself, so why don’t you write like that. It’s disgusting to put this misery on the market, just adding to what’s already there, these books are all absolutely loathsome….” He mentions Dostoyevsky’s “The Notes from the Dead House” as an example. And then he continues: “…they’re always suffering for all of humanity with all its troubles as well and they talk about all the wars and predict new ones…” When I was reading it, I was thinking surely he is not right. And maybe he is not. But it reminded me David Graeber’s Debt: The First 5,000 Years . In there, he claimed there that Adam Smith has created an utopia in his An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . The world was not like he described it in that book. He imagined it. But it has become like that in a few generations after sufficient amount of people has read his book. Graeber, in his turn was saying that it is what we need - to imagine a new world and to write about it. It is of course not that simple, far from it. But it would be fair to say that the big chunk of contemporary, forward looking fiction written today is dystopian. It is especially true for the young adults. The world created in those books is so gloomy and so scary. I know it represents the fears and concerns about the current state of the world. Those fears in Ivan’s words, predict the new wars by making them much easier to imagine, making them real. In other words, those gloomy dystopian books shape the reality of today and tomorrow. But why there is such a little place for more positive imagination, maybe for an utopia? It seems Bachmann was thinking a lot about this transformative power of language. She said in one of her interviews: “If we would fully possess a word, possess a language, we would not need weapons.” Moreover, in her Frankfurt lectures, she talks that we treat literature as if it were an utopia. She says “we give any work of literature the chance to exist by the single fact that we read it and we would read it tomorrow.” And the language is our dream of complete expression: “Each word, each phrase, each period, each punctuation mark, each metaphor and each symbol add to this dream of being able to express everything - our dream which we would never be able to fully realise.” It reminded me Nabokov’s saying: “I know more than I can express in words, and the little I can express would not have been expressed, had I not known more.” Under Ivan’s influence the heroine experience the following: “A storm of words starts in my head, then an incandescence, a few syllables begin to glow, and brightly colored commas fly out of all the dependent clauses and the periods which were once black have swollen into balloons and float up to my cranium, for everything will be like EXSULTATE JUBILATE in that glorious book I am thus just beginning to find. Should this book appear, as someday it must, people will writhe with laughter after only one page, they will leap for joy, they will be comforted, they will read on, biting their fists to suppress their cries of joy, it can’t be helped, and when they sit down by the window and read still further they’ll start flinging confetti to the pedestrians on the street below, so that they, too, will stop, astonished, as if they had walked into a carnival, and people will start throwing apples and nuts, dates and figs just like on St. Nicholas’ Day, they will lean out of their windows without getting dizzy and shout out: Hear, hear! look and see! I’ve just read something wonderful, may I read it to you, everybody come closer, it’s too wonderful!' It is interesting she does not use the word ‘to create” or ‘to write” but “to find” about her “glorious book”. All of this is somewhere there. We just need keep looking for it, asking naive questions, it won’t work all the time, but sometimes we would be able to express something new. Utopia? Yes. Can a book make people in “leap with joy” in mass? I do not know, but it might re-shape a few little “bricks” of our reality. And the heroine starts writing a beautiful legend of the Princes of Kargan. The story is inserted in fragments further into a fragmentary novel. She is “able to find myself in the legend of a woman who never existed”. There is an image in the novel of a virus caught by her and Ivan at the beginning that she wishes would spread around. She says she would name this virus soon but never does. Many would think this virus is love. But I think the virus might be a bunch of new ideas available to her through a new language spread to the others in a form of a book and making people create good things. A type of positive social contagion through literature. Does she win at the end? No. She faces a crashing defeat: “In the apartment I lie down on the floor, thinking about my book, it’s gotten lost, there is no beautiful book, I can no longer write the beautiful book, I’ve stopped thinking about the book long ago, there’s no foundation, nothing more comes to me, not a single sentence. But I was so sure the beautiful book existed and that I would find it..” But does it mean it was not worthwhile trying? No, again. I think it is very important to challenge something that we think is obvious. Those concepts and narratives we’ve been told were alway there. The traditions that seemingly do not have a better alternative both in an individual life and a society. I think it is worthwhile to ask naive questions. Ivan, otherwise not very attractive character is really good at it. It is all in his name. Just try to move the letters around. Naive is Ivan. (Ok we need to drop “e” for this to work). He asks: “Wailing Wall, why hadn’t anyone ever built a Wall of Joy?” I am not sure why I’ve picked up this theme out of this otherwise dark, brutal and beautiful novel. But it made me feel good thinking about it. Back to “Normal” One of the other themes of the novel is collective and individual repression of thoughts. In the post-war world, so many feelings and observations are required to be silenced, ignored or even replaced by blind hope. “I almost believed it myself—that once the window and door frames are reinstalled, once the mountains of rubble disappear, then all of a sudden everything will be better, people will again live in their homes and be able to continue living. But just the fact that for years I wanted to say how strange I found this living—and continued living—is very revealing, though no one wanted to listen to me. I would never have thought that everything would first have to be plundered, stolen, pawned and then bought and sold three times over.” Based upon her words, It seems people has plunged plundering and looting and then buying and selling, wildly consuming just because they simply could and also in order to forget what they’ve been through. All of this while the war was still pretty much raging in their minds. This has sadly reminded me our “Covid back to normal” strive, but of course on a incompatibly smaller scale. Malina says at one point “there is always war inside you” . And also that: “Once one has survived something then survival itself interferes with understanding, and you don't even know which lives came before and which is your life of today, you even mix up your own lives.” Reading This is the last thing I want to mention. Of course I could not let it slip from my review. There is a brilliant piece of writing in the book, sort of anti-interview where we do not hear the questions but only the answers by the main heroine. She completely subverts the whole thing as it is evident that there is no way her answers could be published. The exasperated interviewer switches off a tape-recorder a few times. But she talks about reading there among other things: “Reading is a vice which can replace all other vices or temporarily take their place in more intensely helping people live, it is a debauchery, a consuming addiction. No, I don’t take any drugs, I take books..” And what about this brutal and beautiful piece (after both she and her books and were physically hurt): I lie down among the books, I again caress them, one after the other, in the beginning there were only three, then there were fifteen, then over a hundred, and I ran to my first bookcase in my pajamas. Good night, gentlemen, good night, Mr. Voltaire, good night, Fürst, may you rest well, my unknown authors, sweet dreams, Mr. Pirandello, my respect, Mr. Proust. Chaire, Thukydides! For the first time the gentlemen are saying good night to me, I try to avoid touching them so as not to stain them with blood. Good night, says Josef K. to me. Bachmann is definitely a precursor of many contemporary works of fiction. Now, reading the others I probably would not help but noticing her influence. The most obvious recent example is Checkout 19 . Where the narrator talks about the books she has read for about 20 pages, including Malina. I know now exactly where the inspiration was coming from. There is an exquisitely written sequence in Malina, very similar in spirit. They’ve mutually influenced each other with Max Frisch and Paul Celan (more about in “What is going on” comment under the spoiler.) Also I’ve also read that Thomas Bernhard has modelled the character of a poetess in Extinction on her personality. I could have cut and paste the whole book I think. It is so dense it is hardly a world there I would not want to quote. But one has to end somewhere. What is amazing is how she incorporated all these thoughts into the work of art. It seamlessly unites the personal, intimate stuff with the social and political. I’ve seen a lot of attempts to do that in the very recent novels, but it is rarely goes beyond a manifesto through the mouth of a character created specifically for this purpose. I’ve written many paragraphs already and I have not even started. I do not want to reduce a multitude to something measurable. But if I need to say it in one sentence, “Malina” is a wonderful, devastating and complex work about loneliness, desperate courageous attempt to be understood and its defeat. Bachmann said to someone somewhere: “I think, all of the books talk about an impossibility of people to understand each other. All this fake understanding that they call openness is not there. Understanding does not exist. Openness is nothing but misunderstanding. In essence, every human being is left together with her thoughts and feelings that cannot be translated.”
