Robert Silverberg's work is highly regarded in the SF-reading community. This book has been called his masterpiece, even though - aside from its study of mental telepathy - there is nothing in it that qualifies it as science fiction. I'd not read his work, so I read this. About the book, Silverberg himself said it's "as mundane in texture as any novel I've written." He sells himself short with that; it's hardly mundane. If you embrace the book on its own terms, it's a fascinating read. But what if you don't? I found it hard to, completely, even though I still found it compelling. Silverberg's protagonist - David Selig - was born with the ability to read minds. Now in his 40s, Selig has spent his entire life being able to uncover human thought as if it were taking off its clothes to him; as if he were entering a room, seeing everything laid out before him. He wouldn't just read what was on the surface of the brain - what others were about to say or what they were generally thinking - but he could go deeper, drawing character traits that determined decisions and created a profile. Selig's attitude about his ability is filtered through a personality that is half J.D. Salinger and half Philip Roth. He's clinically discontent. Four decades of being intimidated by (often feeling guilty or angry about) his power, has caused Selig to become increasingly isolated. He's berated for that by Tom Nyquist - a fellow telepath who falls into his life: "Isolated? You? You can get right inside people's heads. You can do something 99.999% of the human race can't do. They've got to struggle along using words, approximations, semaphore signals, and you go straight to the core of meaning. How can you pretend you're isolated?" Nyquist hasn't let that happen to him. He has taken charge of his power in a way that catapults him up the social ladder. But he's not about to mentor Selig. Instead, he plays mind games with him - well, because he can: "The real trouble with you, Selig, is that you're a deeply religious man who doesn't happen to believe in God." Apparently that's his cagey way of saying 'God helps those who help themselves.' Selig can't help himself. Fundamentally, he and Nyquist are jerks - but Nyquist hasn't let that stand in his way; he uses it to work the room that is his life. Selig would rather be anywhere but in that room. He just keeps finding new ways to mess things up - esp. with his adopted sister Judith and the few women he gets close to. But what if he didn't keep messing up? What if he had found a way to conquer his fears?, his odd but overwhelming feeling of inadequacy? I kept wanting Selig to be more like Nyquist, only not a jerk. I kept thinking that would have made the book a more interesting read. (Could it somehow make the people around Selig better?) What we get, though, is Selig facing the realization that he is losing his power. It becomes the equivalent of watching air being slowly let out of a balloon. Of course, what I wanted was far from the theme that Silverberg lays out early on: Do you remember '68 at all? That was the year we all woke up to the fact that the whole business was coming apart. I mean American society. That pervasive feeling of decay and imminent collapse, so familiar to us all - it really dates from '68, I think. When the world around us became a metaphor for the process of violent entropic increase that had been going on inside our souls - inside my soul, at any rate - for some time. That's an immensely wise statement. ~because it's still true about our society today. (Entropy. It's a bitch.) So maybe what I wanted from the book was more of a pipe dream. Maybe. Still... I enjoyed entertaining the thought of rising above.
