I tried reading a couple of pages of this a few months back and gave up as it seemed to be a style that I instantly recognised as not my thing. But I finally went back to it and, after reading several more pages, came to the conclusion that it wasn't that bad after all. Alas, this feeling didn't last too long and as I got deeper into it my initial feelings of dread returned, that this was a book I would have to wade through, as if through black treacle. The basic plot concerns an unnamed woman in Austria who lives with an introverted man called Malina but who later meets and has an affair with a more exciting, extrovert Hungarian man called Ivan. He gradually loses interest in her and eventually rejects her while at the same time Malina is dealing with the protagonist's slow descent into madness. I have to say that some of these reflections felt self-indulgent and a little dull. The book then spirals off into fantasy and otherness, a whole section regarding the guilt and consequences of the second world war. I didn't find any of this much fun to read either. The book (I think) is saying something about the brutal masculinity of that war and Bachmann appears to be demonstrating that the duality of man (as presented by Malina and Ivan) is a struggle, which from her female perspective, is at the heart of all human experience. There's a large portion which revolves around her father at this point too. She, like society as a whole, is more excited by what Ivan represents but acknowledges that the security of what Malina represents remains necessary. As such, it's noteworthy, I think, that the book is called Malina as though she, the protagonist, is merely visiting his story. Because it's always HIS story. Because life is a man's story. But I don't know for sure. It felt like that's where she was going with this but the truth is, I struggled to make sense of a lot of it and barely enjoyed the experience. The book is almost tempting the reading to interpret it by virtue of the reader's gender because it has that female touch in the prose, a female consciousness and internal world which is meandering and difficult (as a man) to fully grasp. Women readers might have an entirely different experience of this, one which is more intuitive. Hard to say for certain but this whole book screamed... you are locked inside a woman's mind. In many ways, it was like the inverse version of Kundera's Unbearable Lightness of Being. But I slogged my way though it and never truly understood or enjoyed it. I'm tempted to describe it as experimental writing (it does contain large portions of script-like dialogue and dream sequences) but the truth is I found the text generally very basic, often prosaic, and essentially a standard narration. But it definitely felt like there was an experimental quality. There's something of value here, no doubt, even something quite profound, but from my own (very male) perspective I couldn't find it and was ultimately a little bored by the whole thing. Hard to review because it was saying something important but I just couldn't discern what.
