The original and complete title of Moll Flanders by Daniel Defoe is this: "The Fortunes and Misfortunes of the Famous Moll Flanders, Etc. Who was born in Newgate, and during a life of continu'd Variety for Threescore Years, besides her Childhood, was Twelve Year a Whore, five times a Wife (whereof once to her own brother), Twelve Year a Thief, Eight Year a Transported Felon in Virginia, at last grew Rich, liv'd Honest and died a Penitent. Written from her own Memorandums." There is the story in a nutshell. Supposedly, it was written by Moll herself. Daniel Defoe ’s name never appeared as author on the books until after his death. The tale is said to be based the life of Moll King, whom the author met on visiting Newgate Prison. On closing the book, I knew I had enjoyed it. The question was why. Well first of all, I like Moll, despite her faults! She is strong and resourceful. She is clear thinking and doesn’t give up. She talks straight. She doesn’t shy away from stating what she has done, at least as she tells the story to us here. Moll’s voice, her personality, comes through loud and clear. Secondly, I was curious to see how what is stated in the title came to be. How is it possible one marries a brother? Moll’s story is in fact believable, but convoluted. Thirdly, I felt like I was seeing life, experiencing life, in the 1600s, the life of a woman not of the elite. Moll, seventy years old in 1683, tells us the story of her life. We see life in England and America. Comparisons may be drawn. Surprisedly enough, written so long ago, Defoe’s prose is not hard to follow. The book was first published in 1722. This is quite simply a fun story. I believe Defoe wanted us to enjoy ourselves and laugh. People enjoy reading more about those who misbehave than those who are strait-laced and law abiding. Clearly, Defoe knew this. Why not more stars? Sometimes it is hard to keep track of who is who. Davina Porter narrates the audiobook extremely well. Her narration increased my enjoyment of the book. She perfectly intones all the characters. Five stars for the narration.
