Original Title: The Last Man Alive: A Story for Children from the Age of Seven to Seventy I think this must have been the first dystopian book I have read in my life. It has definitely marked my childhood and I still adore it. This is basically a fiction story that A.S. Neil (the founder and headmaster of Summerhill school in England) tells to a group of his students. The book has an interesting layout. It has a) chapters of the the story “The last man alive” that describes the adventures of a group who survived a poisonous green cloud that turned everyone else into stone. b) chapters with the discussions of Neil and his students about how this story proceeds. The students say if they approve the story continuation and whether they are happy with the way the story proceeds. Let's mention here that the characters of the story “the last man alive" are based on Neil's students. So, when there are gradually killed, they are not that happy. The chapters of fiction and reality/discussion alternate. Someone may just read the fiction story with the stone humans, the flying ships and the gorillas; if he/she does not care reading about the students’ reactions. I have to say that it is one of the smartest, humorous and imaginative books. Also it is a perfect example of the freedom of speech for the young children who are free to express their opinion as long as they have correct arguments. Let's not forget Neil is best known as an advocate of personal freedom for children. I really hope that it will be republished, because my childhood copy is not in the best shape and I cannot find a reasonable-priced copy anywhere. Excerpt: The search for statuary continued. Davis was, as they expected, a statue in repose; Ole Herman, again as they expected, was eating; he had been petrified as he was shoving a large piece of bread into his mouth. Michael rescued the bread. "But why aren't we turned stone too?" asked Jean suddenly. No one knew. "I know", said David. "That green cloud. It must have been a cloud that everyone into stone." "Sounds the only explanation", nodded Pyecraft. "I say, look!", and he pointed to a cat that came round the corner. "But the trouble is this: if that cloud were a petrifying one, why ain't that cat a statue?" "And I hear a cock crowing", said Robert. "What do you think, Neill?" Neill looked wise. "I think David is right. We were above the cloud, and we possibly the last people left alive. Apparently the cloud had no effect on animals." "Good thing", remarked Betty; "else we'd all starve". "The last ones alive. How awful!" "How glorious!", said Evelyn."We can take everything we like from the all the shops."
