I gave this novel 1.5 stars. Which was painful for me to give. I have become such a fan of Elizabeth von Arnim I have procured almost all of her novels (only one I don’t have is ‘The April Baby's Book of Tunes’). I started out reading 3 books of hers (‘Vera’ — ‘This Enchanted April’ — ‘The Caravaners’) and I absolutely loved her writing and thus I became enraptured by her and wanted to read everything by her, and the last two books I have read by her I have not liked all that much (Christine & Christopher and Columbus). Woe is me. ☹ Hopefully I have just run into a bad patch. 🤨 She wrote ~ 22 novels. This was her 20th, and it was published in late 1934. Five years earlier she had written ‘Expiation” which I liked a great deal, and it has been re-issued by the New York Review of Books (i.e., which means other people must think highly of it too). A central story plot line of ‘Expiation’ is that a married woman has an affair. Her extended family think it involved one of their own (a married man). In ‘The Jasmine Farm’ the plot line also involves an affair…this time a young unmarried woman with a married older man. There are two parts of the novel — the first part takes place at a country home in Shillerton, England (I could not find Shillerton when googling it, but in the novel it was within a train ride to London), and the second part takes place in a small farm in France in which jasmine is grown (again, harkening back to Elizabeth’s love affair with flowers and gardens), hence where the novel gets it name. The characters involve mostly upper-class British characters from the early part of the 20th century. The first chapter involves a number of people spending a weekend at one of the rich people’s houses and they are getting tired of eating gooseberries. That’s what that chapter is about. About a bunch of people letting their vapid thoughts be known to the reader about how much they are hating to eat gooseberries. It’s all downhill from here folks. The writing is supposed to be humorous but at least for me some necessary ingredients were missing in this novel (some sort of plot/story line, interesting characters and/or likable characters), and so the humor for me was too little and pointless after a while. Elizabeth married into a Prussian family. By the writing of this novel, I get the impression she is not enamored of Prussia or Germany. There is one German man in his 40s known as The Count in this novel and by novel’s end he is portrayed as a beast of a man. One of his thoughts (about Jews and concentration camps) was totally shocking to me… I had to google to get some idea of what concentration camps were like in Germany in 1934… I’m bothered by it as I think anybody would be — but given that von Arnim was trying to get a daughter out of Germany during World War I (but failed and the daughter died of pneumonia), and given this was published in Great Britain, and given she eventually moved to the United States and died there in 1941, I have to think her sympathies were not with the Germans and the Nazis. Anyway, I can’t recommend this book. As far as I can tell, this novel is not represented as one of her key works. Notes: • This is a cool website with frontispieces of 8 of her novels: Works by or about Mary Annette Beauchamp at Internet Archive The frontispieces have dates of publications, the publishing house, and drawings within the book. • Shows the book jacket of the novel (which I did not get…rats!): https://leavesandpages.files.wordpres... Reviews (from blog sites): • https://leavesandpages.com/2012/08/25... • https://piningforthewest.co.uk/2011/0... • has a comment about The Jasmine Farm in comments section of the bloggers’ review: https://vulpeslibris.wordpress.com/20...
