Joshua Slocum's Sailing Alone Around the World stands as an amazing testimony to one man's quest for extreme adventure. For Slocum not only circumnavigated the globe solo 125+ years ago, becoming the first to do so, but over 13 months of labor he fabricated the 30 foot sloop he sailed on, the Spray , described as a 10 ton yawl, from cast off lumber that had once been part of another small vessel. When one considers other heroic ventures, including Sir Edmund Hillary's first ascent of Mount Everest, together with his Sherpa guide, Tenzing Norgay, or the first moon-launch with John Glenn's epic walk on lunar terrain, these quests involved considerable support staff & technology in the background. Slocum was quite alone, almost entirely dependent on his own wits & largely self-taught seamanship. As he put it, "I claim only to be one of the poorest of American sailors & having nothing else to do, made a voyage." Oddly enough, it was said that Joshua Slocum never learned to swim. However, as he stated it: I had studied the sea as few men had, neglecting all else. Next came shipbuilding and I longed to become a master in both professions; in time, I accomplished that desire. I had made calculations as to the size and sort of ship safest in all kinds of weather and seas. Thus the voyage I am about to narrate was a natural outcome not only of my love of adventure but of my lifelong experience. But prior to his solitary circumnavigation in 1895, the Nova Scotia born Slocum had served on sail-powered freighters and had become a ship's captain, almost always on foreign-bound vessels, sailing to China, Japan, the Azores, the Spice Islands & Brazil, meeting the woman who became his beloved wife who often sailed with him, while in port in Australia. Eventually, especially after his wife's death, following the birth of multiple children & a dozen years of happy marriage and with the inroads of steam-powered ships, Slocum became to feel a sense of dislocation, lamenting the transition from ships dependent on sails alone. A feeling of alienation set in & on long voyages, he began to converse with imaginary fellow mariners in an attempt to feel less alone. In Slocum's words: "Was the crew well? Was I not?" While intrepid, during the circumnavigation, his hands bled due to the difficulty in handling the ropes, his sails were often mangled by storms and he had to be alert when in sight of pirates & warships. He depended on mussels & fish he caught and cooked but avoided killing a Muscovy Duck or other birds that alighted on deck, disdaining to take a life except in self-defense. Through it all, Slocum was said to react to changing winds like the conductor of an orchestra. Many days at sea were rather less taxing, allowing Slocum to read books, many of them given to him by the widow of Robt. Louis Stevenson when Slocum visited Samoa where the author had died. He was often treated as a dignitary while ashore in the midst of his voyages and was even invited to dinner at the White House by fellow-adventurer, President Teddy Roosevelt. While in various ports during the long circumnavigation, Slocum gave lectures to paying patrons eager to hear about his solitary adventures, thus providing needed cash for food & repairs to the Spray . Why would anyone choose to spend so very much time in an exceedingly hazardous, solitary adventure at sea, adrift in a self-made, seemingly only marginally seaworthy vessel? Perhaps, yachtsman Vincent Gilpin, who visited Joshua Slocum on board the Spray in Miami in 1908 put it best: He was a good example of an old-line Yankee class boat-handler, as well as a former ship captain, besides being a shipwright-a very capable man & a lonely, unhappy man. Only at sea did Slocum feel truly in his element, fueled by a sense of oneness with nature's nautical boundaries, with only his mastery of the Spray and a bit of luck to keep him alive. He & the Spray were said to have grown old together. Following his circumnavigation and the publication of his book, in search of a final adventure, Joshua Slocum longed to reach South America and sail up the Orinoco River, the Rio Negro & eventually connect with the headwaters of the Amazon. In mid-November 1909 Slocum set off from Tisbury, Massachusetts and was never heard from again. At some point, Slocum & the Spray apparently merged with the sea, in his view, the most heavenly of bodies. A caveat: there is almost constant nautical terminology within the book that will readily baffle the landlubber. A glossary would have been immensely helpful. To be sure, Sailing Alone Around the World hardly stands as epic prose but it is a memorable tale of a formidable voyage by a most amazing adventurer. *Within my review are two images of Joshua Slocum, one in old age, also a photo image of the Spray & lastly, the route map for Slocum's circumnavigation. **Included is a rather interesting introductory overview of Joshua Slocum by Walter Magnes Teller.
