***Reread October 2018: I randomly came across Patrick McGrath for the first time with this book, Blood and Water and Other Tales just found on a shelf in the horror section of Half Price Books in the late 90s (the one that used to be on Guadalupe, anyone who lived in Austin back then?), and I started buying everything he'd ever written after that. This is his only collection of short fiction, though, and I believe it was his first book. I was about to drop the book from 5 to 4 stars on this recent rereading of it, but decided to keep it five. It's awesome to see the methods that McGrath is a fucking master at here in their fledgling forms. There are the rich people with mysterious pasts, shady histories in exotic places, insanity, and, what McGrath does better than any other writer I can think of living or dead, the unreliable narrator. Also his two favorite settings, rural England and New York City, are already becoming real here. The collection gets off to a weird start with "The Angel," then just kicks ass after that. "The Angel" is about a dude who, I don't know, it's a little unclear, but there's an old man who is still alive but rotting. The Lost Explorer: A tent complete with a British explorer from Africa delirious and dying of fever appears in an English garden and is discovered by a little girl. The Black Hand of the Raj: British soldiers in India getting cursed by a mysterious old man in a loin cloth, resulting in them growing evil hands out the tops of their heads. Lush Triumphant: An alcoholic painter in New York City painting weird shit. Ambrose Syme: Horrid murder story brilliantly told about a teacher at a religious school and a child killing. The Arnold Crombeck Story: Another murder story about a woman interviewing a serial killer in the weeks before his execution without realizing that the entire time he's planning one last murder. Blood Disease: A tiny village all with some kind of odd blood disease murder people coming through and drink their blood. The Skewer: My favorite of the bunch, about a guy who keeps seeing 15-inch tall world famous psychiatrists popping up everywhere. There is a great twist ending too. Marmilion: Another favorite in this book, and a fantastic, pitch-perfect example of the southern gothic genre, with a typically snarky McGrath ending thrown in, hahahaha, laughing about it right now. Hand of a Wanker: Completely bonkers story about a man who thought he jacked off too much and sliced his hand off, only now the hand is still sentient and wants to keep hanging out in titty bars harassing women using the bathroom. Reminded me a lot of the hand in Evil Dead 2, but with a dirty mind. The Boot's Tale: This was the one story I kind of remembered after nearly 20 years, a post-apocalyptic black comedy told from the point of a boot. The E(rot)ic Potato: For sure the weirdest thing in the book, and I think it actually might take place in the same world as "The Boot's Tale," from the point of view of a talking fly, in a world where all the insects can talk, who is lead to a rotting human feast by a sexy dragonfly. What the fuck? Blood and Water: Title story! Another tale of murder and madness in typical McGrathian style. Of the stories in this book, this one is the most indicative of the kind of stuff he would write later after his Quickening and becoming a literary master. *** Original review from way the fuck back: Another really really underrated author, I've never met anyone in real life who's even heard of him, but he writes this really deadpan, funny, scary stuff. Highly highly recommended.
