Ira Levin's Rosemary's Baby is the blueprint for horror. The setup, "Part I" is an example of impeccable timing. Readers are introduced to a married couple, Rosemary and Guy. Through careful narration and dialog, we get a front-row seat to the dynamic of their relationship. We know there is a nine-year difference between them and that Rosemary feels a deficit of intelligence in the company of her husband, THE ACTOR. She is passive and eager to please, he is a bit domineering and narcissistic but Ira Levin holds his cards close to the chest at first because none of this is heavy-handed. Despite what the reader is picking up on as an outsider to the relationship, Levin allows "Ro" and Guy to have a sweet, healthy relationship with moments of tenderness, sexual intimacy, and romance. I appreciated the nuance because it felt authentic. I was hooked and enjoyed being a fly on the wall to this couple's life. Everything we learn about these two plays an important role later when conflict is introduced to the story. This is where I have to remark on how much I love the character, Hutch. Goddamn, I wish this guy had a larger role. I loved what we got but I could have used more. His scenes were so good. Let me also urge any writers reading this review to really consider adding characters like this to your horror to be that voice of reason and concern to the protagonists wrapped up in whatever is happening to them. Hutch's friendship with Rosemary is awesome! Reminded me of Dick Hallorann's friendship with young Danny in the Shining. I actually love the party scene with Rosemary's girlfriends too. Those "bitches" as Guy calls them. A stoke of genius on Levin's part to add these characters in for flavor. It gives the whole theme of gaslighting some real complexity. I have to remark on Guy telling Rosemary that her haircut is the worst mistake she's ever made in her life. Holy fucking shit. I hated him for her. Also, the dream sequence scene and the things Guy says afterward to Rosemary are seriously fucked up. That whole thing is way more traumatic than the way I remember it playing out in the movie. There is some language in this book that doesn't age well in regards to race/ethnicity and the queer community. So just know that going in. Several instances. Part III of this book is bananas. I absolutely loved it. It's just everything a horror fan wants in a climax. I can't praise it enough. This book is gold standard material in so many ways.
