Disclaimer: Alberto Manguel is probably my favourite non-fiction author, ergo this review will inevitably take a rather gushing tone. I put off eating supper for two hours because I wanted to finish this book, an anthology of his essays. The book's framing device of quotations from 'Alice in Wonderland' and 'Through the Looking Glass' is subtly effective; it reminded me of how wonderful both books are and now I want to reread them. (As an aside, the Alice books are one of only two volumes that I have in duplicate, as I love both the famous Tenniel illustrations and the beautiful set done by Mervyn Peake.) Manguel's essays are universally humane, beautifully composed, and richly intelligent. He brings together reminisces (he read aloud for Borges!), literary criticism, historical reflections, and philosophical musings. I was particularly moved and engrossed by section seven, titled 'Crime and Punishment'. The meditations on Argentina's violent, horrific, and unresolved political past were only more painful for their lucidity. In a more general piece in the same section, Manguel addresses the difficult issue of appreciating writers and writing, when either or both are tainted by racism, misogyny, and/or anti-Semitism. This is a very tricky subject to write about without seeming patronising, insensitive, or just awkward, but Manguel manages it. Somehow we must come to terms with the prejudice inherent in (much) historic literature, without glossing over the terrible oppression it represents nor refusing to read all such literature. I was especially pleased that Manguel quoted Alice Walker here. Another section contemplates the future of reading, incidentally seeming to predict the development of kindles and iPads; the book was published in 1999. Manguel discusses and analyses the work of his favourite writers, all the while conveying a visceral sense of the joy he finds in reading. I've read a little bit of Mario Vargas Llosa, GK Chesterton, and Cynthia Ozick, so found context and interpretation of their novels fascinating. On the other hand, I've not read any Richard Outram or Julio Cortázar, so was intrigued to discover them. I trust Manguel's taste and greatly enjoy the way he skilfully draws quotes and references from disparate books. It's lovely to travel towards new literary interests on a path of trusted favourites. Other topics covered include the role of the editor, the death of Che Guevara, and the nature of museums. The latter I particularly enjoyed, as it managed to cover such wide ground so elegantly in a mere eight pages. I could continue in this vein for a while, but, apart from anything else, will soon run out of suitable adverbs of praise. As to why Alberto Manguel is my favourite: he comes closest of any writer to articulating why I so love books, reading, and libraries. I could quote many beautiful, profound, and funny passages from 'Into the Looking-Glass Wood', but this from the final paragraph seems to me best of all: '...the point, the essential quality of the act of reading, now and always, is that it tends to no foreseeable end, to no conclusion. Every reading prolongs another, begun in some afternoon thousands of years ago and of which we know nothing; every reading projects its shadow onto the following page, lending it content and context. In this way, the story grows, layer after layer, like the skin of the society whose history this act preserves.' I find it both terrifying and wonderful that I will not live long enough to finish reading everything that I want to. But I don't need to, books and the reading thereof will continue on.
