A Taste for Death features Commander Dalgliesh - PD James's favourite detective - and introduces Detective Inspector Kate Miskin, whose personality now seems, in certain respects, an extension of the private detective Cordelia Gray, who appeared in only two novels and was discreetly abandoned by the author for reasons unknown (to me). A sordid murder - Are not all murders sordid ? - draws everyone's attention to the sacristy of St Matthew's Church, a fictional basilica in Paddington, where a tramp, Harry Mack, and a former minister and Conservative MP, Sir Paul Berowne, have been found with their throats slit by an old-fashioned, sharp-edged razor. The police team's meticulous investigation sheds light on a number of suspects in the Baronet's entourage and the motives of those who may have been involved. The Dalgliesh hierarchy, under pressure from public opinion, urges the investigator, one of the very best at Scotland Yard, also a poet with a passion for classical literature and a keen eye for the darkest recesses of the human soul, to produce tangible evidence. But the investigators struggle to do so. The trained eye of a crime novel reader will detect, early in the plot, the unfinished reflection of a character of apparently little significance, a reflection that proves essential in the last quarter of the novel, crucial for the denouement and resolution of the investigation. Yet the outcome is far from being predictable. Tracks first explored may lead to dead ends. This well-written crime novel is a quality page-turner. PD James knows how to narrate, describe and report with precision the work and days of ordinary and extraordinary protagonists, exploring the twists and turns of everyday life and the frustrations that lead to the fatal act. The author skilfully balances procedures and interrogations, the personal reflections of the protagonists, and concrete situations from everyday life. Even places - whether fictional, like the church or the Berowne family's Sir John Sloane mansion in Camden Hill, or real, like Holland Park or the banks of the Thames - are beautifully, albeit unostentatiously, described. The recurring characters in Baroness James's detective stories - Adam Dalgliesh above all, but eventually Kate and John Massingham - are endearing, with their qualities and insights, but also their flaws and their own private ghosts. Here, the prolific author offers a fine, realistic reading of the world around us, with a hint of subtle humour and a touch of poetry. "London, laid out beneath him under a low ceiling of silver-grey cloud, looked eternal, rooted, domestic. He saw the panorama, of which he never tired, in terms of painting. Sometimes it had the softness and immediacy of watercolour; sometimes, in high summer, when the park burgeoned with greenness, it had the rich texture of oil. This morning it was a steel engraving, hard- edged, grey, one-dimensional." (Book Five, chapter 6)
