Ran across this book and had to pick it up. Read it in about 48 hours, despite life getting in the way here and there, I could not put this book down. Some have said Jon Kraukaur's book "Out of Thin Air" is far more interesting, possibly so as he was a professional writer and looked more to write to entertain and sell, this book was written to correct some misinformation put forward in Kraukaur's book. I didn't rate this high because its a great piece of literature -- its not, the writing is chopppy and bland, but that's ok, the story jumps out beyond the reporter style writing. As someone who ran a business that often required difficult decisions and risk evaluation, I was riveted to the spot from the very beginning. The story starts from the very beginning when Boukreev and other characters in the book are laid out within the context of preparation for the climb. A good layout is given of the competitive nature of Everest guide tours, the tension and drive that comes with wanting to be number one combined with the desire to be successful in business. Immediately it is clear from the get-go that the expedition leaders make some crucial mistakes and cut corners in their ambition to grab the brass ring -- getting as many people to the summit as possible. Also the book explains very clearly through simple sketches of character and quotes from survivors how privilege combined with ambition can lead to blinded ambition. Did the groups build cohesion? Did they stick together and build teamwork? Were there those who thought of themselves more than the group? Does privilege (Everest thrill seekers have to be among the very wealthy to afford the trip) lead to entitlement that overshadows judgment and proper discrimination about who should go up and who shouldn't? Is it all about the cash? The glory? Everest is in my mind an extreme example of human hubris. People go there for the thrill, go there expecting to get back to tell the world and claim that title. And yet ironically they are guided the whole way like old ladies on a seniors bus tour, most of them not fit to make their own decisions should peril strike them. The mountain is littered with bodies to testify to human error and yet the people keep coming. Do they come to view a pristine natural wonder or to simply use the mountain as another notch for their ego? The mountain currently is loaded with trash, the mountain villages in Nepal are struggling to survive under the weight of resource sucking western amenities to satisfy the tastes of western privilege. After reading this book one wonders; for what?
