It's like the obverse of Robinson Crusoe, innit? Unrighteous dude can't keep still, sees the world, never resting longer in one place than it takes to turn unjustly-acquired goods into gold...but just like in that other book, everything that he sees here is made sense of, filtered through, a thoroughly pragmatic European trader's sensibility, in mercantile terms: the entire continent of Africa, for example (which he and his colleagues must traverse, largely on foot, in the first half of the novel) is but a backdrop for that great individualist project of making one's way in the world, and of mastering & transforming passive nature (and her creatures, including those countless and forever-nameless indigenous peoples) into use-value and then of course exchange-value, of putting the whole God-given thang to work —the whole point of our way of life to this very day, in other words, come to think of it.... Along the way, Defoe is consistently, typically, scrupulous to pile up enough documentary-style detail to fool us into believing that this is a factual document (again, as with Crusoe, Moll Flanders and Journal of the Plague Year, as if the Lord would not be pleased by so much mere... fiction ), though the sheer amount of overmuch suchness of this material, it does feel more somewhat more, erm, lightly-worn here than in those latter two books—and all the better for it, for this reader at least. Of particular interest, after the fairly adventurous trek across the benighted dark continent is our Captain Singleton's bromance with William the Quaker, a willing captive of the pirate ship that Singleton serves on during the novel's second half, who is always at-the-ready with witty banter and wise counsel, so as to keep things lively (or livelier than they otherwise would have been), for the pirate cruise is not nearly as swashbuckling as one might have been led to believe by our otherwise over-honest, not-too-bloodthirsty Captain when he protesteth a bit o'ermuch: and this I may venture to say before Hand, upon the Word of a PYRATE, that I shall not be able to recollect the full, no not by far, of the great Variety which has formed one of the most reprobate Schemes that ever man was capable to present to the World. Whew, now something like that might've upped the star -quotient a notch or two, but really Defoe's seafaring scallywags are less like that variety of pirate one encounters in, say, R.L Stevenson, than are those true reprobates of our present-day (i.e. those well-dressed/coiffed, private(er) equity managers who party together, have got each others' backs, and can be just a tad ruthless when the odd hostile takeovers come along, which is thankfully often enough to keep those pages turning. Thankfully, too, the Captain's William largely spares us of the kind of holier-than-thou moralizing and constant invocations of divine Providence that we get in Crusoe or Plague Year. As shall this William, too! Amen to that. And amen as well to this Oakville Ontarian transplant to Nova Scotia and his dirge on privateering (in which the singer learns that life is, alas, not as fungible as gold, and the true value of a "letter of marque"* from the king ): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6Nl3... * https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Letter_...
