Uber alles? ♠️ I’ve read seven novels by Remarque and he is always cynical but in this story he goes beyond all the others. Here we are living in the time of rampant inflation, the 1920s, and in a defeated, embittered Germany where National Socialism is on the rise. There is a real anger against what he perceives as the Germanic national psyche in these pages. Nazis who thrive on being Nazis and brutally racist are given good jobs and pensions shortly after the war. Those who resist Naziism or hide Jews are treated shabbily and go unemployed. Some are left to rot in jails or camps the Nazis place them in. In all his other works I’ve read, but for All Quiet, there is a love affair that works out for most of the novel even if it inevitably ends in death or breakup. Here nothing works at all. There are two women and throughout the novel nothing clicks permanently between our male protagonist and the two ladies. To be sure, he is absolutely enraptured by the one, but she changes dramatically inside her own mind and soul when she heals from a mental illness and she does not even recognize him anymore. Obelisk is a love story where love fails on many levels, not just between man and woman. It fails between humans and God, between humans and country, it fails between human and human. There are some sparks of light but not many. Indeed, this novel had fewer lyrical passages about beauty than his others. Most of it is written in solid tombstone granite. A cynical work. But important in understanding Remarque and his Germany. In addition, he asks questions all must ask, especially the religious. Sample 🕊️ The ministers consecrate the memorial; each for his own God. During the war when we had to attend divine services and the ministers of the various denominations prayed for the victory of German arms, I often reflected that in just this way the English, French, Russian, American, Italian, and Japanese men of God were praying for the victory of their armies and I used to picture God as a kind of hurried and embarrassed club president, especially when He had to listen to the prayers of the same denomination from enemy countries. For which should He decide? For the one with the most inhabitants? Or the one with the most churches? And what of His justice if He let one country win and the other, where the prayers were no less diligent, lose? Sometimes He seemed to me like a harassed, elderly emperor, ruling over many countries and forced to keep changing his uniform to receive different deputations—now the Catholic, now the Protestant, the Evangelical, the Anglican, the Episcopalian, the Reformed, according to which divine service happened to be going on at the moment. Or like an emperor reviewing the Hussars, the Grenadiers, the Artillery, and the Navy ♠️
