Oh, give me a sec to let my tears drop. This book is beautiful. The story inside feels so real. It feels different. It almost feels like Tiuri, the main character here, sits across the room telling me the story himself, and help me learnt so much. I won't forget this book, that is for sure. I am glad I found this book in my school library a few days ago. This is beyond my imagination. I had no expectation when I first saw this book. I thought to myself that maybe this is another freakish classic tale, written with so much art and deep thoughts and evil mixed in. But what I found is surprising. After a few pages I realized how this book feels so pure and unreal but real at the same time. How this book did nothing but touching its readers and send them great values of life that they learn by themself. It is a book for kids.. but it is an awesome book. Oh let me cry for a little bit more, for this book is beautiful. I ridiculously love it, I learnt so much from it, gosh I just adore it. It doesn't feel old or boring. It's awesome. The characters are all males most of the time, guys that shared the same age with me right now. The story is about a journey of Tiuri, a young man that ran away on the night before he could be the king's knight, for a secret mission given by strangers. On his journey he met a lot of people, become friends with so many people, and face so much danger. The story tells about how he discovered a lot of things about life, about himself, about the world. Some sentences here punch in a huge impression in my heart, like the time when Tiuri finished his mission and a wise clown from the neighbour country told him a story of a guy who went on a journey to chase the end of the rainbow, for he believed that the end of the rainbow would be the most beautiful place on earth. However l, after the long trip he found nothing. He was disappointed, but then he thought about the journey he had, how he met so many awesome new friends, beautiful sights,and a lot of happiness, he realized that the rainbow is not the most important thing! Thee beauty and values he found in his journey, that is the most important. This book is crazily awesome, I hope my son or daughter will read it one day and feel the same thing. This book gave me a lot. One of the most inspiring book ever. :) I also hope you'll consider reading it too, even thou the cover of it might not look that interesting, haha. Happy reading, and God bless your journey :")
