A Book with Many Layers of Stories.... First Layer/Top Layer It is a story of a person by the name of Christa T. Her life story is narrated by one of her friends after her death at the young age (in her late thirties). Her friend tries to reconstruct Christa T's life from her own memories and in it she is ably (?) aided by some of the letters, diary jottings, some incoherent scribbling, and a thesis done in college of Christa T. Thus, we find a story of an ordinary woman who survived the war and later sought after education, and necessarily fell and fell out of loves, went for the subsequent marriage and kids, nurtured the enduring friendships, and finally fell a victim to leukemia and died. The Second Layer It is a story of a person who tried "to become oneself, with all one's strength." It is a story of a person who wanted to mark her identity as an unique individual in the world. Christa T was a person interested in constructing her own I in the world of many and innumerous persons. In other words, she was afraid that she will be lost among many others as one among them and her reason for existence will be nothing other than existing. She was afraid to be like the 'other'. She wanted to be a different and unique person. She wanted "to see life in all its colors." But then in her plan of becoming a particular I and trying out all possibilities she always met with failures. As a young girl she wanted to be different and sought the books for answer. Later she saw herself one with many other students. She sought the life of a married woman and after few years of marriage she saw that any other woman could do the same thing. She wanted to write. But then she was afraid that words will not be able to describe the exact reality. When she wanted to be herself, giving full vent to her desires and imaginations, the world was adamant not to let her to be "herself". The world was more interested in the principle of conformity than on the principle of freedom. She felt the routine life a bore, a real prison and an incurable sickness. Survival in such world meant only deception. That killed her. Because she wanted to be always honest. Third Layer This is a book that criticises mercilessly any Totalitarian regime. The whole story of Christa T is an allegory. Through her life story the life under any Totalitarian regime is very subtly analysed. Christa T is asked to life according to the principle of conformity. Anything to be thought other than this/other than the idea of the regime will not be tolerated. "The essence of health," in such society, "is adaptation or conformity." In such societies, the moral aspect and an individual opinion do not and can not exist. Voicing out your opinion can be very dangerous and mortal. If the Rule of Conformity is the Reigning Principle its second in command is: "No more playing with possible variants." The Fourth Layer It is also the first book of any literary merit to come out of Walter Ulbricht's Communist (Totalitarian) regime of GDR (East Germany of 1950s). And so, it is also a political book. And it contains very subtle but poignant criticisms of Ulbricht's regime. Naturally after the fall of Nazism, Communism was seen as the saving philosophy. It looked so appealing and very beautiful. Everyone sought in it a paradise. Christa Wolf writes: Paradise can make itself scarce, that's the way of it. Make a wry face if you like, but all the same: one must, once in a lifetime, when the time was right, have believed in the impossible. They too believed in the paradise on the earth - an impossibility. In paper and in thoughts, the 'New World' was very appealing - "an image of human beauty created by longing." And "every love story must come to an end in marriage." The stark reality (the arrival of Communist regime - the marriage) with its hard facts ended the love story. As usual, the facts did not correspond to the picture created in the paper. Christa Wolf writes: The happy times of pristine thinking and open minds, always favorable for beginnings, belonged now to the past, and we knew it. There is also an image in the book in which we see initially Christa T planning for a new house and she plans everything in advance (what colour paint, what curtains, what location, etc). She creates her own imagination and her desires for the new house in a white paper. The images are immediately appreciated by her friends and they add minor details. And when the real construction begins, the life becomes hard and when the house is finally ready, it is far from the house created in the white paper. Just change the image of 'house' with any other ideology and one gets a different message. Final Note This is just an example and the allusions are all over the book. Each sentence in the book is pregnant with layers of meanings and stories. A powerful book and Highly Recommended.
