Comic books tell us that superheroes are people with supernatural powers (mostly, unless they’re not super rich) who like to jump around in tight spandex suits and fight each other. David Selig has a superpower, but he doesn't wear a costume nor does he use his power for the greater good. In fact, for a long time, David thought he was the only one who possessed a gift and he only uses power to his benefit, even that he's not doing as he could. He was born with the ability to read other people's minds, but there is only one problem. His power is fading. It would be easy to succumb to what is written on the cover that this is the best sci-fi novel of all times and fall into the trap, to skip it if you are not a fan of science fiction and thus deprive yourself of reading one of the best novels not of SF but in general. Silverberg is known as a genre writer, but that doesn't stop him from showing us in "Dying Inside" how good a writer he is, which he had already done a year earlier in The Book of Skulls . Using the story of a telepath losing his power, Silverberg takes us retrospectively through Selig's life, very likely based on Silverberg's memories and feelings because the novel is too intimate, or he is so talented that he manages to sell us a compelling lie about David Selig. Although, Silverberg did take a writing break shortly after publishing this novel, so it is very likely that writing "Dying Inside" was therapy for what he felt at the time. Soul searching, because as Selig lost the power to read minds, so Silverberg faced a creativity crisis. Younger readers (probably some older ones too) will frown over Silverberg's descriptions of women or his imitation of an African-American character, but in fact, it is all part of Selig's character and if it were written differently his character would not have been convincing because these thoughts are in accordance with the time when the novel was created. Selig dies from within, his self-imposed alienation from society stops because he no longer feels different from others but becomes one of them. He faces his long-repressed feelings of incestuous love for his younger sister and thinks about the woman he loved, the only person whose thoughts he couldn't read and that scared him, and the one he scared so much she never wants to see him again. In a way, the old Selig dies to make room for the new. "Dying inside" is primarily a story of alienation, which even Silverberg explains to us through one of the essays that David writes as an assignment while listing Kafka and his works. Another one of, to put it bluntly, genre novels, which show how much people who avoid science fiction lose by skipping certain works.
