The very rare case of a slow moving, nevertheless suspenseful soft horror novel mainly using characterization and worsening foreshadowing to thrill the reader. This one really stays in mind because of the end nobody would suspect and an accelerating thrill and feeling of discomfort I´ve hardly ever seen performed this way. It starts friendly, does a bit of creepy exposition, and gets more and more disturbing for the lead protagonist, culminating in a great wtf moment. Really, why can´t it always be such a peaceful end of letting the mother breed the antichrist instead of being cruel and taking the baby away from her. It´s especially staying in mind because, following the rules of Hollywood stereotypes, there has to be at least some gore, violence, or even a bad, depressing ending and not a kind of happy for parents and child, bad for the rest of the world, solution. The sexism is a bit exaggerated, even for the late 60s, but how it shows the oldfashioned thoughts and mindsets surrounding motherhood and feminity has the extra bonus of a bit of social cultural studies, although I suppose that Levin possibly integrates a bit of his own mindset here too. That´s of course highly subjective and I don´t know it, but it could be the explanation for the a bit over the top manly masculinity that is contrasted with and compensated by satanism and occultism but whatever, all the same 1st and 2nd millenium trash. The today hilarious idea of a woman so obedient to her husband and authorities such as doctors that she doesn´t listen to the inner voice of logic or body signals and just stays in a meh, ok, do with me whatever pleases you mode, could be today's black comedy material. It´s like an exaggerated, overlong horror movie stereotypical victim does nothing to prevent it´s downfall while all warning signs are accumulating gag. But a very well written one. It must be creepy to read this as a woman in general and especially as a mother, because it subverts the idea of pregnancy by dealing with the fear about the health of the unborn child used to manipulate the pregnant protagonist . I imagine it longer, with more bam, blood, and gore, escalating to the end and followed by a worthy second part, not the seemingly bad if one believes the ratings, such as I tend to do, jay, collective intelligence. Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...
