Season of Storms by Susanna Kearsley is a pleasant read if you enjoy suspense novels with a dash of romance and a side helping of spiritualism (Tarot cards, séances and spirits). It's set in the lovely area of Lake Garda, Italy. Celia Sands is a struggling 22 year old British actress who gets a break: the chance to star in a play in Italy, directed by one of the two men who is a father figure to her. Celia hesitates to take this on for a couple of reasons: She's being required to use her real name rather than her stage name, since she was named after the actress the play was originally written for in the 1920s. And her former roommate's Tarot card reading for Celia promises that terrible events will occur if she goes. ^^ This is a bad news Tarot card indeed. But in the end the offer to star in the show proves irresistible, so off Celia goes, to the lovely historic estate in Italy where the playwright once lived, and where the play will be staged. Il Vittoriale, an Italian estate on Lake Garda once owned by a poet, which inspired this novel She meets the playwright's handsome grandson, an actor and actress who will be in the play with her, the debonair stage manager, and others. Rehearsals for the play are coming along well, with a few hiccups ... but there's something ominous going on. Season of Storms is an enjoyable read, if not one of Susanna Kearsley's more memorable novels. There's a little bit of a dual plot with a few scenes from the life of the original Italian playwright back in the 1920s, but it's a very minor piece of the overall story. I enjoyed the description of the process of putting together a theater production, which seemed very true to life. Kearsley spends a lot of time describing that process, and all of the beautiful Italian scenery ... which was nice, but possibly some of that time could have been put to better use in creating more well-rounded characters and a more compelling romance. The romance was touching, if unlikely and not terribly intense. Overall this novel has pretty leisurely pacing (it gets seriously slow at times), and not all of the pieces of the mystery fit together well, IMO. It was a decent read and I didn't have any trouble finishing it, but I probably won't be rereading it.
