I've had a binge of re-reading Nicci French written prior to the Frida Klein series. 'The Safe House' is one of the best of these, if what you are looking for is a plot with some complexity and murder which does not instill too much fear. This is not to say that it is dull read, quite the reverse. But, unlike my having to read the end of 'The Land of the living' because of my unbearable fear around the middle of the novel, 'The Safe House' can safely be read as it should be. The protagonists are a professional mother, Sam, and daughter, Elsie, who move from London to the country. The relationship between Danny, an irregular visitor, Sam's lover and beloved male figure for Elsie is a particularly interesting part of the plot. He is an integral part of the domestic part of Sam's life, but on the periphery of her professional life; their relationship is at the same time loving and close but awkward; he is independent of the mother and daughter at times but also expects to be part of their decision making. He is not a party to the most important decision Sam makes, accepting a traumatised survivor, Finn McKenzie, into her home. In the first part of the novel Finn's parents are found by their daily help. They have been murdered: throats slashed, and 'Piggies' written in blood on the wall of their luxurious bedroom. Finn, their daughter is found bound, gagged and wounded, but alive. Suspicion revolves around the animal rights movement because of McKenzie's work. Sam is assured that she will have Finn for a finite period, she and Elsie are safe, and that she can be of help to a traumatized young woman who is now alone. Sam's concerns are overcome and she enjoys Finn's gradual recovery from a victim who cannot speak to someone who will shop, play with Elsie and eventually cook delicious meals. Sam is pleased to see that her help has had positive results for Finn and mother and daughter build a warm relationship with her. The police and the McKenzie's doctor become regular visitors in Sam's domestic world; at the hospital where she is to head up a new trauma recovery unit new relationships are also formed, like those in the community with negative and positive aspects; Elise's world also expands, with school friendships. Two murders and an apparent suicide demonstrate that Sam and Elsie are not necessarily safe and Sam's attempts to maintain her child's safety and her own become the focus of the plot. The safe house motif is important in Sam's and Elsie's lives, as a memory game and, eventually, a clue to their survival and important factor in Sam's decision-making. While French's familiar motif of the incompetent police emerges with its frustrations for the reader as well as the characters in the novel, it is understandable. The complexity of the plot, although there are some excellent clues, is clear only to the person most involved. Sam knows the characters better than anyone. It is Sam who can follow the clues, obvious and subtle because of her closeness to the other characters. She arrives at a solution. However, by the end of the novel Sam is as reluctant as the police to investigate any further. Rather than the ending being a let down, it draws the reader into further understanding of French's depiction of the closeness of a parent-child relationship helps explain Sam's reaction to Danny's relationship with her throughout the novel and the resolution of the plot.
