“Thin clouds form, and the shadows lengthen out. They have no breadth, as summer shadows have; there are no leaves on the trees or fat clouds in the sky to make them thick. They are gaunt, mean shadows that bite the ground like teeth. As the sun nears the horizon, its benevolent yellow begins to deepen, to become infected, until it glares an angry inflamed orange. It throws a variegated glow over the horizon.” Salem’s Lot is the story of a small town being overtaken by vampires, and a brave band of people who come together to fight an ancient evil. The story centers around Ben Mears. Ben has returned to Salem’s Lot in hopes that exploring the history of the Marsten House, an old mansion long the subject of rumor and speculation, will help him cast out his personal devils and provide inspiration for his new book. But when two young boys venture into the woods, and only one returns alive, Ben begins to realise that something sinister is at work, in fact, his hometown is under siege from forces of darkness far beyond his imagination. And only he, with a small group of allies, can hope to contain the evil that is growing within the borders of this small and fragile town…. Salem’s Lot builds slowly and this is where Stephen King uses his time to do what he does best, build great characters and create fascinating back stories. The town of Salem’s lot feels like a soap opera with characters that will make you feel nostalgic and disgusted at the same time. They beat their children, cheat on their husbands, drink and bully. Yet its hard to pin them on a good vs bad board, there are shades of grey with everyone you meet. Once this entire foundation has been laid Stephen King ups the ante and unveils the full horror of the vampires and it unravels like a dream! Salem’s Lot is a brilliant work of vampire/horror fiction. It is genuinely scary at times, it has the ability to raise the hairs on your arms and neck and gives you a genuine sense of foreboding. This town is more a charcter than a setting and you realise the evil man can do is more destructive to society than a thousand year old vampire. It’s the townspeople that drive the action and turn Salem’s Lot into an apocalypse. This is a rich story full of great themes about society, the power of faith, men vs boys and even love and salvation. It was an absolute dream to read! I Highly recommend 👌🏻
