Under the Pear Tree is a little mystery novella. A little like Alias Grace in that even if a criminal act occurred is uncertain, but much shorter. And also without a canter through mid-nineteenth century psychological theories and approaches on the workings of the mind. The joy of the book is in Fontane's skill as a writer. The rivalry between Hradsheck, the main character, and the village policeman, Geelhaar, that begins over a small joke, and leads to Geelhaar "honouring" the day of Hradsheck's arrest by turning up in his official Shako (with plume). Both the intensity of the neighbourly quarrel and an ironic detachment from it economically expressed by the author. Language is central in how Fontane sets up his characters. The villages speak Platt, Low German. Hradsheck's 'refined' Hildesheim wife, the Pastor and other authority figures speak the authoritative Hochdeutsch. Hradsheck himself and his rival as marginal figures code switch depending on who they are talking to and how they want to be perceived. There is a hub and spoke effect in the characters relationships to the world. The hub of the story is a village in eastern Brandenburg while Hradsheck is of Czech extraction, his wife is from distinct (and well-spoken!) Hildesheim, Hradsheck is borrowing money from Krakow and travels regularly to Berlin after his wife's death to go to the theatre which is obviously suspicious . Hradsheck's speech is alien, his dealings are foreign - he's mysterious to the villagers and the reader. When a representative of the Krakow firm that lent Hradsheck money dies in a curious accident on a dark and stormy morning, has a crime been committed or not? When questioned Hradsheck's employees can only vaguely say that he's been odd, different, since the accident. But this is Gott sei Dank Prussia, a man must be orderly and consistent. Being odd and different is sufficient grounds for the village policeman to put on his Shako (with plume) and make an occasion of Hradsheck's arrest. But on this occasion, half way through the book, Hradsheck is saved when the official party digging through his potato bed under the pear tree of the title uncovers the remains, not of the representative of the Krakow firm, but of a French soldier who fell in 1813 . Fontane's technique of revealing characterisation through speech doesn't work as well here as in Irretrievable which is much more a novel of conversation and the occasional letter. Although the absence of conversation I suppose adds to the central mystery that is carried through to the end of the novella.
