Erich Maria Remarque (1898-1970) is best known for his WWI novel, "All Quiet on the Western Front" (1929), and rightfully so. However, for the rest of his career he wrote more books about the aftereffects of the war than the war itself. He was in a position to know about both, since at age eighteen he was drafted into the army, and was badly wounded. He then lived through the years of postwar economic depression in his defeated country. "The Black Obelisk" (1956) is an excellent representative of those postwar books. It is set in a small German city in 1923, five years after Germany’s defeat in what at the time was called The Great War (Time magazine would rename it World War I in 1939 when the world was on the precipice of an even greater global conflagration.) Ludwig Bodmer, a twenty-three year old ex-veteran, is employed by a small company that sells cemetery monuments and stones. It is true that sales in a time of widespread illness exacerbated by hunger and poverty are nevertheless brisk. However, if the company doesn’t receive pay in advance the sale price will not cover the company’s expenses. This is due to the fact that the German economy is in the throes of galloping, runaway inflation. The people of the defeated nation, at least the honest ones, are struggling to survive. When they acquire any money at all they rush to spend it because its value depreciates hourly. Only on the weekends, because the stock exchanges are idle, does the value of the German mark remain stable. With the German society in such a turbulent state and on the verge of collapse, the people begin to look for drastic changes in the government, hoping for one that will take steps to alleviate the dire conditions in which they live. Unfortunately, it is the National Socialists (Nazis) that they turn to. The country is then confronted with the twin threats of economic turbulence and extreme nationalism. We know how all that ends. However, as with Remarque’s other books, it isn’t all doom and gloom. I know that it might seem counterintuitive, but there is much humor in the plot. Well, I have to admit that there isn’t much plot, but there is much humor. True, it tends to be dark, which is to be expected – even slapstickish in a few cases -- but it gives the reader a break from the unrelenting misery of the German working class struggling not just from day-to-day, but from hour-to-hour. There are also interludes in which Ludwig, who has become extremely cynical of it all, engages in thought-provoking conversations indulging in much philosophical theorizing, often with a friend, who is also his employer, and with a priest, a doctor, and a woman who is a patient in a mental hospital. His interactions with the patient and their discussions provide the book with its most interesting and best written passages. The story is almost totally character driven and the characters are fully developed – even the minor ones. As I mentioned, it isn’t a page turner. If plot is your thing, this is not your book, but if you are more interested in strong characterizations, then it could be yours. Finally, pay no attention to the anonymous reviewer on Kirkus, who wrote that “[t]his is one Remarque novel that, for my money, could have been inferred [?] in the German language, unpublished here. I found it not only distasteful, but boring …. It is an unsavory portrait of the little man of Germany under duress – and even more of the “little woman.” Ouch! It is too bad that the reviewer has neither a sense of the absurd nor a sense of humor, especially one that is slightly warped. Possession of those two traits might have led the reviewer to write a more positive review. I know it helped me.
