My thoughts a bit into the book: THIS is fantastic! What lines! Did you know that Remarque died in 1970? He didn't JUST write about WW1. Here the year is 1938. The Spanish Civil War, the build-up to WW2 and refugees in Paris are all part of this book. Interesting and exciting and marvelously written. And you want to know why the main character is as he is. You simply MUST understand. Slowly it unfolds. Good stuff. Me, I am enjoying myself as I read this. And on completion? Everything that I loved when I began the book remained valid through to the very end. Ravic and Joan are the two main characters. Ravic is a stateless refugee and an accomplished German surgeon. He is not Jewish; he is not a supporter of the Nazi regime. He is living in Paris without papers and thus forbidden to preform surgeries. His surgical skills are excellent; he has to make a living so he performs surgeries for "acclaimed" French doctors who are inept. They get the acclaim of his prowess, but he survives. He is about 40. He is stateless because he is wanted by the Nazis for hiding two people - a Jewish writer and a man who saved his life fighting in WW1. He has been mercilessly tortured and sent to concentration camp, from which he escaped. All of this explains why at the beginning of the story he is stateless, without papers and living in France, Paris to be exact. The year is 1938 and the story continues through to 1939. Ravic has one aim beyond simply surviving, to get revenge on that Nazi who has tortured him and those he loved. Is it just revenge or is it his duty to shoulder punishment of crimes committed ? Doesn't each and every one of us have to share the burden of retribution? This theme turns the book into a crime novel and the tension mounts as you reach the end. Another central theme is how war forever alters those who living through them. Ravic took part in the Spanish Civil War too. The book is NOT about war experiences per se but rather about their personal consequences, and the larger perspective of the many who lived through the 20th Century. Through Ravic you see the consequences of history on an individual. I came to understand Ravic. There is another central character - Joan, who he falls in love with. Joan is another completely different story and I felt the book did not explain as well why she was who she was. This is why my appreciation of the book was less than magnificent. Really gorgeous writing. Remarque draws Paris superbly, Paris and how it looks and smells and the tension of those times. You follow the events of history through the life of Ravic, his one year hidden in France. The narration by Ralph Cosham is totally fantastic. It was never too exaggerated to increase tension, but boy does it mount. The excellence of the narration was a total surprise for me since when I listened to the sample I thought it would be way too old-fashioned. No, it was just perfect. And the voices of the women were perfect too. Smooth, calm, pitch-perfect! I loved the narration, and I highly recommend listening to this book rather than reading a paper copy. And the ending? It fit; it ended as it had to end given Ravic's character and what he had lived through.
