3.5 Not a bad book but a little dry and dusty. I don't know how else to explain it (that's a lie, of course I can explain it I'm just not going to). Both characters are self-absorbed, isolated selfish people who can be both cruel and gentle. They are flawed to the point where at first you don't know if you like them or just hanging out with them. Sort of like the people you only hang out with at a bar but the minute you are summoned to their house for dinner you hesitate. Yeah. Jack is a writer and I connected with his character - the selfish playboy 'dillente' that he is - and less so with tough as nails, art house manager Freya, who is an emotional ice sculpture with storms swirling inside her so hard they threaten to subsume anyone who comes close. Jack and Freya are friends and have been for about a decade and their relationship, like their memories are bittersweet. When Freya gets dumped by her boyfriend she moves in with Jack until she gets back on her feet. Ok. That makes sense but not a day in are they bickering and fighting and the reader is left wondering how in the hell were they ever friends? Are they friends because of history or because they truly like each other? The rest of the book is pretty much like that until the scenery changes from NYC to England and then with the change of scenery comes new perspective. Jack has been completely cut off from his allowance, Freya is forced to attend her step-sister's wedding (whom she can't stand and frankly I can't either) so both are a little raw and sore but somehow they manage to get along in this situation of pretending to be lovers than they ever had in being friends. The reader then wonders if the fighting is due to the familiarity and comfort of friendship is chafing due to the fact that they both have feelings that have grown outside of that box. Until Jack commits an unforgivable act. Then the rest of the story is about how these two people were so close but because of their defenses and self-imposed issues have blown the one thing that could have kept their silly little lives afloat in this crazy mixed up world. On top of that there is another betrayal, less shocking because the author didn't have the good sense to leave two chapters out of the book, several revelations and some maturity. I don't think this book is particularly romantic but instead focuses on the bittersweet aspect of a relationship that really only two options left for it. To part of take the next step. It's a good Autumn in NY read. The descriptions weren't bad but I got the feeling that Sisman might not have spent enough time in NY because instead of feeling vibrant, gritty, slightly gross and amazing it seemed like a sketch or a watercolor. Pretty foundations but no solid form on which to stand. However, decent read. If you see this is in a bargain bin or on the bookswap take a second.
