** Update ** Two days after finishing this I'm still thinking about it, helped by an interesting discussion in the RTTC group (thanks, as always!) so am upgrading my rating to 4-stars. It was neither sign nor coincidence that we were going to have mussels that evening. Structured as a single long monologue by a daughter waiting with her mother and brother for their father to come home, while the mother prepares the eponymous mussel feast, this loops repetitively around itself, teetering between stasis and gradual breakdown until, by the inconclusive ending, the family performance has disintegrated. Clearly - too obviously, for my taste - this is a portrait of authoritarian patriarchy in both a domestic and national setting: the bullying, violent, toxic masculinity that oppresses both family and nation, in this case East Germany in the run-up to the fall of the Wall. The family acknowledging their repression and banding together in the absence of the father is clearly an allegory for the collapse of the East German regime in 1989, leading to reunification. Perhaps this would have felt more novel when first published in 1990 but for me, today, the analysis feels monolithic and well established and the stylistic choices - the monologue, the repetition - didn't resonate with me. Allegory such as this just feels clumsy and a bit old-fashioned: it reminded me too much of medieval writings where the tracing of symbols is often far more elaborate than here: I just wanted more to chew on while the text wears its meaning very clearly on the surface. The monologue form lends itself well to a single-sitting reading but the looping repetition is a bit tiresome to read even if it's supposed to indicate the well-trodden paths of the unnamed woman's thoughts, gradually breaking away into new and radical possibilities. The most affective part of the narrative for me was the brilliant description of the screaming mussels as they cook, a potent image of suffering and resistance, even if only verbal. So much of the action here is in these sorts of non-actions - even the climax comes from not doing something the mother not answering the telephone . The ending is inconclusive in terms of definite actions or resolutions but we feel the family will not be the same again, now that the mother, son and daughter have looked into each others eyes and seen what shared emotions lie there. For me, this is a one-note piece - it's not subtle, it's not nuanced, it makes its points swiftly and with force. I thought at the start the figure of the father laughing with the mother was going to be more complicated but it closes down to a single representation. Definitely worth a read as this is a short book and the topic of how we need to organise to resist is an important one, whether it's through personal or more communal activist support. I also wonder if the patriarchal and toxic masculinised nature of political tyranny was less well recognised at the time of publication (1990) than today when we just need to look around at who is causing violent chaos in the world to draw our own conclusions. And I'm sad, disturbed and horrified at how many reviewers have said they recognise this father from their own lives.
