Hi, my name is David – no, don’t tell me yours, I already know. Plus I know your wife’s and your kids, and your little cute dog’s and your girlfriend’s names. I can read minds you see. Don’t believe me? Well, how’s this – Sharon, that’s the missus, Holly, Troy and Danny, aww he’s so sweet, Wowser, and Jasmine. Heh… I can see what you see in her! So am I right my friend? That’s worth a drink don’t you think? Oh yeah, I been able to do this all my life. What’s that? Why aren’t I rich? Why am I in a crummy bar talking to the likes of you and wearing this raggedy shirt? Haha, yeah, you didn’t say that but you’re thinking it! I can read you like a book, an airport novel in your case. Well, it’s a good question. Met another guy once with the same mind reading power and he was living the high life. His name was Nyquist and he’d got some sweet little Wall Street tipster racket going on. He’d read some minds for the latest scoops on what was up and what was down and then he’d sell the info to the dealers who hadn’t heard it yet. I should have done something like that instead of turning into an insufferable self-loathing unemployed mope. This one time, hey, I’m buying these, let me tell you, there was this hot girlfriend I had and I just couldn’t read her mind at all, complete blank. It was really bugging me. So I got her to go and see my pal Nyquist for an evening and then, hey buddy, this part is really cute, I hopped into Nyquist’s mind while he was reading my girlfriend’s mind and he showed me what she really thought of me! That was kind of mean because it turned out she thought I was a bitter loser. Huh. I really thought she liked me. We broke up after that. * Hey Joe, remember me? We met right here about six months ago. Right, the mind reading guy. Oh yeah, I can still do it. Well…. Just between me you and the gatepost, I think my power is declining, like one of those radios you have to whack to get it to work at all. Yeah, it’s sad. What’s that – what am I gonna do when I’m just a normal person without any superpowers? Good question, Joe. Good question.
