Just "out of the book"! Just finished in other words. Last Chance Saloon really captured me. Definitely better than the Marian Keyes I've read lately (that is Lucy Sullivan ans Sushi). First Last Chance Saloon also seamed just too much like them. Almost boring to read about the same things (low self-esteem etc) again. But of course MK is ALWAYS entertaining. But Last Chance Saloon is actually different. Kinda more serious. The message is that we shouldn't presume life is forever, so we should make the most of it while we can. The very serious matter took up in the book is cancer, which one of the characters suffers of. I knew it was cancer immediately when there was some talk about some lump in Fintan’s neck, and I didn't like the way the book was going. Cancer and MK don't go together, cos MK-books always end happily. So I never expected Fintan to die, cos such doesn’t happen in MK-books. So I presumed he would be miraculously cured, even thou I don’t believe cancer can be cured... Well, actually Fintan wasn’t definitely cured at the end after all. He might well die of it some day, but he’s going to make the most of his life till then. Well, however, he was't even the main character... The main characters was Tara, who couldn't make herself leave her awful boyfriend and Katherine, who doesn't want a boyfriend. Sounds pathetic, but it isn't really when u get to know more about them. Tara is very sympathetic actually, and I love her! Katherine seams stupid sometimes, but she is the one who's past is reveled little by little in the book. Sometimes I actually thought that wasn't the book ever going to end. There certainly is many turns, but they are very unexpected actually, so its only good. Anyway. I think I was going to write a great deal more, but I have forgotten the rest... Conclusion: A Very Good Book PS. Last Chance Saloon was very good to read beside all the schoolbooks I’m reading for the matriculation examination! I think I’m going to read some more MK straight away! This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
