“ All Souls” is the second novel I have read by Javier Marias.“ A Heart So White “ was my first experience with the author. That book was filled with intrigue and innuendo. In “All Souls,” Marias continues to enchant and tantalize. At its core, the novel is a “ ghost story” that recounts the unnamed narrator’s life at Oxford refracted through the passage of years.The permutations of time slither through the narrator’s remembrances of his academic and personal relationships, creating a spectral aura that has the reader constantly evaluating information. Plot is not a predominant feature of the novel. The expository thread is a series of connected vignettes and musings doled out by the narrator as he ruminates on his long ago two year professorship as a Spanish scholar and translator.He is a cultural outsider in this environment. His academic training enables him to observe and evaluate contextual clues that help him to adapt to his unfamiliar milieu.Oxford, filled with departmental infighting and obfuscation, is a fertile ground for the narrator to apply his unique skills. Observational acumen and tongue in cheek wit accompany him as he seeks to decode Oxford’s academic and personal secrets. Marias’ prose advances the narrative thread, then retreats backward, and sometimes moves sideways. Many of the narrator’s colleagues are deceased as he looks backward, tinging the reminiscences with a wraithlike aura at times.The tale becomes circular, swirling with insinuation and inference. The passage of time and the ability to both keep and decipher secrets become thematic threads running throughout the novel. Marias has created a novel that is dominated by feeling more so than by linear logic. The reader gets caught up in the author’s unique prose that alternates between elegant tones and subtly veiled humor. Having completed the novel, the reader is tempted to ask: “ What just happened?” For me, the joy of this novel is in the attempt to answer that question long after the book has been closed.
