Reading this 1968 novel out of East Germany reminds me a lot of an LSD trip I took as a college freshman in 1969. Under duress of the mismatch between my sense of self and the world I was to play some role in (it was the Vietnam era and I had a low draft number), I spent many an hour observing people in everyday activities compelled with the basic question: “What do people do?” Here the largely anonymous narrator seeks to accurately reconstruct the reality of a close friend from childhood and youth who died in her 30s, and in the process she ends up circling around the same odd and pregnant question about all our lives. It bent my mind over how hard it can be to about asking the right questions to elucidate another person’s “true” nature. Why was the narrator drawn to Christa soon after she arrived as a stranger at her rural grammar school in Germany during the last year of the war? Somehow she wasn’t cowed by the teachers and seemed a bit of a free spirit in their gray and regimented world, with the dangers from the war constantly looming. At one point while in line to see a film, Christa uses a rolled up magazine to let fly a loud trumpet sound. From that point the narrator tried to nurture friendship with her: Rapidly and regardlessly I had broken all other threads; suddenly I felt, with a sense of terror, that you’ll come to a bad end if you suppress all the shouts prematurely; I had no time to lose. I wanted to share in a life that produced such shouts as her hooohaahooo, about which she must have knowledge. Chista wasn’t really wild or rebellious, but somehow carried herself with a certain self-possession and openness to the new that was enviable: It always seemed that she’d taken upon herself to be at home everywhere and to be a stranger everywhere, at home and a stranger in the same instant; and as if from time to time it dawned on her what she was paying for and with. The narrator was close to Christa through secondary school and to a lesser extent during college, where they both shared a love of literature. We hear little about the oppressiveness of the communist regime, but indirectly through both the pull and strain of their trying to grow intellectual integrity in the face of pressures to conform and adapt to a new social order: What does the world need to become perfect? This and this alone was the question which wrapped her up in herself; but more deeply still it was the presumptuous hope that she, Christa T. herself might be necessary for the world’s perfection. …She went to the lectures, sat in her seat in the reading room, followed with her eyes the ranks of book backs and was suddenly afraid that the books might contain the answers to all the questions. …She didn’t attempt to escape from it all, as many people were starting to do in those years. But she also lost the capacity to live in a state of rapture. The vehement overplayed words, the waving banners, the deafening songs, the hands clapping rhythms over our heads. She saw how words began to change when they aren’t being tossed out any more be belief and ineptitude and excessive zeal but by calculation, craftiness, and the urge to adapt and conform. Eventually, Christa moves away to become a school teacher, gets married and has three kids, all the trappings of a good comrade. When she dies, the narrator feels a great loss over their drifting away from each other. In coming into possession of her collection of letters, a diaries, and experiments at poetry, she is moved to formulate what she can of her true nature. The task feels virtually impossible from the start: Since I’m alive and she isn’t, I can decide what’s to be talked about and what is not. That is the disregard the living show for the dead. Much points to the ineffable aspects of every one’s existence, the fallibility of memory, and challenges of truly knowing another and being known in turn : …the dead are easily wounded, it’s obvious. What a live person can tell, being alive, would finally kill a dead person: flippancy. Therefore, one cannot unfortunately, cling to the facts, which are too mixed up with chance and don’t tell much. But it also becomes harder to keep things separate: what one knows with certainty, and since when; what she herself revealed, and what others revealed; what her writings add and what they hide; and what it is one has to invent, for the truth’s sake: the truth of that being who does now appear to me at times, and whom I approach with caution. The type of “truth” about Christa the narrator homes in on comes from relating new facts from her friend’s life to ways she handles situations later. For example, from a childhood diary from before Christa came to her school, she learns of harrowing experiences she had during the war. We see how an occasion where she experienced encountering the body of a child while a refugee were mentally linked to an earlier witnessing of the cruelty of little boys killing magpie chicks or a later episode of drunken farmer killing a cat in a rage. A biographer would interview other people Christa knew in her life to get a more “objective” portrait. However, the thought of drawing on the experience of Christa by a particularly influential college teacher seems superfluous to the narrator. She can readily project what she would say and the likely distortions that would arise from her perspective. ”Her imagination”, she’ll perhaps say, “not quite content with herself. She was—eccentric. She never managed to recognize the limits which, after all, everyone does have. She lost herself in everything, you only had to wait for it. Sometimes you had the impression that all the studying, all the book stuff, didn’t really concern her at all. She was after something else. …She had only one interest: people. …There was a trait of hers, too: to disregard the objective facts. Then came the miserable after-effects, talking and talking …” “Hangover?” I shall ask cautiously. “More than once. This ocean of sadness! Simply because people didn’t want to be as she saw them.” “Or”. I shall suggest, “because she couldn’t be as we wanted her to be?” Eventually the narrator comes to feel some triumph: The paths we really took are overlaid with paths we did not take. I can now hear words we never spoke. Now I can see her as she was, Christa T., when no witnesses were present. Could it be possible?—The years that re-ascend are no longer the years they were. Light and shadow fall once more over our field of vision: but the field is ready. Should that not amaze us? The blank you get from the life of the narrator effectively draws the reader into the position of being Christa’s friend. I was reminded of the feelings I got from Ferrante’s “My Brilliant Friend”, though in that case the narrator was more revealing about the impact of Lina on her life. This book felt deceptively radical to me. I can see why it was included among the collection considered to have advanced the form of the novel in Boxhall’s “1001 Books You Should Read Before You Die.” There is little challenge to reading its spare prose and following its narrative trajectory, but its influence on how one I view the reality of my life was significant as that spurred long ago by LSD.
