Patrick McGrath is one of those writers who could have been, and almost was, a major presence in contemporary literature, not to mention the new gothic and the weird. Unfortunately, it hasn't quite worked out that way. There have been some lazily misconceived books ('Port Mungo' anyone?), a fascination with New York (never a good thing, even if one is a New Yorker), and a tendency to repetition, usually in a forlorn attempt to recapture the glory days of 'Dr Haggard's Disease' and 'Asylum'. 'DHD' was a superb novel; beautifully evocative, haunting, erotic, moving and ultimately bizarrely horrifying. I didn't like 'Asylum' as much, perhaps because of its relentless gloom, but I had to admire its elegant prose and coolly unpleasant psychiatrists. I don't know what went wrong after 'Asylum', but the other day I found myself re-reading the early collection, 'Blood and Water' and found myself enjoying it a great deal. There is a tendency in these stories to undercut morbidity with humour, as if, in those heady days of postmodern irony (oh, the 1980s), nothing could be trusted or invested in on its own terms. This does weaken some of the stories. However, there are some brilliant moments, notably 'The Angel', a tale in which Quentin Crisp meets Jay Gatsby (sort of) in a hot New York summer (here for once the city's presence is a bonus rather than a distraction or handicap). I also love 'The Black Hand of the Raj', which for all its knowing humour (look at that introductory paragraph!), manages to be memorably weird. Fans of 'Ripping Yarns' will not be disappointed. McGrath certainly has a lot of talent, but he seems caught between doing what he used to do well (here he is dulled by repetition) and being unable to find an alternative to it. His forays into historical fiction have been unsatisfying affairs, and he seems to be drifting from one book to another. It's a shame because there was a time when he was a wonderfully exciting alternative to the mainstream 'literary fiction' which then clogged the shelves.
