I expected to love this book because memoirs of people who have faced life's biggest challenges and survived are generally my favorite stories, but this one left me cold. While I was sympathetic to this family's plight, I disliked the writer and would have preferred a less unbiased account. Milika sounds, even at 40, like a spoiled child. She takes credit for everything -- her family's escape, the children's education, the family's entertainment, maintaining their sanity... is there anything Milika can't do? By the book's end I was literally laughing every time she started in one her "I saved them all" song because it was so over the top. Perhaps it's due to her years of imprisonment, but at times the book comes across as a tribute to herself. Perhaps no one told her that you don't say these sorts of things about one's self, you wait for others to say them about you. I suspect that some of the clunky writing is due to the translation, but sheesh, this book is so filled with inconsistencies that I found myself doubting the author's truthfulness. She often contracts herself on the same page and occasionally even in the same paragraph. One minute they were all bald, the next she's combing her waist-long hair. One paragraph states they haven't seen each other in years, the next page mentions the sisters cuddling in bed together and the mother spending her days caring for the youngest child. They were all starving, literally wasting away, but one sister is "getting fat" and had to be put on a diet. Then there's her descriptions of their terrible physical condition after the escape... except the photographs taking just after their recapture show healthy young people. Milika in particular is striking with her rounded cheeks, bright eyes and well-groomed hair. By the book's end I didn't know what to think. It's terrible that this family was locked up for their father's crime, but I'm not convinced that their experiences in jail were exactly as the writer describes. The ending is abrupt and I was left with the feeling that something was missing. I expected some sort of great realization by the writer... perhaps acknowledging that the deprivations her family experienced in jail were much like what the poor people of her country experienced every single day without any hope of escape. But no. She seems perfectly okay with the fact that some people are princesses, some people are slaves who serve said princesses, and that's just how things are. Milika's outrage is very narrow, reserved entirely for the suffering of herself and her family, and it has the effect of diminishing the entire tale. I'd like to read more about this story from an impartial, skilled writer, someone who takes time to explain the cultural conditions in Morocco and explains her father's crimes and interviews the entire family to present a more nuanced, complete version of a remarkable situation.
