After having read Into Thin Air by Jon Krakauer, I had an impression of this particular Everest expedition that, as I have found out, is completely erroneous. Mr. Krakauer unjustly and inexcusably defamed Anatoli Boukreev by painting a false picture of an event that took the lives of five individuals and left many others ravaged and haunted. This book, The Climb, presents information as gathered by the Everest team itself and Mr. Boukreev’s account of this expedition. Not only was Anatoli Boukreev unjustly accused of wrongdoing, he was shockingly unheralded for his heroic efforts immediately following the disaster. At a time when no one else was able or willing to rescue stranded and freezing climbers, Anatoli Boukreev summoned what little strength he had left to search through a blinding and devastating storm for his fellow mountaineers. Without his aid, there would have been many more than five deaths on Everest that day. Despite Krakauer’s efforts to convince readers otherwise, Anatoli Boukreev remains one of the most respected climbers in mountaineering history and ultimately received the David A. Sowles Memorial Award for his efforts; the highest honor awarded by the American Alpine Club. He remained, until his death in 1997, incredibly humble regarding his fantastic achievements and stoically respectful of the mountains he lived (and died) in. This book was incredible. Well written, honest, and enthralling. Boukreev bravely explains the occurrences of the difficult expedition and thoroughly incorporated the events as recounted by his fellow climbers. As a response to Jon Krakauer’s poor evaluation and publication of the event, Boukreev and DeWalt paint an objective and detailed portrait of what really happened that day. While detailing the expedition, Boukreev and DeWalt also examine many of the recent developments in commercial expeditions. The business is booming and, unfortunately, that has meant many climbers attempting Everest (and other harrowing peaks) with less-than-minimal experience and questionable motives. Boukreev speaks to the consequences of these developments and dives into more philosophical questions regarding high altitude mountaineering and the concept of “purchasing” a summit. For me, this book ultimately brought honesty and closure to a highly publicized and scrutinized expedition on Everest. While Boukreev had over twenty years of high-altitude training and experience including previous Everest summits, Jon Krakauer was simply a disgruntled writer with minimal qualifications to climb a dangerous peak. Krakauer will forever be questioned in my mind as an honest and impartial journalist. Boukreev, however, has my deepest respect.
