This collection of, yes, haunting and grotesque tales finds the author in a dark, ironic, frequently unkind mood. Which is just another Tuesday for Joyce Carol Oates. As always, her mastery of the art is on full display. I always find it a treat when a writer decides to match their prose to their protagonist's state of mind. And so Haunted features often mannered writing styles that are repressed and introspective ("Haunted"), desperately chatty ("The Bingo Master"), or that feel like a vindictive chant ("Blind"). The most stylized story of all - the hypnotic, horribly bleak "Extenuating Circumstances" - starts each of its sentences with the word Because. Other stories provokingly upend various traditions in narrative structure and story resolution. But Oates is not only an experimentalist; she also has a sure hand when it comes to more formal, classic prose, as deployed in perhaps the three most easily digestible stories: "The Model" and "The White Cat" and "Premonition". No matter the style she adopts, the concerns and themes that shape the author's stories remain consistent: strong, vital but also frustrated and often cornered women who may not know exactly what they want but they know they need something different; men as unknowable ogres or men as professors, often living life in a higher realm of thought, of stars - or at least in the higher realms of their heads; faculty life in general, and as microcosm to and analogy for middle to upper class life; and perhaps above all in this collection, aging and losing innocence and what growing old means. ☠ "Haunted": Backwoods girls. Exploring abandoned houses. A severe punishment. A murder. An old woman, haunted. "The Doll": Dollhouse, realhouse. Panic attack. Private self, public self. She is a living doll. "The Bingo Master": Her life lived like a story she tells. On the prowl, at the bingo house. The poor spinster virgin. "The White Cat": A dignified older man. A kind but less than loving younger wife. A smug cat that refuses to be killed. "The Model": "Where have we come from, and where are we going?" "Extenuating Circumstances": Why did the child have to die? BECAUSE BECAUSE BECAUSE "Don't You Trust me?": An abortion. A lack of trust. "The Guilty Party": The 2-year-old has named himself Jocko. He is the bullying new man in his mother's life. He has orders for her: daddy must die. "The Premonition": The family makes Xmas gifts with dad. "Phase Change": Groundhog Day or Sliding Doors or maybe Inception, plus rape. "Poor Bibbi": Poor Bibbi must be put down, the poor old thing. But what is Poor Bibbi? "Thanksgiving": We must help Mom. But the supermarket is trashed, its food spoiled and decayed. Nevertheless, the shopping must be done. "Blind": It was a dark and stormy night. It was a bitter and spiteful old woman. It was a lonely and loveless marriage. It was a terrible and welcome blindness. "The Radio Astronomer": Senescence, alas. "Accursed Inhabitants of the House of Bly": Pity the loving Jessel; pity the virile Quint. Love is not fleeting, it shall return and it shall claim what it owns. A new ghost comes to life. "Martyrdom": Rats are born. A human is born, and enslaved. Rat boy meets human girl. Fear, pain, blood, torture. ☠ These stories were all technically admirable but many left me cold. Worst of all, the execrable "Martyrdom" which tries to instruct its readers on how life lived as animal or human prey feels, but only succeeds in being the written equivalent of child/animal torture porn. This is the most repulsive short story I've read in the past decade or two. UGH! But there were a number of stories that I enjoyed. "The Model" is about a young lady with a mysterious but tragic background taking up a wealthy gentleman on his offer to pay her for some modeling in the park. It is a marvel of unnerving ambiguity and slowly increasing tension. "Extenuating Circumstances" left me rather breathless as its abandoned, mentally ill narrator counts off the ways despair and wrath led to her murdering her child. The demented "Guilty Party" is wonderfully surreal and viciously funny. Never trust a 2-year-old to give you good advice, really. The bizarre rape fantasia of "Phase Change" has its gentle, bougie wife being raped by various fantasy figures: a swarthy cop, a group of black men, her gynecologist. Very uncomfortable but also darkly amusing. Not sure whose side Oates was on in that story. Not even sure what it all meant! My favorites were "Accursed Inhabitants of the House of Bly", which retells "Turn of the Screw" from the perspective of the mournful, vengeful ghosts, and above all the tense and satisfying "The Premonition". This tale has a younger brother feeling a distinct sense of foreboding and so visiting his older brother - a wealthy, abusive alcoholic - only to find his dreadful brother missing and his sister-in-law and her daughters surprisingly merry as they finish cleaning up the kitchen, putting away various tools, wrapping up the Christmas gifts they'll be mailing out to the relatives who ignored their abusive situation, right before they leave on an unexpected vacation. Hmm, I wonder what's in those packages? Perhaps it is bloody schadenfreude! Don't reveal that spoiler if you plan on reading the story!
