Three Men in a Boat is a completely and absolutely delightful waste of time. I must have bookmarked at least twenty hilarious passages to go back and read again for a last chuckle before returning to the library (I may subject you to some of them if the mood hits me before I wind this up). I listened and then read so I could enjoy the nonsense dialogue (both verbal and literary) a second time. Published in 1889 this book is in the Public Domain and available for free download from the Gutenberg Project and probably elsewhere. It is also available on Kindle Unlimited. There are several audio versions, probably all good, but I chose the narration by Hugh Laurie and the delivery was perfect! The (very lean) plot: Three idle young men (Jerome, George, and Harrison), who seemingly have nothing better to do with their time than to ramble reflectively for hours regarding their hypochondriasis ailments and on every other moronic thought that pops into their heads, decided that although a sea voyage might benefit their health. They did not have the time to do so - but, they mused, wouldn’t it be lovely to book a boat and take a fortnight boat-ride holiday of canals and locks on the river Thames? Although this does sound sublime, these three young swells and their dog Montmorency, are not taking a barge cruise but rather more like a camping trip along the Thames and since they are adept at absolutely nothing but sloth they are in for surprising adventures (surprising to them but not to the reader). The plot here is nothing more than a vehicle for the comical ruminations of Jerome. Before setting out, the three of them carefully planned – down to the last detail – what they needed to prepare for their trip. If this was today, it would probably read like one of my camping trip lists starting with the essentials: electronics and chargers, blow-up mattress and snuggly bedclothes, wet-wipes, tissues, toilet paper, Tupperware laden food supply, plastic dinner service (shame on me), wine, flashlights, and at least half a dozen family card games. But since it was 1889 the prep and carriage was a lot more cumbersome and there are a few hilarious descriptions of their packing. “…chaos reigned… and then there remained the hampers to do. They began in a light-hearted spirit, and I looked at the piles of plates and cups, and kettles, and bottles and jars, and pies, and stoves, and cakes, and tomatoes, &c., and felt that the thing would soon become exciting.It did. They started with breaking a cup. That was the first thing they did. They did that just to show you what they could do, and to get you interested. Then Harris packed the strawberry jam on top of a tomato and squashed it, and they had to pick out the tomato with a teaspoon. And then it was George’s turn, and he trod on the butter…and they stepped on things, and put things behind them, and then couldn’t find them when they wanted them; and they packed the pies at the bottom, and put heavy things on top, and smashed the pies in. They upset salt over everything, and as for the butter! I never saw two men do more with one-and-twopence worth of butter in my whole life than they did (they obviously never watched Last Tango in Paris) . After George had got it off his slipper, they tried to put it in the kettle. It wouldn’t go in, and what was in wouldn’t come out. They did scrape it out at last, and put it down on a chair, and Harris sat on it, and it stuck to him, and they went looking for it all over the room.” Of course, they forgot to pack a can opener and there is also a funny passage describing their attempts to get at the pineapple inside a tin. (Okay, I can't resist, i'm still chuckling so I'm adding the scene below:) "It cast a gloom over the boat, there being no mustard. We ate our beef in silence. Existence seemed hollow and uninteresting…. George drew out a tin of pine-apple from the bottom of the hamper, and rolled it into the middle of the boat, we felt that life was worth living after all…Then we looked for the knife to open the tin with. We turned out everything in the hamper. We turned out the bags. We pulled up the boards at the bottom of the boat. We took everything out on to the bank and shook it. There was no tin-opener to be found...Then Harris tried to open the tin with a pocket-knife, and broke the knife and cut himself badly; and George tried a pair of scissors, and the scissors flew up, and nearly put his eye out. While they were dressing their wounds, I tried to make a hole in the thing with the spiky end of the hitcher, and the hitcher slipped and jerked me out between the boat and the bank into two feet of muddy water, and the tin rolled over, uninjured, and broke a teacup….Harris went up into a field and got a big sharp stone, and I went back into the boat and brought out the mast, and George held the tin and Harris held the sharp end of his stone against the top of it…It was George’s straw hat that saved his life that day…Harris got off with merely a flesh wound…We beat it out flat; we beat it back square; we battered it into every form known to geometry—but we could not make a hole in it. Then George went at it, and knocked it into a shape, so strange, so weird, so unearthly in its wild hideousness, that he got frightened and threw away the mast. Then we all three sat round it on the grass and looked at it." They had a tarp cover of sorts and frame to protect them from the rain (and there was plenty of it)…their struggle to construct the covering had me giggling (too bad they couldn’t hop over to the convenience store at the gas station near my house – they could have bought a tent that pops open to a three room villa for $20)! On their sightseeing tour they were lost in a maze for a few hours with about twenty other people who were lost inside including the staff member who came in to help them find their way out. One night, after mooring the boat and heading into the town for a pub, on the way back, it was raining so hard they decided to spend the night in town but there were no rooms to be let. They considered punching a policeman but then they mused that the policemen might just punch them back instead of hauling them in to spend the night in jail. By the end of he story Jerome was pooped…he felt he had been put upon and that the others should share in the work (his rationale): “I said I thought Harris would have been showing a more proper spirit if he had suggested that he and George should work, and let me rest a bit. It seemed to me that I was doing more than my fair share of the work on this trip, and I was beginning to feel strongly on the subject. It always does seem to me that I am doing more work than I should do. It is not that I object to the work, mind you; I like work: it fascinates me. I can sit and look at it for hours. I love to keep it by me: the idea of getting rid of it nearly breaks my heart. You cannot give me too much work; to accumulate work has almost become a passion with me: my study is so full of it now, that there is hardly an inch of room for anymore. I shall have to throw out a wing soon. And I am careful of my work, too. Why, some of the work that I have by me now has been in my possession for years and years, and there isn’t a finger-mark on it. I take a great pride in my work; I take it down now and then and dust it. No man keeps his work in a better state of preservation than I do….” To be honest, I had never heard of Jerome K. Jerome, before reading a review of this book by GR Friend Peter. I was sure it must be a pen-name for Oscar Wilde, because it was Wilde who popped into my head as soon as the humorous rambling began. Jerome K. Jerome was in fact a writer of the same period and may have traveled the same literary circles, but they do not appear to have been friends. I read a little blurb on the internet suggesting that it might even have been Jerome who outed Wilde in one of the former’s publications, but the latter was hardly discreet.
