A few months ago, I was talking to a friend of mine about diversity in media, specifically queer characters, or the lack thereof, while I was a teenager and how I wished I would've seen someone like me, trans and queer, so I would've felt less alone. She remembered reading this book as a teenager and offered to lend it to me. I was super excited to read it but then life happened yadayadayada, I only picked it up now and oof. Y'know,,,, maybe me not seeing (out) queer people in media was a blessing in disguise. I disliked this so much. The only reason this got two stars instead of one is that I'm hoping that some day in the future I'll remember something positive about this. I just,,,, oof. First of all, the problematic things that made me insanely uncomfortable, starting with the casual pedophilia. Listen,,, I'm all for addressing difficult topics in books, BUT when writing YA the author imo has the responsibility to handle these topics delicately and seriously. Writing the woman who molested an 8y.o. boy as a mentally disabled old lady and trying to make the reader pity her and sympathise with her, is not only incredibly ableist, but also all kinds of fucked up. The way this is just a throwaway flashback and treated as "I learned how to make myself feel good from her" is disgusting and I wanted the book to be over right then and there. And later in the book, his uncle takes the protagonist to a child prostitute???? I'm... No. Fuck this. And we can't forget the racism and homophobia of course. Fun times. Now,,, even if all the problematic shit wasn't there, I still wouldn't have enjoyed myself. The protagonist was insufferable, I couldn't stand being in his head. The way he treated his sister was just,,, urgh. And then he wonders why she's isolating herself like sir, you're probably the most disloyal piece of shit brother I've ever encountered, I wouldn't tell you shit either??? Weirdo. Also, another thing. What's with adults being obsessed with talking inappropriately to minors about sex and sexuality?? I'm so tired of seeing this used for cheap laughs in entertainment. And that's not just this book doing it, but media in general and I'm tired. I am so fucking tired of people writing dialogue in which adults talk to minors about sex in such a crass and weird manner, what's with that?? If an underaged person comes to you because they trust you and talks about his feelings for someone after sleeping with them for the first time and you turn this convo around and talk about fucking in public and all that shit like,,, what the actual fuck is wrong with you?? And I know none of y'all would do that irl so what's the obsession with putting shit like that in coming of age stories? One day y'all will figure out how to talk to minors about sex without sexualizing them in the process and that's going to be the day my soul finally finds peace. So,,, in conclusion,,, I'm mad. Y'know what? No, I am going to give this one star. Sorry aboot it.
