Frida: A Biography of Frida Kahlo was a magnificent and well-researched biography of a Mexican artist that I have been fascinated with over the years. Married to Diego Rivera, an avowed Communist, she was very involved with Mexican politics, the likes of Trotsky very important in her life. What made this book so enticing was not only the world stage upon which Frida Kahlo lived as we witnessed the history of the upheaval in Mexico, the Spanish Civil War and World War II, but the beautiful color plates and figures throughout the book as the author points out the period of time of these images and their significance. It was a total immersion into another time in history with an iconic Mexican artist. "The story of Frida Kahlo begins and ends in the same place. From the outside, the house on the corner of Londres and Allende streets looks very like other houses in Coyoacan, an old residential section on the southwestern periphery of Mexico City. A one-story stucco structure with bright blue walls enlivened by the restless shadows of trees, it bears the name Museo Frida Kahlo over the portal. Inside is one of the most extraordinary places in Mexico--a woman's home with all her paintings and belongings, turned into a museum." it was also fascinating to read about the Detroit Industry Murals commissioned to have Diego Rivera paint fresco panels depicting laborers working at the Ford Motor Company. Frida Kahlo was often there. This was not the only time the Riveras were in the United States as they also spent a lot of time over the years in San Francisco and New York City with Rivera's large installations. It is also during this time that Frida Kahlo is crossing new boundaries in her art as she is embraced by the Surrealism movement with her show in Paris. In spite of health and marital problems, Frida Kahlo seemed to drive her art to new heights. As I said, Hayden Herrera deserves praise for her impeccable research into the art of Frida Kahlo and the timeline affecting what would lead to this artistic expression. The beautiful color plates of Frida Kahlo's art make the book a treasure. "Years after Frida and Diego died, friends remembered them as 'sacred monsters.' Their escapades and eccentricities were beyond the petty censurings of ordinary morality; not simply condoned, they were treasured and mythologized. As for being 'monsters,' the Riveras could harbor Trotsky, paint paeans to Stalin, build pagan temples, wave pistols, boast of eating human flesh, and carry on in their marriage with the vast imperiousness of Olympian deities. By the 1940s, Diego, of course, was an ancient myth. Frida, on the other hand, was new to mythic stature, and during this decade their myths meshed."
