I am a huge fan of Woody Allen and “Annie Hall” is my favourite rom-com movie ever (probably ex-aequo with Todd Solondz' "Happiness"). The script is brilliant because it embraces Allen's central themes: New York; Fear of death; Existentialism; Trust; Love and Pessimism.. Actually it is more than a comic flick about a quirky romantic relationship. Even if it was considered to be the greatest comedy film of all time ( https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010... ), the film was actually subtitled as "a nervous romance", or as Susan Benson has put it: Annie Hall is one of the truest, most bittersweet romances on film. (I recommend her synopsis of the film http://www.quotes.net/movies/443 ) The film is actually both funny and sad at the same time: while watching it (or eventually, reading its screenplay) you'll laugh at the numerous witty expressions and awkward conversations, but "there is also a great deal of hurt within the film" ( Tim Radford , in a review published by The Guardian when the movie was released https://www.google.com.lb/amp/s/amp.t... ) and once it ends it leaves you in a morose mood. Furthermore, the movie was originally to be entitled Anhedonia , that is, “the clinical inability to experience happiness”, according to WA in one of his conversations with Bukckman who wrote his biography titled Woody Allen On Woody Allen . However, Woody changed it for he feared that it would be labeled as intellectual and that most people would think it’s a european movie. The movie starts with a scene where Alvy Singer (Woody Allen) recites an opening monologue to tell the story of the failure of his relationship with Annie Hall: ALVY: There's an old joke. Uh, two elderly women are at a Catskills mountain resort, and one of 'em says: "Boy, the food at this place is really terrible." The other one says, "Yeah, I know, and such... small portions." Well, that's essentially how I feel about life. Full of loneliness and misery and suffering and unhappiness, and it's all over much too quickly. The-the other important joke for me is one that's, uh, usually attributed to Groucho Marx, but I think it appears originally in Freud's wit and its relation to the unconscious. And it goes like this-I'm paraphrasing: Uh.. "I would never wanna belong to any club that would have someone like me for a member." That's the key joke of my adult life in terms of my relationships with women. Tsch, you know, lately the strangest things have been going through my mind, 'cause I turned forty, tsch, and I guess I'm going through a life crisis or something, I don't know. I, uh... and I'm not worried about aging. I'm not one o' those characters, you know. Although I'm balding slightly on top, that's about the worst you can say about me. I, uh, I think I'm gonna get better as I get older, you know? I think I'm gonna be the balding virile type, you know, as opposed to say the, uh, distinguished gray, for instance, you know? 'Less I'm neither o' those two. Unless I'm one o' those guys with saliva dribbling out of his mouth who wanders into a cafeteria with a shopping bag screaming about socialism. (Sighing) Annie and I broke up and I-I still can't get my mind around that. You know, I-I keep sifting the pieces of the relationship through my mind and-and examining my life and tryin' to figure out where did the screw-up come, you know, and a year ago we were... tsch, in love. You know, and-and-and... And it's funny, I'm not-I'm not a morose type. I'm not a depressive character. I-I-I, UH, (Laughing) you know, I was a reasonably happy kid, I guess. I was brought up in Brooklyn during World War II. * To watch the scene: https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=5h5zurZ... I would quote all the script .. as Roger Ebert wrote in the introduction of his review: "Annie Hall" contains more intellectual wit and cultural references than any other movie ever" . (I think it was his favourite Woody Allen movie, besides "Crimes & Misdemeanors" and "Hannah & her Sisters" which he also rated with 4/4.. He was however really harsh when reviewing his recent films). Most of these cultural references mentionned by Ebert could be found in a list made by Peter Cowie in his book Annie Hall . https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/5... Here are some quotes among my many other favorites: ~“I was thrown out of college for cheating on the metaphysics exam; I looked into the soul of the boy sitting next to me.” ~"Sex with you is really a Kafkaesque experience." ~"I can't get with any religion that advertises in Popular Mechanics" ~"Hey, Harvard makes mistakes too, Kissinger taught there!" ~"I was depressed at that time. I was in analysis. I was suicidal as a matter of fact and would have killed myself, but I was in analysis with a strict Freudian, and, if you kill yourself, they make you pay for the sessions you miss."
