The family – mother, daughter and son – sit at the dinner table waiting for the father to join them in sharing a mussel feast. While they are waiting – the father is expected any minute with good news on his promotion – their chatting moves from a casual exchange on the day to something more sensitive, personal to the daughter of the house. Is it a coincidence that that particular evening the atmosphere is different, the the narrator wonders, is it an omen of things to come? "Yes, it was slightly unusual, and afterwards we sometimes spoke of the mussels as a sign, but they definitely weren't; [… ]After the event, of course, we tried to interpret our decision…" From the novella's first sentences, Birgit Vanderbeke draws the reader into a kind of mystery, into a strange atmosphere at the dinner table that turns into something increasingly ominous... Told from the perspective of the daughter, the narrative changes in tone as the evening progresses and Mum in particular grows more and more concerned about her husband's absence. The children appear to be enjoying the short period of freedom, the time without the father's strict control over the evening's event. They don't really like eating mussels, neither does the mother... Vanderbeke takes the concept of monologue in this story to a different level of complexity as she blends the daughter's feelings and her memories of less than enjoyable encounters with the father with recounting what takes place at the dinner table and the comments and dialog taking place. Initially, the three keep up polite appearances and are careful with the way they express their thoughts, in case Father comes in and overhears their conversation and [...] "Mum is still in her wifey mode." But, as time passes, each of them relaxes into a new level of confidence sharing about their life and in particular their father's behaviour towards the young people and the mother. Slowly but surely, the author - through the daughter's voice - unravels not only the parents' background and the children's life so far. In doing so, she fundamentally challenges the father's dogmatic concept of "the normal family", his constant critique of the children and his wife. Like a piece of knitting, held together by uneven stitches, it can unravel from the seams once you start. Vanderbeke does so with sensitivity and great skill in terms of pacing the back stories with the revelations about the interrelationships within the family. At times, especially in the earlier parts, lighthearted, yet astute observations and a sense of irony enliven the daughter's musings. Still, the underlying concerns are never lost. In contrast to his behaviour at home, where the father constantly criticizes the children and his wife for not being "up to his level", stands his professional life or at least what the daughter can glean about it: : success, generosity and joviality. The reader is constantly compelled to ask: Where can mother and children go from this moment in time? What will they say to the father? How to approach the future in a different way? A thought provoking read at numerous levels. There are aspects that hint at a specific period in time in Germany: 1989 – the time of the spontaneous demonstrations, often started by small groups of people, spreading across East Germany, eventually contributing in a major way to the Fall of the Berlin Wall. Families were still confined within the established authority structures yet these were breaking down. In this sense one can see in Vanderbeke's novella of one family a representation of impending dramatic change. Personally I can also shift the story back in time by several decades to my own youth when scenarios similar to the one depicted here were not uncommon: the uneasy relationships within and between generations as well as the loss of trust of traditional role models and authority patterns in the post-war period. At the broader level, of course, the story can be taken as reflecting universal questions on family values, role models and generational change. Das Mussel Fest was Vanderbeke's debut fiction work, which immediately won her the prestigious Ingeborg Bachmann Prize in 1990. Despite having published numerous books to some acclaim and awards, this is the first that has been translated into English. In translation The Mussel Feast was shortlisted for the International Foreign Fiction Prize 2014.
