Worse than actual events was the fact that not even the horror itself could surprise one now. Nothing new under this sun, only the end, as long as it lasts. And the certainty: that it had to come. Politics is the first we learn of other countries and the last about our own. Proceed with caution. Abandon hope, all ye who enter here. Here, there be monsters. We can display the lines along the filled up maps all we like, but there's a history of interlocking hegemonies to be resolved, some of them sensationalized in the profound and the profane, some of them a matter of dentistry. One day, in your own personal bildungsroman and/or künstlerroman or whatever flavor of prelife crisis your existence happens to consist of, you'll reach into your mouth and pluck out all your teeth, raisins in a muffin what with all the accompanying vein and tissue, and thread through the shining bridle of Adulthood. Or Marriage. Or Political Awareness. Whatever you succeed in grasping that you believe to be the Goal you were looking for. Whatever it is that'll fail you in the long run. This terrible gratitude for the lack of opportunity isn’t something to be forgotten. I'm not trying to heap contextual intrigue onto this. The back of the book does that well enough. What I'm trying to do is reconcile the facts of the work with my implicit recognition, this super subtle heap of prose banned by East Germany before the fall of the Berlin Wall and the number of times I caught myself reading my self. One is not supposed to do that with conspiratorial political works, yeah? One of my particular US breed is supposed to go off into Capitalism Times or Frontierland or even the popularly derided target of New Adult and find satisfaction. Not kin. Not blood with all its sickness and wealth. Satisfaction. Shouldn’t any time be an equally good or bad time for the attempt to search for yourself, inside and outside? It may be that I spend too much time with the writers who've been killed and mutilated and excised on the grounds of difference to be able to see East Germany as this dramatic beast of Other that cannot possibly correlate to any of the lines of my contemporary living. Sure, none of that atrocity to our eye actually happens to Christa T., least from what observation of both self and other is willing to tell. Sure, she's got a hell of a standard of living above the majority of those writers to whom I refer, aligning well enough with my own white/cis/het/middle class/socioeconomically endowed enough to acquire literary interest that it's no wonder I latch onto it comfortably enough. Sure, it's all fun and games and White People Diseases, the mental segueing nicely into the Sontag when neurosis sets back to second place in the wake of leukemia, and the fact that the domestic reality was even achievable means one is physically situated well enough to let the political climate wash on over. For all that, there are writers who write to fill that need and writers who write to make it bleed. The past is a foreign country, but it'll still kill you if you step out of line. ...how, if at all, and under what circumstances, can one realize oneself in a work of art. The thing about post-WWII German female coming of age political/domestic treatises reconstructed on bits and pieces of the dead's legacy and wrapped up in metaphors in order survive the censors and the spies is you get a lot of what you're trained to recognize and much more of what you're trained to ignore. An involuntary image near the end of reading of a classroom going over the nomenclature of Christa T. and Justus in order to get the main "point" of the work made me sick, cause fuck literary sterilization and all that eagerness to let in the quality into the institution so long as it behaves. Take something complicatedly essential enough that it survives the political reality long enough to be published and you can force any sort of meaning onto it. Of course I'm doing the same thing, of course you can't trust the words of something who's going full speed ahead into an English doctorate so as to be able to eat and have a roof over her head, but I haven't been locked in yet. I also haven't achieved that stability of Christa T's later years that I craved at points to the edge of pain, so what does that say about my particular human condition? He has trained himself to want only as much as he can reach by using all his powers. Otherwise he wouldn’t be alive today, or he wouldn’t be sitting here. I know I've apologized for not actually talking about the book much in a couple of previous reviews, but if I started being consistent now I'd never get anything done. All I can say that this rips out enough of a chunk of reality to show the holistic enterprise between banal survival and the horror of our lives, lined a bit with poetry and prose and limned a smidge with the theoretical academia of future existence (what's your flavor of Ethical Living cause no can do under Late Capitalism) transitioning over to practicality of death and taxes and censorship (an open mind's a considerate thing but much maligned Communism still has its human sacrifice) so fast, so slow, so incomplete and deadening, survival's the only word for it. Leukemia may have been a mercy killing, outliving the political agenda may have far more thoroughly saved her soul, but here I am nigh fifty years into the future and I can't tell you shit. That’s my reason for talking about it: bitterness as the fruit of passion. Is that phrase old? Will it seem surprising? Funny? Old-fashioned? Will anyone consider relating it to a hospital corridor, lecture rooms, to work parties moving over the wreckage of cities, violent discussions, conversations, speeches, books? Or will people keep trying to make us believe that passion has everlastingly had to do with the officer with a mania for honor who dies in a duel, or with the rise and fall of monarchs and leaders. The hilarious part about all this is I could probably squeeze a paper out of this that'd get me some impressive references and a few nods at the university table. Do I care? I don't know. It puts food on the table. She was for clarity and consciousness; but she didn't think, as many people do, that it takes no more than a little courage, no more than the surfaces of events which are easily called truth, no more than a little chatter about "getting on fine, thank you." Every so often you come across a book and you go, "What the fuck, fate. I didn't ask for this." And fate says, "Too fucking bad." To become oneself, with all one’s strength. Difficult. A bomb, a speech, a rifle shot—and the world can look a different place. And then where is this “self”?
