My book club refers to it as Paris Hilton goes to Marrakesh.... the ghost writer APOLOGIZES in the preface (to save her career?). It's not badly written. Its just so full of holes. Oufkir grows up with SLAVES- yes- slaves- in the 21st century.. people that are owned by her family. Guess who doesn’t service her Every whim in “Jail”. So be prepared for some outlandishly entitled perspectives defining "life stolen" or "jail." Worse, she lies through her teeth. The contradictions are constant and blatant. She complains all nine family member are locked in two rooms with no electricity. But there is a refrigerator (electric?) which is in the kitchen, next to the livingroom (where they put on stage productions to entertain themselves), down the hall from the two bedrooms that are really just "tiny alcoves" each large enough for nine straw mattresses to lay on the ground, and they choose to all sleep together in one. How small could these rooms be? Tiny alcoves that are big enough to sleep nine, by choice? I live in NY and my bedroom is huge to me, but you couldnt stand 9 people in it. There is another small room at the end of the hall that holds their 20-something Louis Vuitton suitcases full of Gucci suits- she makes a point of this... So is it two rooms as she complains? or the six she describes? They are imprisoned, barely fed. The next page she talks about how they are taken to the local village for two hours EVERY DAY where the local ladies bake them delicious pies from costly ingredients to celebrate their celebrity arrival; as is her due. So, what, she only gets one gourmet meal a day where she can pick and choose from the best an entire village can create to impress her? There is no medical care available- only aspirin. In the next breath she talks about the consitant delivery of prescription drugs for her sister's epilepsy. This is a first person story that by the most inane, self-centered spoiled woman who has ever considered the undertaking. The first half of the book could have been wonderful with insight into culture and life inside the palace, but instead it is one egotistical vacuous tale after another re: her beauty, wit and charm. Everyone thought I was wonderful when I, and wasn't I cute and cheeky when I.... the king liked me better than his own daughter "becasue I was more beautiful"... You get no cultural background when she is in the palace, and no political background about the coup. She's overwhelmingly melodramatic- she talks of two suicide "attempts". One where she cuts her finger and rubs dirt in the wound so it will become infected and kill her (before the family is jailed, while she lives in a palace with its own hospital and nannies and teachers and governesses who mind her- and get this- SLAVES-yes, slaves, while she bitches about her years in jail). You figure it is a child's attempt for attention until in the next paragraph she takes the time to assert to us these were serious attempts to take her own life- despite half a dozen people who's job it is to monitor her! This book is one more childish attempt at attention getting, just like her two "serious" suicide attempts. I hate to say it, but by the time bad things start to happen to her, I almost can't wait. I am sure it was a horrifying experience, but rather than tell what I am sure is the moving truth of this family's horrifying ordeal (quite a bit less than the slaves who served her), this books fails to mask the fact it is melodramatic hyperbole of a spoiled brat from solely her perspective where she is always the hero, the strong one, the smart one, the most beloved, the only one who can take credit for her entire family surviving because she is so beautiful and charming and clever blah blah blah. She doesn't tell you how she bolstered everyone. She just tells a tale of sorrow and ends it with "I bolstered everyone and cheered them up" There are no heartfelt conversations, no touching moment- just that she saved the day...again...and wanders off into the next story. Its gross. I refer to the book as "Paris Hilton goes to Marrakesh". I would like to find a more serious work that deals with the subject that includes some geopolitical and cultural information as well. I think that would be moving and interesting. This book is neither.
