I started book nine (out of ten) in the series with some trepidation, hoping nothing terminal will happen to Martin Beck or one of his colleagues. Beck already came pretty close to snuffing it in book 7 - "The Abominable Man . For more than half of the novel I was then baffled about the title, as the ongoing investigation was about the disappearance, possibly murder, of a divorced single woman from a small village near Malmo, and none of the Criminal Bureau members were injured or threatened. The reason for my confusion is the change of focus in the Story of Crime from catching bad guys to pointing out the social injustice that creates the conditions for crime, from the personal to the national issues. This close to the finish line, Beck and his colleagues still chase criminals, still meticulously investigate clues and interview witnesses, but they are throughly disillusioned with their jobs and their society. Maj Sjowall and Per Wahloo are as good at sketching characters and providing realistic dialogue, but the reader is insistently directed to see the big picture, to look at the root causes and not at the external manifestations of evil. In the disappearance of the woman from Malmo, the first thing that strikes Beck and Kollberg is how much better it is to live in a small rural area than in Stockholm. The second is about how easy it is to jump to conclusions under pressure from the scandal sheets and from impatient superiors worried about their reputation. Since the neighbor of the missing woman is none other than the murderer of Roseanna from the first book in the series (released after a dodgy psychiatric investigation), everyone is convinced of his guilt and cries for his arrest in the absence of any hard evidence. Only Beck's and Kollberg's integrity keep the investigation going. The theme of prejudice and misconceptions is reiterated with another returning character, the killer from book two - "The Man Who Went Up in Smoke" - who is also released, and now works as an investigative reporter under an assumed name. The cherry on the cake of rushing to judgement comes in the second half of the novel, as a separate incident that should have resulted in a quiet arrest on a night road, ends instead with three corpses - two policemen and one robber. The second robber is the subject of a nationwide manhunt. The previous book - "The Locked Room" - used a similar plot device of solving one case accidentally by mixing it with a totally unrelated second case. I was curious how Sjowall and Wahloo will link the investigations this time around and I was not disappointed : a lot of luck and a touch of alertness and attention to details, a healthy dose of common sense and courage. Coming back to the issue of the cop killer that takes over the second part of the novel, my first observation is how close the details of the case reflect the debate at the end of 2014 about suspects dying when resisting arrest: He also knew he was being pictured as some sort of public enemy number one. A cop killer, pure and simple. A person who had to be put out of action by any and all means. --- They've got in the States, believe you me. Just let a policeman shoot somebody, and it's always "justifiable homicide". Legitimate murder, or whatever we'd call it in Swedish. It happens every day. The second observation is a reiteration of the role of the press in feeding mass hysteria while blissfully ignoring the absence of real information about the case, a knee-jerking reaction that is often translated in shooting at shadows and collateral casualties. The whole debacle of the chase for the cop killer may be the funniest sequence in the whole series (sending the reader elegantly back to the mental state at the end of "The Laughing Policeman"), if it wasn't for the bitter awareness that such cases still crop out every year, in every part of the globe: Martin Beck and Kollberg both knew that being a policeman wasn't especially dangerous, even if the higher echelons and a lot of individual policemen did like to overdramatize their profession. Yet this novel was published in 1974, not in 2014! Visionary or simply observant? The authors are at their best as they deploy their blackest shade of humor and sarcastic dialogue to portray police incompetence, starting with the patrolman on the street and going up to the top of the piramid, to Superintendent Malm, who dreams himself the general of an army and assembles a crack team of special operations forces to catch of a single petty criminal. Unlike in the early books of the series, the duo of left-leaning writers are quick to apportion blame and to point out how the individual cases are only symptoms of a widespread disease, of a whole society self-destructingn through greed and incompetence. It gets too much for Kollberg, who hands in his resignation in the form of an angry manifesto against the militarization of the police force and the corruption of its mission to serve and protect: Nevertheless, the crime rate continued to climb, and violence steadily increased. There seemed to be no one within the police administration capable of grasping the simple truth that violence breeds violence and that, in fact, it was the police who had struck the first blow. In conclusion, the ninth book in the Story of Crime has an interesting mystery surrounding a missing person and a too likely suspect, but the actual procedural is pushed somehow in the background as the spotlight is put on larger political and social issues. An added bonus is the tying up of the story from single episodes into a coherent big canvas, bringing back characters and situations from all the earlier installments and putting them in context. Wahloo and Sjowall are still impressive in their narrative skills, and I am real sorry there is only one more book to read.
