WOW JUST WOW!!!! Where The Heart Is written by Billie Letts was earth shattering amazing!!! Billie Letts has a way of connecting her readers with the story, but let me just say, this story definitely doesn't disappoint. This book was so moving, gut wrenching, but also filled with humorous moments. I was hooked from the very first page, and I couldn't put it down until I knew what the outcome of the story was going to be. Unfortunately, I didn't know Billie Letts passed away until I finished the first book I read by this author, so very sad. I loved all of the characters. This story will make you cry and laugh all throughout the book. I apologize to anyone who reads my sappy reviews. Where The Heart Is was so touching, it hits the core of your heart is so many ways. I will continue to read other books by this author because she just writes amazing and moving stories. In Where The Heart Is we follow the journey of Novalee Nation with her pregnancy and after she gives birth. Novalee has always been unlucky with sevens. She's seventeen years old, seven months pregnant, thirty seven pounds overweight, and now Novalee finds herself stranded at a Wal-Mart in Sequoyah, Oklahoma, with just $7.77 in change. Novalee was on her way to Bakersfield, California from Tennessee with her rude and ignorant boyfriend, Willy Jack Pickens. Novalee and Willy Jack were traveling in a beat up car with a hole in the middle of the floor, Novalee fell asleep, and when she woke up she realized her only pair of shoes fell out of the car. Novalee doesn't want to say anything to Willy Jack because she knows he'll throw a fit. Novalee sees a Wal-Mart and tells Willy Jack she needs to stop for a pair of shoes. Willy Jack gives Novalee $10, but when she comes back out Willy Jack is gone. Novalee has no where to stay, so she lives inside this Wal-Mart when the employees leave. While Novalee stays at Wal-Mart she meets so many deeply caring people, among them we have, blue haired Sister Thelma Husband who hands out advice and photocopied books of the Bible. Next we have Moses Whitecotton, who is a wise, soft spoken photographer. Moses learns that Novalee is pregnant and she doesn't have a name picked out for her baby yet, Moses tells Novalee to name her baby something that will always be remembered. Next we have Forney Hull, who is the town librarian who also hides his own secrets. When Novalee and Forney first meet at the library their first connection starts off on the wrong foot, Forney is so sour towards Novalee. Novalee gives birth to her beautiful baby girl, who she named Americus in Wal-Mart. As Novalee is in the hospital recovering, the owner of Wal-Mart comes to the hospital and offers Novalee a job at the Wal-Mart she was staying at. After Novalee has her baby and she's ready to be discharged from the hospital, Sister Husband comes and takes Novalee to live with her. Sister Husband was such a sweet and caring soul who decided to take Novalee and Americus under her wing and cares for them. Novalee knows she has a long road ahead of her after being known as the girl who gave birth inside of a Wal-Mart, but she's so ready to tackle what she needs to do. Novalee forms a friendship with the nurse at the hospital who brought her breakfast one morning, Lexie Coop. Lexie is a single mom of five children. Lexie and Novalee have a strong connection with each other. I loved reading about these characters and their journey with each other. Where The Heart Is will definitely be one of those books that I will never forget. Just do yourself a favor and pick up this book because you will love it!!!! Show more
