I had somehow gotten it into my head that this was a cyberpunk anthology; it is not. Although it has some stories with some cyberpunk-ish elements, it is exactly what it says on the tin: "new tastes" -- in other words, Japanese stories from the 80s that felt fresh and shocking to the editor in the early 90s. Because culture doesn't move terribly fast (and because these stories do not seem to have been influential on pop culture in Japan or abroad), they still feel fresh today. With the exception of Murakami (whose story is first and, by far, weakest), I was not familiar with these authors. Their bio blurbs come after the stories, in a genius move: many of these are actually excerpts from much larger works, themselves experiments in genres that while fringe in Japan are basically completely unknown in the anglophone literary world, and so we have layers upon layers of cognitive estrangement -- thrust into the middle of a piece, in translation, commenting on unfamiliar tropes of a genre you have never heard of, with no knowledge of the author's previous works. If there were clunkers, this would be a dangerous technique, but aside from Murakami's (a slightly more surreal take on a kind of Twilight Zone thing that Pat Cadigan also riffed on), all these stories shine. The content is also interesting. We have a lesbian age gap domestic drama take on the romantic long-haul trucker toei microgenre. We have a very New Wave infused far-future gender-bending glam romantic love story. We have some very incisive satires and pastiches. To say that these are fully "new tastes" is a little bit misleading. Japanese speculative fiction lives under the shadow of Edogawa Ranpo and the "irregular detective" genre -- imagine if anglophone science fiction still considered Olaf Stapledon relevant -- and so Japanese science fiction was doing stuff that looked a lot like New Wave in the 50s, and was primed for the import of american and british New Wave in the 60s and south american magical realism later. Japanese speculative fiction has been more radical and formally experimental for longer than the anglophone world, and while these folks were at the bleeding edge, it is unfair to imply (as the editor's introduction does) that everything was I-novels and other basically medieval literary forms until suddenly a new generation popped up in 1979 and started writing sci fi. This is a country whose popular culture from 1913 to 1930 adopted for itself the term "erotic grotesque nonsense" and wore that badge happily. It is unclear how much of the literary radicalism apparent in this volume comes from poor access to high quality translations of Japanese genre literature from between 1900 and 1980 -- a problem that's still relevant (I can barely find original Ranpo in English outside his juveniles) but was much worse in the early 90s. All in all, this is a hidden gem and is worth paying new-book prices for a used copy.
