Dreams of Trespass: Tales of a Harem Girlhood is a coming of age story, set in Morocco during WWII, an account of Yasmina's attempt to decipher the cloistered world within and the greater world beyond the family home in Fez. The book almost seems a cross between an autobiography and an ethnographic study of French Colonial Morocco, just as the stirrings of an independence movement are in the air. It can't really be compared to The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank but there are certain similarities in the manner in which it portrays a young girl at the onset of maturation, held captive at about the same time as the story set in Holland but fortunately with a much brighter outcome. I read the very engaging work by Fatema Mernissi as a part of a program at my local library, via a National Library Foundation grant called "Muslim Journeys", a series of encounters that included discussions of five assigned books + lectures & films, each representing different Muslim countries. And while one has various notions of what life in a harem might entail, this tale is a warmly personal story detailing how a young girl deals with her very restrictive setting, while yearning to define her own reality in the midst of abundant social contradictions. One example of contradictory manifestations comes with the realization that Princess Aisha, the teenage daughter of Morocco's King Mohammad V, is heard to give speeches in both Arabic & French and seen wearing both long caftans & short French dresses, with this combining of two worlds, two codes, two languages, two personalities seeming far more attractive than living in just one. In fact, this ability is spellbinding, like the sliding open of magic doors, enchanting the younger children, being encouraged by many more mature Moroccan women in Yasmina's circle but viewed as an exceedingly dangerous form of "trespassing" by her father & most men. Moroccan men feel strongly that the "hudud", or boundaries, are sacred & meant to be observed as protective of Morocco's cultural identity & heritage and that if women began dressing provocatively, smoking cigarettes, running about with their hair uncovered & imitating Europeans, Moroccan culture would soon wither & disappear. However, when asked why young males went around wearing their hair like French soldiers & dressed like so many imitation Rudolf Valentino's, Yasmina's father was not able to answer that question. There are many memorable characters within the book by Fatema Mernissi, including Chama, who possesses "charm books" filled with folk wisdom and who often stages complex plays for the women on the terrace of the house but who is dictatorial & prone to depression. The occasional visits to the "hamman" (bathhouse) and the terrace of their home are the only two areas where most women in Fez can feel truly free but Yasmina's time at her much less restrictive family home in the country is also a refuge for her, a time of feeling unfettered. Throughout the book, there are countless images of flight and of developing wings and a character called Aunt Habiba, illiterate but robustly sensitive & loved by Yasmina (a stand-in for the author, Fatema), someone who while quiet, "held onto her wings, giving meaning to her life by dreaming about flight", something that encourages Yasmina. Imprisoned within the walls of the harem, the women went about dreaming of horizons without frontiers. Some women who view themselves as "modern" even embroider images of birdwings in flight, an image that is seen as very threatening for more traditional women. In the view of Aunt Habiba: When you happen to be trapped, powerless behind walls, stuck in a dead-end harem, you dream of escape. And magic happens when you spell out that dream & make the frontiers vanish. Dreams can change your life & eventually the world. Liberation starts with little images dancing in your head & you can translate those images into words & words cost nothing. The beauty of Fatema Mernissi's novel is in its inspirational message, stressing the importance of having dreams, no matter who you are & what your situation might be. This very enjoyable tale is accompanied by some very evocative black & white chapter-opening images by Ruth Ward. *I did have one area of uncertainty: having read that the author is fluent in Arabic & French, there was no mention of a translator for the English version of the book I read.
