”He did not believe that the universe was infinitely complex—one ten-thousandth of an infinite set was still an infinite set—but he felt in his gut that even in the limited realm of basic physical laws, humans probably had not glimpsed a ten-thousandth part of the permutations and possibilities…” Given the length of this book, it took me longer to get through than it should’ve, maybe. Some of that is probably because I’ve been reading about current events too much, but it’s also because this was a tough book to read in big chunks. It’s slow, reflective, and virtually plotless. It rewards a slow and attentive approach. It is ponderous, introspective and lofty literature—something Dan Simmons has proved himself a pro at time and time again. It’s also worth nothing that Simmons cites this novel as his personal favorite of his own works. It’s definitely a personal book, and it will definitely stick with me. The plot, if you could call it that, revolves a man named Richard Baedecker. A marine, a pilot, an astronaut; a man who walked on the moon. A guy who has just been through a divorce and has grown distant from his son. The book has no chapters, only four parts, and is kind of a series of vignettes as Baedecker travels the country, even the world, visiting his son and the men who flew to the moon with. I could say more, but I think it’s better you go in blind and let Simmons unfurl his story in a way that only he can. ”But even as he pivoted and prepared to stroke across the short distance remaining, he knew that this one thing was denied to him. No, not denied he realized, for once it had been allowed. Only return was denied. But then, as if in recompense, he was floating over the familiar white peaks and shattered craters, and he can see even more clearly than before.” The end unfolds in a way I simply never would have dreamed. It was beautifully done. A perfect ending—something I have mostly come to expect from Dan Simmons. This was an early novel, released in 1989; the same year that saw the release of Hyperion AND Carrion Comfort. I don’t know what this man was drinking, eating, smoking, or whatever around this time, but all three novels are brilliant, and completely different from one another. There’s a review on the cover from Harlan Ellison that says, “Earth, air, fire and water: Dan Simmons. Warily, in awe, we watch him, and marvel.” And I have to agree. 4.5/5
