This is a hard SF first contact novel. I read it as a part of the monthly reading for May 2023 at Hugo & Nebula Awards: Best Novels group. The book was published in 1977 and was nominated for Nebula and Locus, lost Nebula to Gateway by Frederik Pohl and took 2nd place in Locus list. This was the first novel by Gregory Benford nominated for major awards. However, earlier, he was nominated for novellas and short stories, including the ones, which were included in this novel. For, in reality, the novel consists of four novellas: • In the Ocean of Night (1972) • Icarus Descending (1973) • Threads of Time (1974) • A Snark in the Night (1977) The novellas were serialized in the Worlds of If, The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, and in a anthology edited by Robert Silverberg . The combined nature of the novel is felt during the reading, for pieces are uneven and moreover, usually a reader [like me] assumes the growth of a story into a great final, but here there are four finals… The novel has a protagonist, Nigel Walmsley, an Englishman working for NASA in the early 21st century. He more than once by chance (and later by design) takes part in the first contact. For example, the first story (I guess it was Icarus Descending as a novella is about an asteroid suddenly turned comet named Icarus which is on a direct collision course for India. To prevent a giant loss of life, Nigel is sent to plant a thermonuclear bomb to Icaruis. However, as he approaches, he sees that parts of the comet are obviously artificial. So, he runs against time, exploring this ‘ship’ before the demolition… as you can see, it is a great self-containing story. Meanwhile, the following arc while mentioning what happened before, is quite independent and depicts Nigel’s family life and fallout from the first story. As such it feels like a letdown after a space adventure. Moreover, like a lot of the late 60s and 70s SF, in this future marriage has changed and e.g. Nigel is in a partnership with two women, but only one he really cares for – therefore it looks more like following a fashion than an attempt to discuss a possible social development – I actually sometimes feel the same way about putting a homosexual couple is almost every modern SF novel. I guess I’d have enjoyed it more if it were just a collection of novellas, but uniting them into a single continuous story hasn’t worked for me.
