Music of a Life is a slim but poignant historical novel by Andrei Makine, a Russian novelist who wrote in French. It is translated into English by Geoffrey Strachan who lent it an elegiac elegance. In the waiting room of a railway station in a Russian town in Urals, the unnamed narrator recounts an encounter twenty five years ago with an old musician, Alexei Berg, when they were both stranded by a snowstorm. Makine’s vivid prose captures the apathy and resignation of the diverse throng of passengers huddled in the cold, trying to find a place to lay down and sleep. The narrator’s fretful waiting is suddenly broken by a strain of music: ‘The music! On this occasion I have enough time to catch the reverberation of the last notes, like a silken thread from a needle’s eye.’ The episode to follow moved me. In an upper floor waiting room, an old man is mutely playing the piano. The narrator is first drawn to the silent flourish of Alexei’s gnarled fingers and then is surprised to see the tears in the pianist’s eyes as one of his hands comes crashing on the keyboard. This choked, yet voluble, communion with the keyboard encapsulates the heart of this story. In the long conversation on that interminable train ride to Moscow, what unraveled is Alexei’s story and that of the artists and musicians, and members of the intelligentsia who lived during the years of Stalin’s Great Purge (mid 1934 to the 1940s). Alexei’s plight calls to mind a similar fate that befell Count Rostov in Amor Towles’ A Gentleman From Moscow and Dmitri Shostakovich in Julian Barnes’ The Noise of Time . In 1941, Alexei was a 21-year-old concert pianist, eagerly looking forward to his debut recital. Of course, it did not happen. Makine keeps the reader invested in Alexei’s fight for his own life and his remaking of a life without music. Alexei steals the identity of a fallen German soldier and is sent to the war front in WW2. A couple of women who nursed him to health when wounded rendered his battled life more bearable. Thus, ‘He reflected that there must be a word for it, some key to understanding this suffering and this moon, and his own life, changed beyond recognition, and above all, the simplicity with which two human beings could give one another not love, no, but this peace, this respite, this release, derived simply from the warmth of a hand.’ He heroically saves a general and is deemed an honorable soldier. . Alexei vigilantly guards himself against a sinking feeling in his heart by not allowing himself to become nostalgic whenever he hears music or sees a piano. But how long can he withhold music from himself? Will his true identity become known? Makine keeps the plot tensed and taut, and I felt torn between wanting Alexei to show the world who he is and fearing for his life. Music of a Life is a melancholic but inspiring story about shattered dreams, stoic determination, and the indelible traces of a musical talent. This is not a sentimental story and the ending is realistic. When I turned the last page, I was left with this thought that even though Alexei is compelled by circumstances to leave his music, his music never left him. Great book. Highly recommended.
