definitely wasn’t expecting this to jump into my top 5 novels of all time, but here we are. very glad i waited this long to read hemingway. not sure i could’ve appreciated him when i was younger, but once you’ve had enough life experience, not to mention legit heartbreak and loss, this book really gets under your skin. hemingway basically writes the greatest action war movie of all time and infuses it with his minimal and poetic prose, so all the emotions in the finale sneak up on you before you’re ready to admit you care. mostly he achieves this by spending a lot of time hanging out with the characters before “the mission,” and we come to live and laugh with the diverse band of rebels, as well as empathize where they’re coming from as individuals; good and bad. i can’t say much more, since it’s much like trying to describe a dream. one that meant much to you, but reducing it to words seems to diminish the whole experience or memory all together. for whom the bell tells is, at its heart, a soulful david/goliath story. even when you don’t agree with the characters views on their world, you still understand it because hemingway makes you empathize. and that’s why the last act is so damned harrowing. in a way, this book reminded me a lot of the structure of the titanic movie. you know something inevitable is going to happen, and as you get to know the characters, who are also getting to know one another and possibly even fall in love, the suspense and tension ratchets up subconsciously the closer we get to the big event/mission. it’s a very subtle but skillful writing trick that avoids any overly plotty sections, and like i mentioned earlier, creeps up on you like the best kinda of stories. before you know it the story has hit you in the heart and now you’re biting nails while reading the last act. i do think many modern readers with modern materialistic sensibilities won’t get this book. it requires a certain amount of giving yourself over to the fiction, while remembering at the end of the day it’s just a great yarn, not a political thesis. tbh, it’s more like a turing test for proof of soul.
