I just finished reading Jewels of the Sun by Nora Roberts with my two reading buddies from the “Two Neurons or Less” book club, and let me tell you, two neurons were too much for this one. Because it seems to me that Nora didn’t use that many when writing this. 1.5/5 reasons for 1star rating: - idiotic main character - creepy, rapey love interest that believes that after a woman says no to a marriage proposal (of sorts, he LITERALLY told her “I need a wife”) all she needs is some persuasion. (hello Mr Collins from P&P) -idiotic side characters (one of who actually takes main character’s shoes off her feet to try them on. just NO) - random supernatural elements - the fact that a professor of psychology is writing a scientific article about stories preserved in oral tradition of a random village in Ireland. - the fact that Robers uses the word “female” 24 times in a 360page novel. TWENTY FOUR! examples of which are too good not to put here: “She felt marvelously weak and female.” * “Then she opened the cream she’d bought in Dublin and slathered herself in it. It never failed to make her feel female.” * “The house smelled female.” * “She looked up, her face stunning and filled with sheer female delight.” * “Torn between yet another layer of shock and a wave of pure female amusement that she wasn’t the least bit proud of.” * “he makes me feel something I’ve never felt before. Outrageously and completely female.” * “the nerves that jumped in her belly were tangled with excitement, then swallowed by pure female delight” (is this similar to Turkish delight? does it come in rose flavour?) * “I love when you do that because it makes me feel all female and fluttery.” - mindboggling metaphors and descriptions: “The, as soon as she realized her mistake, the heavy skies burst open, as if a giant hand had plunged a knife into their heart.” The reason the rating is 1.5: - the main love interest gets punched in the crotch All in all this was a horrible book. I recommend it to no-one.
