Before discussing the book itself, it seems appropriate to consider its theme, which is pretty simple and familiar: humans vs. artificial intelligence. That's a conflict that has been envisioned for a long time – at least since the middle eastern golem folklore, followed by works such as Frankenstein and The Island of Dr. Moreau . At present, with the rapid technological progress of computer-based AI, the opposition between humans and "intelligent machines" ("robots") is as heatedly debated as ever. That conflict could become even more intense, especially if the machine side is ultimately represented, as this book postulates, by "things" whose origins (not hinted at explicitly in the present work) aren't of this planet. The question in all this that's often not addressed is why a conflict should exist at all. Is it a contest over scarce natural resources? Is it simply that the "machines" are so far advanced that humans are hardly any more important in their regard than amoebae are to humans? The book discussed here is the initial volume in a series (known as the "Galactic Center Saga") of 6 (or 7, counting a novella at the end). It drops hints at a different possibility: Perhaps these intelligent machines view any form of biological life as a malignancy that threatens the peace and tranquility of the entire galaxy. There is a plausible argument for this point of view. The book only hints vaguely at it, and certainly doesn't spell it out. So let's examine it here. Biological life as we know it cannot appear instantaneously out of a physical, chemical process. Instead it must pass serendipitously from its earliest appearance (which we still can only guess at) through a period of evolution that (probably) lasts several billion years. Along the way, the mechanism of the process itself imprints distinct and contradictory tendencies on all, or almost all, successful species that put in an appearance. On the one hand, in the Darwinian formulation, there is "survival of the fittest". That is, because resources are usually scarce, or at least expensive to access, there is an inevitable competition between – and within – most species for consumption of the existing resources of a particular environment. And the scarcer the resources, the more intense and possibly destructive is the competition. Exactly which physical and behavioral characteristics contribute most to survival are highly variable over time, depending on the specific nature of the total ecosystem: the available resources and the nature of the species present. But what is constant is the potential for intense competition and conflict in order for the "fittest" to survive. On the other hand, biologists in the past few decades have come to appreciate (as Darwin apparently didn't), that cooperation among the individuals of a species – and also among species that may be quite different from each other – can have significant survival value. The value of cooperation within certain species, such as ants and humans, is fairly apparent. In such species, for instance, there's a division of labor in which each individual behaves in ways that are specific to the individual yet promote the survival of the species, or a subgroup of it, as a whole. Unfortunately, the problem with cooperation is that it's not stable over time. As the availability of necessary resources varies, intense stresses can arise if resources become difficult or expensive to obtain. Especially in the presence of such stresses, it will usually be advantageous for a few individuals (or species) to "cheat" or "defect" from behavior that benefits the group (or the species or even allied species) as a whole in order to secure scarce resources for themselves. (The "prisoners' dilemma" is a very simple example.) But even when stresses are low, some individuals will still be tempted to "cheat" or "defect" – simply because evolution has favored such behavior at some times in the past. (Widespread cheating, of course, is eventually disadvantageous – but individuals who cheat often do better in the short term, and have more offspring, until their behavior is common enough to be suppressed.) Net result: conflict and destructive competition can arise whenever the equilibrium between the opposed tendencies of cooperation and aggression is disturbed for any reason. The process of evolution that all biological life forms undergo essentially guarantees such a possibility. There will be times when the cheaters use violent, destructive means to have their way. In short, evolved biological life can't be trusted not to spoil galactic tranquility by defecating copiously all over the neighborhood from time to time. The book doesn't make any of this very explicit. But something like this might be what the machine intelligences assume – and further, that they have originated in such a way as to avoid any evolutionary predisposition to exhibit hostility and aggression among themselves. Not having read any of the sequels Benford wrote, I don't know if this idea (or some alternative explanation) is proffered. However, this "Galactic Center Saga" doesn't seem to be as highly esteemed as other works in the science fiction world. (For instance, there are Wikipedia articles on only the first 3 volumes of the series.) It could be that the series, like the first volume, comprises much sound and fury, but signifies nothing much in particular. Regarding this first volume, I don't have a lot more to say. The plot has definite essential elements of complexity, suspense, and surprise. (Sasquatches even put in a brief appearance, along with the suggestion they have benefited from earlier alien encounters.) And the prose flows smoothly, even elegantly at times. But overall, the book seems like a small collection of related short stories (which, apparently, is how it originated). It's short enough (a little over 300 pages) to sustains a reader's curiosity about "what happens next". But it's not quite a compelling, memorable read that could have arisen from a more consistently developed central vision.
