Within Gregory Benford’s Galactic Center series, the first two volumes are hard-sf in a near-future Earth setting featuring astronaut/scientist Nigel Walmsley. However, with Great Sky River (#3), the story jumped forward some 35,000 years, to an initially unrecognizable story universe. Furious Gulf (#5) is continuous from Great Sky River, in which Family Bishop travels towards the central black hole of our Galaxy in an ancient human spaceship they discovered. They flee from enemy Mechs, and are strangely allied with a race of cyborg Myriapods. I’m now in a re-read of the entire series, because it is mentioned in Lecture 4 “Evolution and Deep Time in Science Fiction” of Gary Wolfe’s video lecture series How Great Science Fiction Works . In this novel, the perspective character shifts from Killeen to his son Toby. Benford seems to be making a sincere effort to support this as a new entry point into the series, restating a lot of world building detail and backstory. But I feel there is just too much material back there in the first four books - this is still a mid-series novel. Toby is now an older teen, with a lot of those feels, shut out of affection by his father who has assumed very heavy responsibility as leader of Family Bishop. The style of the novel, surprisingly, takes on a YA feel for the first half. But in the second half, after Family Bishop reaches the galactic center, it probably doesn’t matter much who the lead character is, as they become mostly a device for Benford’s cosmic speculations. My hard-sf sensibilities rate the second half more highly than the first. Toby’s life, like our own, takes place with assumptions of the space and time that humans evolved within. But fundamentally, this is a consequence of our biology. Physics gives us models for predicting the behaviors of particles and fields, and of waveforms, that take place on a much smaller level. But such models do not necessarily describe the reality. In fact, for example, both particle theories and wave theories are known to be incomplete alone. Imagine that the underlying truth also describes a realm in which life can develop and intelligence evolve – beings who exist in perturbations of electromagnetic and gravitational fields. Just above the event horizon of the super black hole at the center of the galaxy, rotating at extreme relativistic velocities, there exists a constructed realm that appears somewhat coherent within its own frame of reference. When Toby enters The Wedge, his familiar spacetime-based perceptions make a bizarre experience out of everything. Eventually, as he grows into it, the distinctions become less clear. But through it all, his sense of human will seems preserved. “It would never have happened this way if he had been with the Family or even with Quath. Family kept the sharp edges away. Family was a fiction, he knew that now. A fiction defending against the furious gulf that yawned in all directions. But a truthful fiction, too, because the story Families told by their example made it possible to go on. The gulf was always there and you would see it again, certainly for one last time, but there was no special haste in getting that moment. After you had seen the gulf you spent the rest of your time knowing that it was there waiting and would come again. In knowing this he was now free.” The end of the novel leads directly into the next – Sailing Bright Eternity (#6)
