Another enjoyable, very readable People of the... novel. This is the very first entry in the series, but it's actually the fourth or fifth one I've read. You can skip around with these since they're all standalones, except for a few clearly designated trilogies. I like novels set in deep history, and this one is about the Clovis people's journey from northeast Asia to the Americas across the Bering land bridge. People of the Wolf shares two stories about the halves of a whole: twin brothers, one who is pure and one who is corrupted, and also the story of two tribes that used to be One, split centuries ago over distrust and differing philosophies. The brothers Runs in Light and Raven Hunter are the result of an act of violence done upon a woman of the People by a man of the Others. Both show themselves to be powerful leaders, and the People must decide whose path to follow: that of Raven Hunter, who incites the People to war against the Others for driving them out of the hunting lands of their ancestors, or that of Runs in Light, now called Wolf Dreamer, who sees only death and destruction unless the People follow him south across the ice. Will the People and the Others be separated forever when the rising Salt Sea finally divides them, or will they find a way to make peace and become One again? I've said it before: this is not high literature packed with tons of words you will need a dictionary for, but the stories are engaging. The authors are also archaeologists so there are historically accurate factoids sprinkled throughout, and this series focuses a lot on tribal dynamics, competition for resources, native American mysticism... and a good measure of soap opera. Recurring themes throughout all the Gears' novels are good vs. evil and overcoming hardship. The characters in these books are tough, and reading about how they rise above these experiences is satisfying. These are fun, enjoyable books that don't have to be read in order, which is a good thing because this series is huge - somewhere around 30 books now. I've gone years without reading a People of the... book, but I come back to them eventually. I'm going to try reading at least a couple of them a year, so maybe I'll get to them all before I die! It's not great literature, but it's good for what it is: light fiction about ancient Native Americans.
