Benford works with a fascinating concept here. In the Ocean of Night was first published in episodic format, before the pieces were cobbled together to form this first novel in the Galactic Centre series. It’s a good novel too. However, there is a problem with the pacing, undoubtedly because of its episodic origin. The novel consists of a number of separately defined timeline sequences, which makes sense given the plot progression. It is heavy stuff all round, but the problem lies with the second sequence, which might have been OK if it wasn’t for the fact that the preceding sequence was so exciting. Too much of a counter point here, I daresay. Things pick up after that, though, and Benford is a very good writer. He is also a scientist, so he knows how to sell a concept. In the end, all is forgiven as the novel gradually rebuilds momentum until culminating in some fine Science Fiction. The characterisation of Nigel Walmsley is also worth a mention. It does set up the rest of the Galactic Centre series nicely. You just know things are bound to get hardcore from here. So what’s it all about? Well – quite a bit, it turns out. The novel is deceptively dense, but deals with a theme that is not unfamiliar in Sci-Fi today, namely that of a universe filled with Machine Intelligence (as opposed, perhaps, to Organic Intelligence, and why this might be so), and, well, first contact, evolution and war (among other things). Or is it a novel about one man’s obsession? You decide. There is also the question of the Chicken and the Egg... Heavy on philosophy and science, In the Ocean of Night also touches on some themes that are reminiscent of 2001: A Space Odyssey . I will admit that it affected me in a way that few books do, just by pressing on some of the right buttons. The whole fascinating truth of the story only resolves in the very final pages, even though, by this time, it is shrouded in gibberish (not quite sure why Benford decided on such a cryptic approach, although I have a suspicion or two). It’s a shame about the pacing issue, because that’s probably the only reason I’m not giving it five out of five stars.
