“The world is, of course, nothing but our conception of it.” ― Anton Chekhov link: source Talk about himself? But who was he? That soldier washing in a pool of water, after a bout of hand-to-hand combat, while the water turned red, with the water turned red, with his own blood and the blood of those he had just killed? Or that youth shaking a dead man to get his boot off him? Or else that other one, watching at a dusty window, in another life, in a forbidden past? No, what was most real in all those years was the day he lost consciousness in the cemetery, when he was as good as dead and when all there was between him and the world was that unsteady line: an unknown woman sleeping beside him and giving him her warmth… I often find myself fascinatingly struggling with an intriguing dilemma about the mere size of books, often, I wonder whether we need epic, voluminous books in the contemporary literature when so much could be said in just over a hundred pages. Emotions speak louder than words but it takes something extraordinary to weave ordinary human emotions in just a few words, in an efficacious manner. Such that the sound of silence could be heard through the clamor of your heart, the richness of emptiness could be felt through the plumpness of the universe. Time and again, I find myself absorbed by a vague thought that the literature has evolved from humungous, periodical creations of art to slim, poignant, lively ones that emanate life through their pages and words. But then, reality strikes me and I am taken aback with piercing realization that each fabrication of art has a being of its own, the being of the author exudes from it; and the worth of the art may not be judged from the number of pages. Having said that I must admit that A Life’s music is a unique achievement in the contemporary literature having richness which is equivalent to those of having several hundreds of pages. The author does a remarkable job to infuse the various tints of life in just enough pages of the historical novel which might be considered as a novella- in length but certainly not in scope. The author has been able to craft very rich text by fusing memories of varied colors of life, from painful agonies, pent-up desires to enriching, soul-fueling remembrances, meticulously spun around pieces of inheritance of Byzantium history, serfdom, Tartar yoke, and the revolutions. The poetic agonies and painful despair are amalgamated together to yield a vivid, heart-wrenching experience. Though the joyous moments of the present, which hold in itself a promising, reassuring future beaming with potential but the mad and absurd heart longs for the quintessential phase of life, crafted over the thread of space-time through the gravity of emotions, no matter how painful it might be. Does it essentially mean the human heart finds solace in the pain? And what do these embittered experiences do to us, they, in essence, catapult us from dreaming, ruminating and exalted childhood, where nothing seems to be impossible, to mundane, banal and dull adulthood, wherein we may have acquired most of the accessions we long for throughout our lives but we still feel the emptiness as profound as the universe of our imagination, as if nothing could assuage our bemoaning heart. And the realization of this overwhelming emptiness fills our heart with a strange torpor, leapfrogging the beats of heart, which again puts us before the probing eyes of our existence. The novella seems to have the essential elements of Russian literature, the opening scene of the novella is reminiscent of a typical Russian microcosm- the narrator remembering waiting for a train amidst the snowstorm of the Urals. The author, a French who was born in Siberia, though writes in French but seems to retain the poetic and poignant intensity, typical of Russian literature, perhaps his roots contributed towards it. We find the story of Alexi Berg, a pianist, through the acute eyes of an unnamed narrator, waiting for a train among the superorganism of human beings in a vestibule on a snowy night in Moscow. The narrator chances upon the encounter with the pianist through the music emanating from the second floor where the pianist, through the darkness, murkiness of Russia emerges from the nothingness that extends as far as the horizon can be seen. The business with violin, the nocturnal terror, his years of loneliness as a plague victim, still came back to him from time to time, but mainly to give a keen edge to the happiness he now enjoyed. His parents whispering in the night, the acrid smell of burning varnish, this was only residue of those three black years, ’37,’38,’39. link: source The sentences have been formed with an air of forthcoming climax, leaving the reader in the anticipation of a literary pinnacle. The colossal details are being announced quite discreetly which essentially makes the event all the more pronounced. We have been taken through the haunting memories of the past of Berg, which come back sometimes to give way to current happiness, sometimes to revive some painful remembrances. The poetic notes of violin left stranded in the string of memories, which try to break free from the enduring remembrances of the soul blazing in fire of nothingness, dying away inch by inch with every creak of the wood. The reader is being thrown into the spring of 1941 to witness the shattering events of Berg’s life wherein his dreams are snatched away from him as if they don’t even belong to him, by taking his parents away. Alexi Berg has been robbed of his existence, he has to refuge at his uncle’s place, where, ironically, he has to keep himself apparently invisible to the world to keep himself alive, as if his existence becomes an apparition. The pianist has to keep running hither and thither, forced to forget his identity amidst the sea of fallacious identities he has to forge. He has to expose himself to certain death in order to escape the death itself, as he loses himself among the crowd of soldiers of variegated backgrounds and fate (as some are dead too) eventually to become one of them, his being took refuge in the hell of nothingness in which all the soldiers were burning, indistinguishable as a mass of killing machines. Having come among these soldiers to escape death, he was exposing himself to much more certain death here than in re-education colony, where they would have sent him after his parents’ arrest. He would have been safer behind the barbed wire of a camp than in possession of this lethal liberty. During all these years of endurance, what keeps the being of Alexi Berg intact is his music. His devotion to it though could never really express itself, living as a surpassed element of his being. As he moves on in his life, having mend his physical wounds, through the journey of forged identities among the perilous world of war and death, only to find his soul deeply wounded through heart-wrenching revelations. The author has been able to craft dreamlike prose here which works in the same way our memory works. The author brings the vast details compressed in a few pages in a very coherent manner such that it leaves almost a cinematic experience on the reader, of such kind in which minute details are being given attention without making those superfluous. Perhaps that’s why Andrei Makine is regarded one of the best contemporary authors and is often compared with Proust, Nabokov, Stendhal and Russian giants such as Chekov but this novella reminds me more of Candide by Voltaire since authors in both novellas have been able to carve out humongous works of art, in scope, with precision and economy of a master craftsman of words. Moreover he had long ago learned that in war truth and falsehood, magnanimity and callousness, intelligence and naivety could not be so clearly told apart as in the life before . The author proposes war as one of those vagaries of life which are considered as necessary evils to comprehend it, in an idiosyncratic manner. We know that death is a certain truth of our lives but to present it in a whimsical way creates an altogether different experience for the reader, it is being presented as a kind of revelation, a man encounters as he steps in to world out of his den of comforts. The other theme explored by the author is freedom, it holds in itself life as much as it holds death. However, we see right through the novella that the concept of freedom is skewed and compromised at different stages due to various reasons, such as the crisis of identity, war, and fear. Andrei Berg braves himself through various vagaries of life, at any probable cost, even if he keeps silence of death lodged in his thoughts, he keeps on moving even if it means semblance of untrue intentions as a sort of suspended existence in which even the shadow of a being left it. He sensed that all the life that was left to him was concentrated in this faintly springlike breeze, in this airy, misty sunlight, in the scent of the waters awakening beneath the ice. And not in his emaciated body that no longer even felt the wind’s scorching. It is the first time that I come across the author but it was a great experience, one that left me with a sad but poetic taste. It is a tragic story that has been crafted with the harmony of a musician, infuse with in-between tinges of acerbic humor. It’s an endearing tale of a man who strives all his life to give his suspended existence (perhaps inspired from the life of the author himself, he always maintains that Russia left him rather than he leaving it) a sort of meaning or reference to hold on, a struggle of ghostly existence to keep its being intact in a poetic manner, probably the novella could be taken as a long poem written through the remembrances from some distant memory. One thing which makes him unique among contemporary authors is the usage of words: words are somewhat like necessary evils of art, they are important but one has to have the precision of an artist to create such a profound effect, the inappropriate usage may leave the reader with an unpleasant or superfluous taste. Through half-closed eyelids he watched this rather bumpy haulage and felt as if nothing belonged to him, neither the frozen shadow that was his body, nor what his own eyes saw, nor what was visible of him. There was nothing left of him. He did not feel as if he were playing. He was advancing through a night, breathing in its delicate transparency, made up of an infinite number of facets of ice, leaves, of wind. He no longer felt any pain within him. No fear about what would happen. No anguish or remorse. That night through which he was advancing expressed this pain, this fear, and the irremediable shattering of the past, but this had all become music and now only existed through its beauty. 4.5/5
