It took me a while to get around to this third installment of Rice's Mayfair trilogy. I started it a while back and realized I couldn't quite handle it yet so I moved on to other things for a while then came back and was able to finish it. There's just something about this story, from beginning to end (1st book to 3rd book) that has gotten under my skin. It's one of those stories I won't soon forget... beautifully written yet intensely disturbing. The perfect formula for an unforgettable tale. Anyway, as to this book specifically I just have to say... Rice's vision of the "Taltos," a forgotten, practically extinct race of beings that are so close to human they can pass as human but the differences are so NOT human, and THEY ARE SO CREEPY, well it's brilliant to say the least. These beings have been around since the dawn of time and when humans began making an appearance the Taltos made fun of them, describing them as "hairy monkey things." As humankind evolved and advanced, the Taltos managed to stay out of their way, until disaster struck and their "paradise," their island of plenty, fell into the sea. The surviving Taltos were forced to journey to the bitter cold land of Britain where they managed to hang on. (Being able to give birth to walking, talking, fully knowing children was a definite plus in terms of replenishing their numbers). They were able to pass as human for a long time, until humans became smart enough to question why they had no "young" and finally began to catch on to the differences. Of course mass slaughter of the Taltos was the inevitable outcome; pretty obvious social commentary here. However, the graphic scenes of Taltos being forced to procreate as part of religious ceremonies (the "children" are born almost instantly upon conception), offspring being forced to procreate and then being tossed into the fire and on and on until the people were satisfied enough "sacrifice" had taken place... well, I had nightmares to say the least. It's the mark of a very good author when a story sticks to you like this. I don't know how I feel about the ending. Happy and horrified at the same time I guess. Rice kinda sorta left it open for another sequel, but I really hope that never, ever happens. I honestly don't even want to know what could potentially happen next...
