I have loved the books written by Nora Roberts and for me, she’s my ultimate romance author – in fact, she holds the largest number of books I have read by any author. Her stories are wonderful, filled with romance, love and engaging characters. Since the late 80’s I have journeyed in the worlds and characters she has created. One of my all-time favorites is the Gallaghers of Ardmore Trilogy. Set in Ireland, with a blend of modern-time and fae fantasy, it’s a story filled with romance, love, family and friendship. The Gallagher siblings, Aiden, Shawn & Darcy have to find their true loves as this is the only way Carrick, Prince of the Faeries, can reunite with his lost love for the last 300 years, Lady Gwen. The settings are so vivid – I could feel the beauty and quiet serenity, the laughter, the music, the legends and stories, the harmony between the land, sea and sky. The lush green hill, with a sprinkle of fairy dust has one believing that magic exists here. Jewels of the Sun is the 1st book and tells the story of Aiden, the eldest sibling runs Gallaghers, the family pub in the village, who after spending some years travelling the world, has return to the place he feels and calls home. Jude Murray has come to Ireland after going through a divorce and giving up her job as a professor of psychology, and is staying at her late great-aunt’s cottage, Faerie Hill Cottage just outside the village. She wants to be alone and finds it a bit difficult to handle all the friendly and helpful people of the village, especially Aiden, who she feels an unexplainable attraction to. She discovers the magic of the people and their stories, makes new friends, and slowly begins to see how empty her life had been before. With a little help from Carrick, Aiden & Jude find each other, after some really awesome happenings. I loved the build-up in their relationship…so sweet and lovely. Also seeing Jude’s world being transformed from cold and organized to loving and caring. The secondary characters are stunning – Brenna…what a fabulous woman..and Darcy….Shawn…I couldn’t wait for the next book. Oh, I have read this series so many times…..and each time love it just as much if not more than the first time. Yes, it’s filled with clichés and perhaps some readers may feel it’s a bit over the top…but for me….i read romance to escape, to enter a different world to mine….and the Gallaghers’ world is certainly that.
