It is around Antonio Vicente Mendes Maciel, a historical and Christic figure, ascetic and hallucinated. A madman who doubled as a saint, nicknamed the Counselor by his disciples, who one day formed a millenarian and messianic movement in Bahia. At the end of the 19th century, when Brazil had recently abolished slavery and was still in the early stages of democracy, it transitioned from an Empire to a Republic in less than ten years. This court of miracles, this motley collection of poor natives, beggars, pilgrims, impoverished peasants, Maroon enslaved people, freedmen, bandits, and repentant murderers, refused to bow to the new power. It rejected the census, civil marriage, the decimal metric system, paying taxes, and the ban on private property and money in absolute collectivism; restored churches, cemeteries, and holy places; and saw in the Republic the embodiment of the Antichrist. This "City of god" successfully routed three military expeditions to pave the way for the final one. The War of the End of the World, a moving and harsh historical fresco, seeks to bring this special moment back to life with its epic breath and the great wealth of these well-established characters. By freeing himself from the constraints of time and space, Mario Vargas Llosa meticulously retraces the circumstances and motivations that led all these destitute and disgraced beings to wander through the Sertão, a particularly inhospitable region of the Brazilian Northeast. To share without backing the fate of this illuminated man, whom he sees as a prophet, he describes the organization and the preparations of the belligerents of the two camps. The maneuvers of the Republicans' exploit, the sovereignty of monarchical inspiration, and the press organs in the pay of their sponsors are to blame for the proliferation of this seditious Sebastianist movement. This novel is about a guerrilla civil war, a phenomenon that Latin America's history is replete with. It is a particularly poignant book, and we do not come out unscathed.
