People of the Wolf (North America's Forgotten Past, #1) Gear, W. Michael Gear, Kathleen O'neal Audible : Something I noticed when listening to People of the wolf, on Audible. How much the first book gave foreshadowing to the series. Multiple times the dreamers, Heron, or even Wolf Dreamer talked about events that will become People of the River, People of the Silence, even People of the Lightning. I listened to the descriptions and could see the future in their words, and the past, as I have read the stories, and know how they go. It's amazing when you are listening to how much import something is that you did not think of before. Maybe it shows the power of the spoken word, and the marvel of the story teller. It's all a spiral. Review: People of the wolf the wonderful story of a boy finding the way into a new world, the dynamics of twins of light fighting darkness. Twin brothers born from rape, are living in a dying world. The people are pushed to the edge of survival. Faced with the edge of the world (a wall of ice) and the others (a section of their own people separated by conflict so far in the past it is not remembered) the brothers are forced to confront each other, the world, and the spirits. One brother finds the path to light, a literal path to saving the people, by leading the people through a hole in the ice, and peace with the others. The Other brother embraces darkness drawing the tribes into raids and mutilations. Which path will the people follow? Which brother will save the people? Who has the true vision? This is the first book in an epic series, bringing light and dark in conflict over and over throughout the ages..... This is my favorite book of the series. I feel a close connection to Wolf Dreamer and can only dream of his ability. Character list: People of the wolf (crossing the ice bridge) Dreamer: Runs in the light (birth name), Wolf dreamer(given after killing the wolf) Ravenhunter: (birth name) twin, name was given after birth when he grasped a raven feather. Raven hunter is a false dreamer. He is good at making people question and not following the correct path. Dreamer: Heron: Old woman who guided Wolf Dreamer, true dreamer left the tribe 20 years before because of Broken Branch who stole herhunter. IceFire: father of the twins, dreamer White Tusk clan, was used by power to bring the twins into the world, in the end he learns that his sacrifices will be for all the people, and he will trade a son for a son. DancingFox: Love interest, seen as a leader of the people in the future and give birth to a dreamer that will be the center of the web. Crow Caller: Tribal shaman (false dreamer) Power object: wolf skin This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
