Phases of Gravity is a treatment of the human journey, paralleled and perused by a middle-aged fictional astronaut and his personal wanderings. It is a story of the aftermath of success, and the gaping hole of fear left by failure. Three levels of experience are interwoven in this book: that of Richard Baedecker, America's space program, and mankind in general. Author Dan Simmons asserts that his characters and therefore his readers as well, are part of "...a culture choosing between a frightening future of exploration and discovery, or a retreat into the safe and familiar harbors of internecine wars, stagnation, and decline." Decades since his walk on the moon, Baedecker is haunted by the memory of that moment. The illusory experience left him confused and striving for purpose, and now he is hounded daily by gravity and the sight of the moon herself- reminders that his internal footing remains unsteady and unsure. Surrounded by broken relationships and striving for direction, he searches for a meaning to it all. The Challenger accident provides a backdrop and a national focal point for this same feeling of shaken courage and determination (and indeed was the author's real-time impetus for completing the novel.) Like the nation, Baedecker is at a crossroads, though he can't see clearly what his options should even be. Revisiting elements and figures from his past as he travels across America, he encounters the mundane, the invasive, the exalting and the profane and must make something cohesive of these puzzle pieces if he is to find any peace with himself or his world. All serve to stir and catalyze his ideas, for better or worse. His journey reminded me of several important truths. There are so many small things in life that can help restore joy and peace if we will stay mindful of them. Focusing on the journey while keeping one's eyes open for the destination, maintaining flexibility and good humor with others, genuinely engaging in meaningful conversation, celebrating the beauty of the natural world, persevering in the face of feeling uprooted and denied your truest desires, are all facets that make the journey worthwhile. If we can truly examine the experiences and people that cross our path, and remain committed to deepening this life, we might just be surprised that sometimes, even in some small way, the impossible wish might be granted. Although I don't share all of the specific conclusions the author draws, they are laid out poignantly, wrought with genuine effort on the part of the characters, and are deftly employed to tether the characters together in some semblance of hope and endurance. Simmons insists this is not a science fiction tale although those who enjoy his particular style will appreciate echoes of his other works. Ultimately, anyone who finds value in thoughtfully taking the pulse of the individual, the nation, and the world at this crossroads in time will glean traces of merit from Phases of Gravity.
