UPDATE: I recently purchased the audiobook for this favorite “Oldie” Howard novel DYING TO PLEASE. It was nicely performed by Susan Ericksen who immediately pulled me into the story and kept my attention. Depending on my schedule, I switched between the audio and the digital version, finishing the novel with a smile. I again enjoyed this proximity-danger trope story and am sure to read/listen to it again in the future. ORIGINAL POST: DYING TO PLEASE was a reread for me of a favorite “Oldie” standalone Romance Suspense Thriller novel originally written in 2002. MY RATING GUIDE: 4 Satisfied Stars. 1= dnf/What was that?; 2= Nope, not for me; 3= This was okay/cute; 3.5= I enjoyed it; 4= I LIKE THIS A LOT; 5= I Loved it, it was great! (I seldom give 5 Stars). Sarah Stevens/FMC is an experienced butler and bodyguard with training in both martial arts and firearms. Her clients are individuals or couples who entertain frequently and wish to have the talents of a bodyguard when necessary. Once Sarah is hired, she tends to stay with her clients until they no longer require her services. Her latest client has become as close as family. Seasoned Detective Cahill, 36/MMC meets Sarah for the first time when tragedy strikes her place of employment and her client is brutally killed. Once she is removed from the list of suspects, Sarah attempts to carry on and looks for a new position. A relationship even begins between herself and Cahill. But when another murder occurs Cahill and the police take a second look at Sarah and then the press gets involved. What I Liked ~ 1) Sarah’s employment as a butler and bodyguard is unique. I enjoy reading about characters with unusual careers. 2) I need to like the characters in books I read. I connected with both Sarah and Cahill. Sarah was kick a$$. I wanted to dislike Cahill for doubting Sarah but understood the necessity of a law enforcement officer needing to complete the necessary steps before clearing Sarah from the limited suspect list. The press isn’t as quick to clear her. 3) I am a long time fan of Linda Howard’s Romance Suspense Thriller novels. They simply “Click” with me. I found DTP both suspenseful and quite “earthy.” I believed the relationship that was developing between the MCs and wanted it to work even when circumstances seemed against them. I first read DYING TO PLEASE when it was released in 2002. Other than the minor technology differences, I feel it has aged well. It remains a favorite fun & sexy Proximity Danger story - one of my favorite tropes. 4) I always appreciate it when the antagonist reaps his just reward. ;) Recommended to readers of: 1) Linda Howard, Karen Robard, perhaps Anne Stuart or Jayne Ann Krentz and similar Proximity Danger trope authors. 1) Romance Suspense. 2) Proximity Danger trope. 3) Action Thrillers. 4) Military/Law Enforcement Romance Suspense novels. 5) Any of the above with a preference for HEAs. 6) Readers who appreciate Seasoned and/or complicated rather than “Perfect” characters. READER CAUTION ~ PROFANITY - Yes. Strong language is used. SEXUAL SITUATIONS - Yes. Detailed scenes of open door intimacy occur which are of an “earthy” variety. VIOLENCE - Yes. This is a murder mystery of sorts. Deaths occur and the basic details are covered but not in graphic detail. POSSIBLE TRIGGER WARNING - The antagonist is a sexual predator. Several brief scenes occur in the later part of the novel which some readers may wish to avoid. The scenes are brief and justice does prevail.
