I read this book before. It was many many many many many many years ago but I read this book before. And I had no memory of it. You could not pay me to give you a synopsis of anything that happened in this book prior to my reread. It has been over 20 years since I read the trilogy, so I will say that definitely colored my memory. And a lot of the things that happened in book one I attributed to book 2 and three respectively. But now I think I know why I didn’t remember anything from this book. The first book was the best in the series. And while I really like the storytelling that we got in the second installment because it enriched the history of the Mayfair family, the third book while giving me so much of the history that I love overall didn’t actually have much of a plot. There was a lot of storytelling, and while I think Anne Rice has a beautiful prose when it comes to that storytelling, there’s no larger over arcing plot at this point. So while I was really invested in the chapters while I was reading them there was no motivation to keep going because we weren’t looking forward to anything. I really liked learning the history of the taltos, I really enjoyed seeing how the author took all of these things from human history that we don’t have explanations for and wove them in ways that perfectly utilize the setting to the fantasy that she was building. It was artfully done and I love it. Still, outside of learning that history which is not real history, there’s nothing. The first book had us stressed at Lasher‘s machinations. The second book had us scared of what else he was bringing to the table, what other horrors he would unleash. Book 3 didn’t have any of that gravitas. And I think it might have been better to extend Lasher‘s story into the third book simply to have a nice conclusion point. I know that this series does eventually continue into a crossover with the vampire Chronicles, but I have never read that. I actually stopped reading the vampire Chronicles just before the crossover event. So I cannot say whether or not the way that this ended would be fixed in anyway in the coming novels. But I will say that compared to the intensity of the first two books this one was a letdown. Still beautiful story telling in all of our history lessons, but there was not much else outside of that.
