The oldest human fossils found in North America --at least as of some years ago, when I wrote up my notes on prehistoric humans-- were excavated in Del Mar, California, and date from 50,000 years B.P. (Before Present). But the general consensus of scholars is that the Paleo-Indians came from present- day Siberia, reaching Alaska by way of a dry land bridge across what is today the Bering Strait (sea levels were lower in the Ice Age, with much more water tied up in the polar ice caps), and would have arrived significantly earlier, since their descendants' journey southward would probably have taken generations. This series-opening novel imaginatively reconstructs that initial land-bridge crossing, and the world of the people who made it. W. Michael and Kathleen O'Neal Gear are a husband-and-wife writing team, who were and are serious, professionally-trained archaeologists specializing in the study of the Americas, and actively taking part in actual digs, before they ever took up novel writing. Their field work inspired and informs their fiction, and like Jean Auel (whose Earth's Children series debuted ten years before this one, and probably influenced it) they've also done extensive additional research in the literature of Ice Age North American archaeology and American Indian culture and religion. (They do a significantly smoother job than Auel does of integrating their knowledge into the flow of the novel without lecture-like info-dumps, however.) Of course, only the material objects left by the people from that time are known; everything else about their culture, beliefs, society, customs, etc. rests on guesswork and projections of what is known about later American Indian and Siberian tribes back into the dim past. That's far from a very exact science, so the picture the authors draw is mostly their own creation --though, IMO, it's a plausible creation for the most part. A three-page Introduction set in the authors' present depicts archaeologists unearthing a human skeleton from the Pleistocene in Alaska, with an archaeologist commenting, "I wonder who she was..." (This is apparently a device they use in all the books of the series.) That segues into the novel proper, back into the Stone Age, where we meet the People, a small tribe which has been pushed steadily eastward by their traditional enemies, the Mammoth Clan (who aren't culturally or racially all that different). Now, they've reached a point where further retreat eastward seems balked by an impassable glacial wall. The crisis is exacerbated by a leadership vacuum at this point; how the situation will be resolved is the meat of the story. At its heart are a handful of well-drawn characters: Runs in Light, who will become Wolf Dreamer (like later Indians, the People can change their names after significant life events); Raven Hunter, who's a dynamic character, but not in a good way; a trio of strong women, young Dancing Fox and the elders Heron and Broken Branch; and Ice Fire, the Mammoth Clan leader and principal shaman. This is basically a skillfully told, involving story. I read the book aloud to my wife, and it held our interest consistently. It can be a grim tale, in places; we have depictions of tribal warfare, and the Gears recreate very vividly how dangerous and hard life was for these people. There's some food for thought as well as prehistoric adventure here, with a serious look at the harm cultural prejudice and hatred can do, and at the moral slippery slope appeals to hatred and violence for a "good" purpose can put you on, when it's greased by subconscious hunger for power. My main criticism is that, while shamanism is prevalent among the Siberian tribes and no doubt was back then as well, and the first immigrants to Alaska would have brought it with them (and with the admission that I've never made a deep study of it), the depiction of it here doesn't jibe much with what I've read in parts of books by writers like Linton and Eliade; it struck me, despite the authors' research, to owe a lot to modern New Age mysticism. Since shamanistic practices bulk large here, to me that was a flaw. But that didn't keep the book from being one that Barb and I both enjoyed overall. We liked Wolf Dreamer, Dancing Fox, Ice Fire and our other fictional friends here well enough to have pursued their adventures further. (Dancing Fox displays enough action-heroine chops at one point to arguably entitle the book to a place on that shelf; but I didn't put it there because, though she acquits herself as one seriously kick-butt lady, the incident is never directly described and we're only told about it later second-hand, in a sentence or two. Hardcore action-heroine fans would probably view that as a bit of a literary gyp! :-) ) But we learned that the later books don't follow these characters at all, but jump around to other sets of characters widely separated by time and geography; so we never pursued the series.
