“If we can win here, we can win everywhere...the world is a fine place and worth the fighting for, and I hate very much to leave it...” - Ernest Hemingway, For Whom the Bell Tolls One of my favorite subgenres of literature is the people-on-a-mission story. If you have a collection of disparate individuals, each with a specific set of skills, and if they have to do something really hard and dangerous, preferably involving the destruction of a bridge, I am absolutely there . I’m not quite sure, but this affinity may have started when I first watched The Bridge on the River Kwai with my dad. Ever since, I have been a sucker for tales involving men and women who have a one-way ticket with destiny. Thus, it’s no surprise that I loved Ernest Hemingway’s For Whom the Bell Tolls . Though positioned as a “classic,” it is really just a gussied-up action-adventure novel about a fella trying to disrupt a chasm-spanning structure with a little well-placed trinitrotoluene. Adhering to the typical tropes, he even has time to fall in love, before his deadly rendezvous. The fella, in this case, is Robert Jordan, an American fighting against the Nationalist forces of General Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. This understudied conflict – which began in 1936 – served as a prelude to the Second World War, and became a proxy for the competing ideologies of communism and fascism. As such, it drew journalists and volunteers from all over the world. One of those journalists was Hemingway himself, who went to Spain to cover the conflict, and developed a sympathy for the Republican cause. This sympathy is on full display in For Whom the Bell Tolls , which begins with young Robert lying on his stomach, listening to the wind in the pines as he surveys the bridge that he is slated to destroy. To complete his task, Robert joins a group of partisans, meeting three central characters: Pablo, Pilar, and Maria. Pablo is the leader, but he is aging, selfish, and on the verge of betraying the Republic. Pilar is his wife, and the true leader of the band. Though Hemingway is not particularly known for his fully-realized female characters, Pilar steals every scene of which she is a part. Shrewd, mystical, and manipulative, she is the glue holding the band together, and also the conductor setting everything in motion. Finally, there is Marie, a beautiful young girl who was raped by the fascists and had her hair shorn off. Despite his lethal assignment, Robert finds time to fall in love with Maria, even as the clock ticktocks towards eternity. *** Hemingway is an author whose reputation definitely precedes him. Even if you’ve never read one of his novels, you’ve probably seen his style parodied: the taut, terse prose; his this-then-that manner of storytelling; and his offbeat grammatical structures that make you think you are reading an English translation, rather than a book written in English. All those things – along with Hemingway’s penchant for exploring men being men – is certainly on display here. But you also see that the “simplicity” with which he writes is deceptive. For instance, many of his short, punctual sentences are adding up to something, such as this breathlessly long passage of Robert and Maria spending some alone-time together: Then there was the smell of the heather crushed and the roughness of the bent stalks under her head and the sun bright on her closed eyes and all his life he would remember the curve of her throat with her head pushed back into the heather roots and her lips that moved smally and by themselves and the fluttering of the lashes on eyes tight closed against the sun and against everything, and for her everything was red, orange, gold-red, from the sun on the closed eyes, and it all was that color, all of it, the filling, the possessing, the having, all of that color, all in a blindness of that color. For him it was a dark passage which led to nowhere, then to nowhere, then again to nowhere, once again to nowhere, always and forever to nowhere, heavy on the elbows in the earth to nowhere, hung on all time always to unknowing nowhere, this time and again for always to nowhere, now not to be borne once again always and to nowhere, now beyond all bearing up, up, up and into nowhere, suddenly, scaldingly, holdingly all nowhere gone and time absolutely still and they were both there, time having stopped and he felt the earth move out and away from under them. It is writing like this that puts For Whom the Bell Tolls into a different realm. By way of plot, this could have been written by Jack Higgins or Alistair Maclean. Hemingway’s undeniable talent gives this potboiler a high literary gloss. *** Don’t let that gloss fool you, though. This is a fun read. Of the Hemingway novels I’ve read, this is the most purely enjoyable. It mixes together a lot of dependable elements, such as hopeless love; the debate over pragmatism versus principle; and some pretty solid action scenes, given the Hemingway treatment, as in the famous hilltop stand of the partisan El Sordo: When the shooting had started he had clapped [his] helmet on his head so hard it banged his head as though he had been hit with a casserole and, in the last lung-aching, leg-dead, mouth-dry, bullet-spatting, bullet-cracking, bullet-singing run up the final slope of the hill after his horse was killed, the helmet had seemed to weigh a great amount and to ring his bursting forehead with an iron band. But he had kept it. Now he dug with it in a steady, almost machinelike desperation. He had not yet been hit… I appreciate imagery in my fiction. I like having scenes described. Hemingway does this as well as anyone. He puts you right there. *** This is a book I first read when I was a freshman in college. I’ll be the first to admit that this was not exactly the most clearheaded period of my life. My emotional lability was like a metronome on a ship in a hurricane. The highs were high, the lows were low. Every defeat was like Waterloo, and so was every victory. Each new love was like the world’s first. It was in this mind-muddled context that I first discovered Robert, Maria, and Pilar, and their mission to de-bridge a gorge. I would be lying if I did not say that my fevered, volatile self firmly embraced Robert’s romantic fatalism: [W]hen I am with Maria I love her so that I feel, literally, as though I would die and I never believed in that nor thought that it could happen. So if your life trades its seventy years for seventy hours I have that value now and I am lucky enough to know it. And if there is not any such thing as a long time, nor the rest of your lives, nor from now on, but there is only now, why then now is the thing to praise… Of course, I am no longer in college, no longer that young, and – thankfully – at least a bit more stable, though that is relative. Thus, it was interesting to reassess For Whom the Bell Tolls with emotions that are a bit less raging. I have long classed this among my all-time favorite books, but I’m not certain that would be the case if I read this for the first time today. With that said, there is still a fundamental power in this novel that is undeniable. The cinematic quality of the set pieces still holds up. So does the way that Hemingway marvelously captures the tensions between youth and experience, between choosing causes and choosing people, between what is worth dying for, and for what is worth living. Also, there is a bridge that needs to be blown up, and that’s the kind of saga that never goes out of style.
