When I was at High School I had an English teacher who was a fan of Dostoevsky, who told me that some people learned Russian solely to read Dostoevsky in the original. Sometimes I think it would be worth learning Spanish to read MVL in the original. This is the sixth of his novels that I’ve read and the third that I have rated with five stars. I understand that MVL himself considers this epic novel as his greatest achievement, (and bear in mind that he was awarded a Nobel Prize). The novel is based on historical events in north-east Brazil at the end of the 19th century, namely “The War of Canudos” of which I had previously been unaware. I don’t know how closely the novel follows the real story, but MVL is in the business of writing fiction, and I read it in that spirit. In real life, the basics seem to be that a wandering mystic and prophet called Antônio Conselheiro (“The Counsellor”) gradually collected more and more followers over a period of years, and he and his disciples eventually settled, occupying land at a place called Canudos in the State of Bahia (the land belonged to a local aristocrat). Unlike many of the modern leaders of religious cults, The Counsellor seems to have been a genuine ascetic. People flocked to Canudos, which was organised as a society of subsistence peasants. There was no money, and food and work was shared amongst the inhabitants. The Brazilian army launched no less than 4 expeditions against Canudos. The first three were defeated, and the people of Canudos were only overrun by the fourth after prolonged and ferocious resistance. The Counsellor is of course at the centre of the novel, but the story is not told through him in the first person. He is a distant, mysterious figure, in the novel always observed by others. The reader is instead presented with an immense tapestry of different characters, with numerous sub-plots creating a vivid picture of time and place. On one level, the novel gives us a spectacular re-telling of the war. On another, it seems to me that MVL uses the text to raise all sorts of themes. A major theme is that of idealism, and fanaticism. Canudos represents a rejection of modernity, especially the secular Brazilian Republic established after the overthrow of the monarchy a few years beforehand. The Counsellor rejects the introduction of civil marriage, the replacement of tithes by taxes, even the metric system. The Counsellor’s opposite in ideology, but his counterpart in fanaticism, is Colonel Moreira César, commander of one of the expeditions against Canudos, an extreme nationalist and a believer in progress and industrialisation. In the rest of Brazil, the people of Canudos are portrayed as the agents of reactionary monarchists and British imperialists. Bewildered by how the Brazilian army is routed by a collection of half-starved peasants, newspapers claim that the “rebels” are armed and trained by British officers. (“Fake News” is not that new a phenomenon). The book also features a Scottish anarchist, who fetches up in the area following a shipwreck and who goes by the nom de guerre of Galileo Gall. Equally fervent in his beliefs, he sees Canudos as the rejection of class oppression and the expression of the peasants’ desire for a just society, but his presence is useful to the nationalists who are trying to point to British influence. At one point, the local aristocrat is addressed by one of the Counsellor’s principal disciples: “The baron recognised that tone of voice; it was that of the Capuchin Fathers of the Sacred Missions, that of the sanctimonious wandering sects who made pilgrimages to Monte Santo, that of Moreira César, that of Galileo Gall. The tone of absolute certainty, he thought, the tone of those who are never assailed by doubts.” The Counsellor’s closest disciples are mostly people who have committed horrendous crimes. One, an ex-bandit, even earned the name “Satan João” because of his limitless cruelty – in Canudos he becomes “Abbot João”. Do the disciples come to the Counsellor from a desire to expiate their sins, or are they simply responding to someone who treats them with love and respect? Have they truly reformed as much as it would first appear? What is the source of the extreme devotion displayed by so many thousands? The reader is left to draw his or her own conclusions. I should say that there is a great deal of cruelty in the book. The Counsellor’s followers regard the soldiers as agents of the Devil. The soldiers view the people of Canudos as traitors. Prisoners have their throats slit, corpses are mutilated, and there are many other atrocities. The slavish devotion towards the Counsellor is also uncomfortable to read at times. I have to admit the novel has put a couple of images into my head that I would rather weren’t there, and which I hope I can forget. Overall though, an absolute masterpiece.
