⭐️⭐️⭐️ three stars - Three stars for this 2002 standalone book from Linda Howard. This book is nowhere near my favorite Howard, but it’s not the least, either. It falls flatly somewhere in the middle for me. Why the three stars? What kept it from being a stand stellar four-star Howard read for me? Let’s count up the ways this one fell short… 1. This book is shockingly raunchy for Howard. If you follow my reviews, you are most likely aware that I often read dark romance, so I’m not in any way knocking the edgy smut here, but it’s just surprisingly glaring coming from a Howard read. Shocking in its unexpected presence on the page; I was taken aback at the Hero’s thoughts and how blatantly sexual they were. I didn’t find it sexy, it made me start not to like him, but more on that later. 2. Speaking of the out of place raunchiness (for a Howard novel), how about the naked wresting scene? 😳 Yes, you read that right - naked wrestling. I actually laughed out loud at this cheesiness. Then when his penis accidentally slips - 😂 dead. So outrageous, I’m not sure we needed this scene 😂 It did morph into a hot sex scene, but again, that scene was also uncharacteristically sexy (hint: a tad kinky) for this author, it mostly struck me as odd, rather than sexy 💁‍♀️ 3. In Howard’s defense, she did come up with a unique read, and that is what intrigued me enough to pick this book up to begin with. The unusual fact that our heroine here is a butler was an interesting diversion from the romance norm. I did enjoy that aspect. However, the fact that she was a butler bodyguard was a bit of a stretch. Based upon the h’s body description, I didn’t quite buy the bodyguard characteristic; just a bit over-the-top for me. 4. I also didn’t feel as if the character arcs were as well drawn as they normally are in her better books. I had a few moments where I was confused as to why our heroine never reached out to her family, when in the beginning of the story she was portrayed as being very close to her siblings. I kept expecting one of her brothers to make an appearance on page, but after they were introduced, that was their last mention. Howard did throw in a phone call with the heroine and her mother in one of the last chapters, but this came across as an afterthought add-on that was only thrown in there for continuity, as it really added nothing to the story, other then letting Howard tie up the loose end of the character arc 💁‍♀️ 5. I really did not care for the Hero here. All the raunchiness drew his character as someone just a little too rough around the edges for me. I like my men a bit more sophisticated than he appeared, and a bit more intelligent. A real disappointment, as Howard’s alpha males are normally just my thing, but not the Hero here. Sorry, Cahill. 6. Our Hero also helps this book get shelved to my “don’t like the Hero here” shelf with his unbelievable, very unfortunate, and highly unromantic action toward our poor heroine. His act of personal betrayal (note: this action is not a romantic action - i.e. not cheating) would have been unforgivable for me. She just took him back, no questions, and slept with him the same day; just gave him a pass. An act like this deserves grovel in a romance. We don’t get that here, so there’s the loss of a star for the underdeveloped romance 💔☹️ 7. Finally, the crime drama here is more drama, rather than suspense. Howard can really write masterful romantic suspense, but this book just doesn’t deliver that. There’s a competent drama here, with a side of murder, but that’s it. There you have it. Those are my reasons why this isn’t the best Howard I’ve read (that honor goes to her “After The Night”, and you can read my review of that outstanding five star Howard read here 👉 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... ). I’m rating this a mediocre crime drama, with some raunchy dialogue and sex scenes thrown in. Do not particularly recommend. Especially not if you’re looking for another romantic suspense, because I don’t feel that this one qualifies. Three stars, because it’s Howard 💁‍♀️📚📖
