Second read – 25 September 2024 - ****. In the Ocean of Night is the first book of Gregory Benford’s hard-sf Galactic Center series. I’ve started a re-read of the series, because it is mentioned in Lecture 4 “Evolution and Deep Time in Science Fiction” of Gary Wolfe’s video lecture series “How Great Science Fiction Works.” The 1977 novel is a fix-up of four previously published novellas, and was nominated for 1978 Nebula Award. The novellas are: Icarus Descending , published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction April 1973 In the Ocean of Night , published in Worlds of If May-June 1972, Locus Novella 1973 17th place. Threads of Time , published in Threads of Time anthology, edited Robert Silverberg, 1974, Locus Novella 1975 12th place. A Snark in the Night , published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction August 1977, Hugo novella 1978 nomination, Locus novella 1978 2nd place. The stories all concern a British-born astronaut named Nigel Walmsley, who is involved in several first encounters with an alien intelligence from outside the solar system. Walmsley’s reputation grows, as he takes initiative in opposition to NASA’s conservative and politically-motivated direction. They don’t like him, but they need him. Humanity’s movement out into the solar system is systematic and believable, although his stated timeframe is overly optimistic. Benford’s vision of the situation of machine and biological intelligence in the galaxy that is gradually revealed through the episodic novellas is subtle and complex, yet broadly powerful. This novel sets the stage for future novels of deep time and cosmic significance. This world-building is paralleled with choppy stories of Walmsley’s personal life. There is little of his personal life in the first story, of his encounter at the comet Icarus. However, the next episode is told from the context of his polyamorous triad with Alexandria and Shirley. I found the closing events of his life with Alexandria to be evocative in their contrasts between the alien communication involved, the misinterpretations of the New Sons (a new world religion that stands in like a caricature of actual religions), and how it affected Walmsley. In the final episode, involving an alien space wreck at Mare Marginis on the Moon, I was indifferent to his subsequent relationships with Mr. Ichino and Nikka. The social speculations of the then near-future are extrapolations of the trends of the 1960s and 1970s, which ring false when read in 2024. The writing probably would have survived better if Benford had not attached actual years to the future events. The epilog is set in 2019 - five years ago... First read – 3 September 1984 - ***. I read this because I liked Gregory Benford’s Timescape . I did not realize at the time that it was the first of a series.
