With the haunting life story of Alexeï Berg, Andreï Makine engages himself into the tradition of the framing story as a narrative strategy, a technique so often used by Turgenev ( First Love , Rudin ) and by Makine's choice for a train journey to create a forum for Berg’s story, particularly reminiscent of Tolstoy’s The Kreutzer Sonata . While waiting in some crowded train station in the Urals, the unnamed narrator encounters Alexeï Berg, once a budding pianist whose life will radically change when he gets towed into the whirlwind of the second world war and has to make some tough choices in order to survive. During the train journey Alexeï Berg will tell the narrator about his eventful life, from the moment he had to flee Moscow in 1941 when his parents are arrested until the moment both men will disembark from the train in Moscow – the history of one individual caught and almost crushed by the horror of 20th Century History. Once the atmospheric but slightly overlong introduction in the train station shifts for the train journey, the story unfolds elegantly . The novel seems as intricately structured as a musical piece which reflects its title beautifully, as this is not as much a book about music as it is a book about broken lives - and broken dreams. Makine’s storytelling is compelling and engrossing, his prose is lyrical and sparse at once, glowing and imaginative. Cinematically drawn war and snow scenes echo Pasternak’s Doctor Zhivago . The story sparks and smoulders under the skin, propulsing dexterously towards the apotheosis, unleashing jubilantly – dissimulation gives way to the authenticity of truth, which cannot go without consequences in Stalinist Russia. As his hands fell upon the keyboard, it was still possible to believe a beautiful harmony had been formed at random, in spite of him. But a second later the music came surging out, the power of it sweeping away all doubts, voices, sounds, wiping away the fixed grins and exchanged glances, pushing back the walls, dispersing the light of the reception room out into the nocturnal immensity of the sky beyond the windows. He did not feel as if he were playing. He was advancing through a night, breathing in its delicate transparency, made up as it was of an infinite number of facets of ice, of leaves, of wind. He no longer felt any pain. No fear about what would happen. No anguish or remorse. The night through which he was advancing expressed this pain, this fear, and the irremediable shattering of the past, but this had all become music and now only existed through its beauty. Music of a Life conveys a acute illustration of the profound and powerful wisdom in Epicurus’ device to live hidden - as in some places and times this simply makes the difference whether one will live or not. (*** ½) (Photographs by Joseph Koudelka)
