The wind which this evening alertly plays - recalls a loud clash of metal sheets - the instruments of the thick trees and sweeps the coppery horizon where streaks of light like kites stretch high in the sky that thunders (Journeying clouds, bright realms of above! Of sublime El Dorados half-shut doors!) and the sea that scale after scale, hurls to the ground a horn of spiralled foams; the wind that is born and dies in the hour that is slowly blackening would also play you tonight out of tune instrument, heart. - English Horn , pg. 21 * * * Do not ask from us the word that surveys from every side our shapeless soul, and in letters of fire proclaim it and make it shine like a crocus lost in the middle of a dusty meadow. Ah, the man who moves forth sure, a friend to others and to himself, and gives no thought to his shadow which the sun stamps upon a flaking wall! Do not ask us for the formula which could open worlds for you, yes, some twisted syllable and dry like a branch. This alone nowadays can we tell you, what we are not, what we do not want. - The Bones of the Cuttlefish , pg. 29 * * * There emerges Triton from the waves that lap the threshold of a Christian temple, and each approaching hour is ancient. Each doubt is led by the hand like a girl-child friend. There no one looks at or listens to oneself. Here you are at the origins and making decisions is foolishness: your path you will later trace to assume a face. - The Bones of the Cuttlefish: Portovenere , pg. 39 * * * Like a vortex whirls above my bowed head a pungent sound of trees. The earth burns, crisscrossed by the twisted shadows of the firs, and at sea, out there, the gaze is veiled, more than by branches, by the haze that here and there breaks out from the veining ground. When more or less muffled the roll of flooding waters that drown and swell neat to dry stretches reaches me: or it is an intermittent thrashing and showering of foams upon the rocks. As I raise my face, abruptly the braying, above my head, ceases; and darting past towards the shrilling waters, blue-white arrows, a pair of jays. - Mediterranean Sea , pg. 55 * * * Obliterate if you wish it so this weak complaining life, as the sponge does the ephemeral scribble upon the blackboard. I am awaiting to re-enter your circle, my slippery passing-by is coming to an end. My venture bears witness to an order that in the course of the voyage I forgot, these words of mine swear their faith in an impossible event, of which they are wholly ignorant. But always when I heard your gentle surf upon the beach consternation took hold of me as when a man of waning memory recovers reminiscences of his country. Having learned my lesson more from the gasping of some desolate midday hour of yours that is scarcely audible than from your moment of glory, I surrender to you now in humility. I am no more than a spark of an influoresence. Well do I know it: to burn, this, nothing else, is my significance. - Mediterranean Sea , pg. 69-70
