3.5/5 I've seen this book compared to The Clan of the Cave Bear by Jean Auel (one of my absolute favorites) which is why I bought nearly the entire series when I came across it in a used bookstore a while back. Both the Auel books and this series are pre-history in terms of time period and both have characters that go on a long journey. So I suppose they are similar. However, the writing is quite different between these books and the characters are too. This is the first installment in a very long group of standalones featuring the first people to come across what is now the Bering Strait back at the end of the Ice Age. The characters aren't super developed but their relationships are quite dynamic and I really enjoyed the "politics" between tribes. It started sort of slowly and I wondered if I would enjoy it, but it built to a dramatic end. There is a lot of talking about "dreaming" and shamanism, and pretty much every aspect of this was a little over my head. Also, there are a few scenes involving animal hunting that I chose to skip pretty much over because they were just really detail-heavy. But overall a good read and I think I will meander my way through the series slowly. Audiobook Notes : I was excited to be able to alternate between reading with my eyes in my paperback and listening when I was driving to and from work. Otherwise it would have taken me much longer to get through the book. The narrator does a great job with his performance; he gave distinct voices to certain characters and I enjoyed this. The hardest part about listening, I think, is that ALL of the character names confused the heck out of me because they aren't anything like the names I am familar with. (Ex: Runs In Light, Wolf Dreamer, Raven Hunter, Strikes Lightning, One Who Cries, Green River). I had a really tough time remembering which name went with which character, but once I sort of figured it out, the story was much easier for me to follow. As it stands at the time of this review, there are only audiobooks for a few of the titles in the lengthy series, but I'm really hoping they will publish all of them. Title: People of the Wolf by W. Michael Gear and Kathleen O'Neal Gear Series: North America's Forgotten Past #1 Narrator: Mark Boyett Length: 19 hours, 19 minutes, Unabridged Publisher: Audible Studios
