How little we know of what there is to know. I wish that I were going to live a long time instead of going to die today because I have learned much about life in these four days; more, I think than in all other time. I'd like to be an old man to really know. I wonder if you keep on learning or if there is only a certain amount each man can understand. I thought I knew so many things that I know nothing of. I wish there was more time. For Whom The Bell Tolls ~~ Ernest Hemingway Selected by Alan for April 2022 Big Book Read Sadly, it's en vogue to hate Ernest Hemingway these days. Hemingway was selfish and egomaniacal, a faithless husband and a treacherous friend. He drank too much, he brawled and bragged too much, he was a thankless son and a negligent father. Hemingway was a terrible person, and he was brilliant writer ~~ a very brilliant writer. I've noticed that most of those who hate on Hemingway have never read Hemingway ~~ or they've only read The Old Man and the Sea in a high school English class. The brilliant The Old Man and the Sea is over the head of most 15-year-olds. I wish people could get past this hatred of Hemingway . I will continue to shout it from the rooftops ~~ Hemingway is a brilliant writer ! There is a tremendous amount of sadness in Hemingway’s best novel, For Whom the Bell Tolls . How could there not be? It’s about the Spanish Civil War; that most terrible of events pitting the bad against the equally bad. The story is simple, the tale of an American who ends up fighting on the side of the republicans against the fascist government. His task? Blow up a bridge. His conflict? A sudden and growing romance with Maria; some existential conflicts about the meaning of the war; the desire to die a purposeful death that is also painless. For Whom the Bell Tolls is a brilliant story inspired from true events during the Spanish Civil War of the 1930s ~~ the guerrilla warfare between the fascist leader Franco and the Republican resistance. A story that bluntly accepts the horrors of life and one that sheds light on the sheer obstacles that people can overcome with purpose. For Whom the Bell Tolls is told in the wonderfully smooth prose that employs both a refreshing truth in dialogue and also a realistic depiction of the human mind. For Whom the Bell Tolls projects the actual human beings caught in conflict. The characters face significant challenges and are faced with tribulations we can hardly imagine, yet the daily struggles and moments of joy and laughter are shown as well. It was this integration of even the most trivial of things that brings this story to life, and somehow made the story even more tragic, depicting the continuity and normalization of living always with the possibility of death lurking beyond. The range of characters that Hemingway creates is incredible. Robert Jordan is the typical driven military man who won't allow himself to feel emotion, then encounters love. But the exploration of his mental tenacity takes this common character, and makes him a brilliant protagonist. His willingness to sacrifice anything for what he believes to be a great cause is presented in such a humble manner that is just incredible. Alongside him, we have Pilar, the aging woman, wise and fiery, brutal and loving. Her motivations and limitations were written so realistically, and that is what sets these characters apart from most other fictional characters. I could go through a long list of the unique characters here, but my point is that if you read this, you will come away feeling an intense connection with each and every person. That is one of Hemingway's greatest qualities as a writer. Alongside the wonderful prose and characterization, the plot is also brilliant. A series of twists and turns, of big and small events that expertly drove the pace forward at what I felt to be near perfection. There were scenes that slow the pace down and really make you think as a reader, and then there are those heart pounding moments that drew me into the chaos taking place, from the skirmishes to moments of clarity and the times when all seems to have descended into failure. I think you know by now; I loved this book. Hemingway presents ideas of love, anger, hatred, discrimination and determination in such nuanced ways that are genuinely moving. For Whom the Bell Tolls is an amazing book that not only delivers a thrilling read, but also has an intense moral code that one can aspire to follow.
