A pointless book. I can't imagine why the author thought this would be of any use to anyone. It is supposed to be a fictional autobiography of the author's childhood in a Moroccan household, which practised seclusion of the women - hence the harem business. The book is unstructured and simply jumps from one topic to the other without any sort of coherence. One moment you would be reading about the French invasion and the next moment, it is all about charms and spells. There was no discernible plot in the book. It was just a collection of random anecdotes, some of which were quite interesting, but led nowhere at all. It might have worked if the characters were developed a little, but no attention was paid to that. This was just a rant against Moroccan patriarchy. Quite understandable, but not something I wanted to read. It could have been so much more and so much better if the author had told an actual story - her actual story! A pet hate of mine is using childish voices to keep the quality of writing down. I dislike lengthy childish ruminations of life and issues and I do NOT think they add anything innovative to the discussion. It was quite annoying to read about dumb theories like the French going to wars because the taste of tea drunk with milk is horrible, or that Americans used short forms for everything because they wanted to go back to chewing gum. Perhaps this was meant to be funny but to me, it was just irritating. I don't want to read about dumb girl theories. I was genuinely interested in reading about a woman's journey from seclusion to feminism, but Mernissi really failed in this. Even worse were the endless discussions about what a harem was. And the stupid theories about the world war. And boring discussions about the difference between boys and girls. Do I really look like I care? I wanted a plot, a story, great characters, a journey from A to B, not meaningless discussions by stupid children, half ranting, half political essay. The ending was abrupt and ended with the protagonist suddenly realising that she was different from a male cousin. Congratulations. This was what I got after skimming through endless pages of traditional Moroccan beauty treatments! One word - Boring.
