I found myself disappointed with this 1976 'hard sci' novel, not because the outdated sci fi component was an issue but because, as a novel, its literary experimentation and narrative jumps did not cut the mustard. One should never be too hard on old hard sci-fi books just because their imaginative futures look less imaginative nearly half a century later (say). At least they tried and the core idea here has merit - Earth's first contact with a galactic struggle between machine and organic intelligences. Apart from the fact that the sociological representation of the future is a simple extrapolation of the lifestyles and political anxieties of the 1960s and 1970s and so uninteresting today, there are other more literary flaws. Its cardinal sin though is its ridiculous leap into pseudo-science ('Bigfoot'). By trying perhaps to be a serious narrative novel with far too much 'stuff' on the emotional lives of its characters, it provides insufficient time to develop the science fiction. The main character also makes imaginative leaps that no serious scientist could possibly make to move the story along. The core idea's viability gets to be neglected in favour of an 'ancient alien' story line that becomes embarrassing. A nuclear explosion is only one of many incidents that are left lying unexplained in the path of the reader while hypotheses are thrown out wildly and then treated as facts. One also suspects that Benford thought that some almost unreadable and rather dull literary modernism might help to convey the passage of a somewhat emotionally repressed British-American astronaut into some form of transcendence. It does not. It merely seems pretentious. There are other more novelistic flaws - the over-emphasis on a polyamorous stressed emotional life that disappears half way through the novel, the 'life crisis' sexual shenanigans with a techno-nymph on the moon and the stereotypical science versus religion sub-plot that goes nowhere. There is nothing wrong with mixing hard science fiction with the more conventional novel of character development and emotional growth but, to get away with it, you have to be able to do both twice as well as more conventional practitioners, This is not the case here. This is a shame because periodically Benford writes very well especially when his protagonist is doggedly and autonomously ploughing his own furrow and yet his bureaucratic survival never quite seems plausible enough to keep putting him in the right place and right time as it does. Our hero is somehow there at some remarkable moments of first contact in a way that seems more magical than scientific. It is extremely hard to believe that any modern society would let him get away with his behaviour on first contact and put him where he could be central to next contact. As a normal space adventure it might have worked. Perhaps as a novel of emotions based on first contact alone it might also have worked (though then be of scant interest to most sci fi readers). As a combination of both, it just does not do so.
