Acclaimed as one of Hemingway’s greatest novels, and indeed worthy of this distinction, For Whom the Bell Tolls is the story of an idealist during the Spanish Civil War - which was a bloody and treacherous prelude to WWII. Hemmingway was one of many artists that opposed Franco's repression of the Catalan Republic which was founded on Anarchist principles and crushed mercilessly by the right-wing Falangists with the full support of Hitler (while promised support for the Catalonians from Britain and France never materialized due to their failed strategy of Appeasement). This is the subject of Picasso's Guernica in Madrid's Reina Sophia museum - one of the most powerful pieces of art on the planet. In any case, it is against this fatalistic background (it was written in 1940, a few years after the annihilation of the movement), Hemmingway places an idealist American fighting for Catalonia and, well, things do not end well as one might surmise. It is a typically understated masterpiece of Hemmingway prose that can be read as a historical document about the failed revolution, a swan song for the pre-WWII idealism, or a precursor to the death and destruction of WWII to come, but nonetheless, it must be read as an essential anti-war text and an American masterpiece. Robert Jordan is sent behind the fascist lines in the mountains near Segovia and there he joins forces with a band of guerrilla fighters and falls in love with Maria, a young girl who barely survived captivity by the fascists and was rescued by the band. There is Pablo and his wife Pilar, the de facto leaders, a gypsy Rafael, an older man Anselmo and a few other revolutionaries. Robert’s mission to blow up a bridge over a deep gorge while the Republican army opens a new front in the war, hoping to conquer Segovia, is an ill-thought-out move and some disagreement in the group nearly leads to a split. The book is Hemingway’s longest and his protagonist Robert Jordan may be the closest to an autobiographical portrait as he also lost his father to a suicide and seems addicted to action and violence. Don't miss my review of the Meyer biography of Hemingway: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...
