Within Gregory Benford’s Galactic Center series, the first two volumes are hard-sf in a near-future Earth setting featuring astronaut/scientist Nigel Walmsley. However, with Great Sky River (#3), the story jumped forward some 35,000 years, to an initially unrecognizable story universe. Tides of Light (#4) is a sequel to Great Sky River in which Family Bishop has escaped the Mantis and the planet Isis in an ancient human spaceship they discovered. I’m now in a re-read of the entire series, because it is mentioned in Lecture 4 “Evolution and Deep Time in Science Fiction” of Gary Wolfe’s video lecture series How Great Science Fiction Works . Once again, the plot tension is not so much about conflict with the Mechs in their long-term aggression across the galaxy, as about the Mech strategy of pitting biological forms against each other, and reaping a form of art from their actions. In this volume, Benford focuses his hard-sf acumen on the evolution and intentional development of biological forms in the shadow of Mech aggression. This is not done with straight-up info-dump, but as seen through the sensoria of our knowledge-regressed post-human descendants and a race of cyborg biological life encountered on the pre-programmed destination world of the Argo. Benford has worked out an intricate future history and reveals more of it in each volume of the series. The narrative can be difficult to follow until the reader assimilates the clues to the nature of the deep-time speculations Beford is animating, and that is the pleasure of hard-sf. Yet, Killeen and his tribal family are easily identified with, and their human concerns drive the story. Quath, less so. Reviews should not be a mere plot synopsis, or reveal more of the world building than necessary – and I have tried to avoid that. I would not recommend reading this book as a stand-alone, but I have found the series as whole to be both challenging and rewarding. My edition also contains the entirety of A Hunger for the Infinite , a 44-page novella set in the same future history, which I have previously read in Robert Silverberg’s anthology Far Horizons: All New Tales from the Greatest Worlds of Science Fiction . It made little sense to me then, on a stand-alone basis. I now better understand a lot of the vocabulary and context, and it furthers the exposition of Benford’s Galactic Center speculations. So, a good inclusion here.
