I bow before the master. Goodreads author Andrew Leon has been politely asking me to give Gregory Benford a chance for almost a year now. When he first asked me to, I had assumed that I already had. Back in the 90’s when I first started reading science fiction in earnest I found that the sci fi portion of my local bookstore was pretty well stocked with authors whose last name started with ‘B.’ Stephen Baxter, Greg Bear, David Brin, Ben Bova, they are probably others that I can’t recall at the moment. But I read all these guys over a period of 6 months or so. Startide Rising, Mars, The Forge of God, Ring, and I read multiple books by each of these guys. It was during a naïve time I had when what laid beyond the ‘B’s’ was a great mystery because I could never get past them when I was browsing. Anyhow, I thought I’d read Benford too, I knew the name, folks told me he was pretty good. I had him on my list of guys to read. I must have just forgotten. The second time Andrew told me to check I went out to the internet and checked his bibliography. I had never read a word of his stuff. Damn. So, I took a gander at this book, written more than 40 years ago. And held my breath. When this thing arrived I almost immediately regretted not having found him earlier. The story, as it goes, is pretty hard to lay out, as the plotting reminds me quite a bit of something Arthur C Clarke would have done, but the prose Benford used was incredibly powerful, it was full blown literary. I absolutely loved this novel. It took me a bit longer to read than I would have liked, as it felt like the sort of thing I could have knocked off in a couple of days, but other stuff kept coming up and I didn’t really have an opportunity to just sit and plow through. That didn’t stop it from being awesome. The book is written in four parts. The first takes place in 1999 when a rather large asteroid on a trajectory that leads it to Earth is being investigated by our hero, Nigel, he sees that this is really an ancient alien craft, derelict and unworking. He disobeys orders, raids it for what he can and allows it to go unencumbered. He was supposed to nuke the thing before it struck the earth, but he let it go having realized that it would not hit the earth, but skip along its outer atmosphere and fly away to never be seen again. In part two, a decade later, after taking a desk job within NASA, on the same day he discovers a working alien craft entering the sol system, his one true love in life is diagnosed with a terminal disease. And it’s right there I was hooked. I’ve thought about this book a lot as I read. I wasn’t kidding about the plotting. There is no real bad guy, and it takes place over 20 years. It’s about a guy trying to find his place in the universe, and the idiots that run the world. It was a masterpiece. Funny, I’m not sure it would get published if it were written today, and I don’t mean for the fact that it is set, more or less, on our time right now. It’s so far wrong on details, big and small, that you might think it would be hopelessly dated. But it isn’t. Benford wrote what is clearly a ‘hard’ science fiction book, and those tend to age poorly, but what this had going for it that so many others do not, is a hauntingly beautiful story. The final part, where some of the mysteries presented early in the novel are explained, the story drags a bit. It starts to get a tad new agey there too, but the weight of the previous portions of the book carried me along even after things got weird at the end. Not too badly, he wrote not only a beautiful novel, but a very philosophical one as well. It posits a universe where beings not too much unlike humans, rise and fall with startling regularity, but the machines we all build continue to live and explore long after the species that created them have passed into the night. They see humans, and other organic beings, as something to be avoided, or if necessary, exterminated. This is a 40 year old book that looks at humanity dealing with the night sky full of sentient machines, and a history of violence written all over the galaxy – and the solar system itself. Only read if you can sit and think about what’s being written. I’m a fan for life because of this book. Thank you Gregory, and thanks Andrew, for the introduction. I loved it, and can’t wait to read another of Benford’s books.
