I have just awoken, having dreamed of music. I closed this book and thought long and hard about what it is to have the remnants of a life. This is what this short novel does, helps the reader understand loss and how a person deals with meandered memories. Music is memory. Music is survival. Music softens the story. The prose is music. A child, a budding pianist, loses his parents to hate during Russia's doomed years. He flees to a friend's house where he is met with betrayal. He flees. He hides between the boards of a house, a place unfit for a human. And when there is nowhere else for him to go, he takes on another person's identity. Years go by. The child ages. Yet despite his loss, music never leaves him: He has fingers that are nothing like a musician's fingers. Great, rough, lumpy knuckles, tanned and wrinkled. The fingers move about on the keyboard without depressing the keys, pausing, springing to life, accelerating their silent course, getting carried away in a feverish flight: one can hear the fingernails tapping on the wooden keys. He lives in despair, with all of the guilt a survivor endures. Unsure of himself, unsure of the life he has chosen for survival, he exists emptily. When he receives a woman's attention, he does not know what to do, for betrayal is all he has become accustomed to: He reflected that there must be a word for it, some key to understanding this suffering and this moon, and his own life, changed beyond recognition, and above all, the simplicity within which two human beings could give one another not love, no, but this peace, this respite, this release, derived simply from the warmth of a hand To think, the reader receives all of this on a train ride to Moscow, when two people's lives are changed by a story that needed to be told. The narration starts in the present and smoothly delves into the past tense. Even when the shorter spaces of story left me puzzled and the spaces between paragraphs left me wanting more, one of the things I enjoyed was the drastic yet subtle movement of time because of how tense is utilized. Like a piano recital, this novel occurs in refined cadence. The reader traverses a symphonic order that is alluring and graceful, yet strident and at times pandemonic. A slow read is definitely recommended.
