4.5 stars This novella by the Russian writer Andreï Makine left me with a question I considered for a long time afterwards. I’m not certain if this was the author’s intention or not, yet it lingered, haunting me before drifting off to sleep at night. In trying to preserve yourself from horror and isolation, can you be truly saved if in return you have given up the essence of your true self? Your identity, your love, those things that bring you joy? Music of a Life is a story of a musician, a classical pianist named Alexeï Berg. His tale is told to an unnamed narrator upon their meeting on a snowy night while waiting for a train to Moscow. The narrator first stumbles upon Alexeï after nodding off in the waiting room only to be awakened by the sound of a piano. The feeling of fatalism he felt emanating from the mass of his fellow countrymen resignedly accepting the delays is replaced by a new emotion upon hearing those subdued notes played. “Suddenly everything is illuminated by a truth that has no need of words: this night lost in a void of snow, a good hundred travelers huddled here, each seeming to be breathing gently upon the fragile spark of his own life; this station with its vanished platforms; and these notes stealing in like moments from an utterly different night.” It was the spring of 1941 and the brink of Alexeï’s debut concert. His dreams are thwarted when his family becomes ensnared in the web of Stalin’s purges. He flees to the countryside and is forced to take on a new identity in order to survive. His new life must never betray his gift for music, yet this passion is never far from his thoughts, remaining forever in his soul. With World War II now at Russia’s doorstep, Alexeï’s journey is both perilous and heartbreaking. The prose is beautiful and evocative, and his story as told to the narrator takes on almost a dreamlike quality. Now and then along the way he encounters something resembling the emotion of love. Most are fleeting impressions and he struggles to name this ephemeral feeling. "He reflected that there must be a word for it, some key to understanding this suffering and this moon, and his own life, changed beyond recognition, and above all, the simplicity with which two human beings could give one another not love, no, but this peace, this respite, this release, derived simply from the warmth of a hand.” I don’t know how an entire man’s life can be so perfectly encapsulated in a book just a little over 100 pages. Yet Makine does just that with elegant and masterful writing. In few pages he also manages to depict the mindset of an entire country during this time period. It’s a story of survival – of the body as well as the spirit. Makine conjures the beauty of music and how its loss affects a life. Ultimately, it’s a story about betrayal, particularly of one’s self. This author is another gem that I would not have discovered without the blessing of my Goodreads friends. "He told himself that in this life there should be a key, a code for expressing, in concise and unambiguous terms, all the complexity of our attempts, so natural and so grievously confused, at living and loving.”
