I must admit that I am more of a fan of Fatima Mernissi herself than her books. The Morrocan feminist is an icon in her own country. Born in a 1940, she did indeed grow up in a harem and then went on to earn a Ph.D. in Political Science, teach sociology at Mohammed V University in Rabat, do research for UNESCO, and publish a handful of books and a multitude of articles. What is not to like? It is safe to say that she is the doyenne of scholarly research addressing the validity (or lack thereof) of the hadith regarding the subjugation of women. In addition, she looks like an elegant and wise grandmother, who is said to have a great sense of humor and lecture in Darrija, the local Moroccan dialect instead of MSA (Modern Standard Arabic, which is preferred by most intellectuals). In short, she is the kind of person many women (including me) would like to have tea with because she is an inspiration. Her semi-autobiographical Dreams of Trespass is probably her best-known book in the USA due to its easy-going, humorous tone and insights into a culture the average Western reader knows little about. It is a description of harem life through the eyes of a nine-year-old girl also called Fatima, who is as playful and fun as she is questioning and probing. The precocious, smart girl grows up within the safe boundaries of her family home where her paternal grandmother Lala reigns supreme, while her maternal grandmother who lives out in the country is a free spirit allowed to roam the countryside on her own. Despite having various fellow co-wives, the latter seems happier than the domineering Lala. Their grand-daughter questions the Hudud or frontiers that separate women from men, Christians from Muslims, the French from the Moroccans, and most of all what is considered Halal (pure) from Haram (forbidden or sinful). The very word “harem” is a variation of the word “haram”-That which needs to be protected at all costs. Sitting on the roof, Fatima often observes the contrasts between the world within and outside the confines of the harem. Her playful nature, games, and imagination are a way to deal with the restrictions imposed on her – An escape her mother, who seems to suffer most from being confined, no longer finds enough. From her highly sheltered world dominated mostly by men, Fatima struggles to find a balance between remaining loyal to her family and roots, while growing up into a modern, independent woman. The beauty of Moroccan architecture and the inventiveness and love among the women and children counter-balance the reality of living in virtual imprisonment, yet tellingly Mernissi seems to urge mostly her female readers for social change. A worthy message that no doubt has inspired many a modern Muslim woman, but lacking a real plot, not satisfactory as a literary novel.
