That a "mad man" walking from village to village in the poor northeast of Brazil in the state of Bahia, during the late 1800's preaching to the poor the brotherhood of all, and the end of the world would cause the deaths of countless people, and shake the very foundation of the new republic ... is unfathomable. Since the abolition of slavery and the monarchy less then a decade ago 1888, 1889, many homeless slaves have nowhere to go or feel wanted anywhere, white farm workers no jobs, neglected Indians living in abject poverty eating roots, when available but they do have something in common, each is powerless and hungry exploited by the rich landowners , the government more interested in collecting taxes than helping them, they die like flies in the arid lands, frequent droughts, epidemics, bandits roaming the countryside killing stealing from the inhabitants the little they have. Nobody cares until Antonio Vincent Mendes Maciel, known as Antonio the Counselor. Gathering followers after twenty years of fixing neglected churches, cemeteries, comforting the impoverished becomes a saint to the locals. He decides to build a new town Canudos, ( Canes) spectacularly growing to 30,000 citizen in a few years, causes concern to the nervous authorities, since he opposes the Republic separation of church and state and Freemasons, unbelievers that influence greatly the Brazilian establishment. The city does not use paper money, trading is the custom everyone has a piece of land and a mud house to live, food given to the helpless health houses for the sick and old, farms outside growing crops by the river nearby all, are equal. The benevolent Counselor, no titles orders the building of a second church a magnificent cathedral the Temple of the Blessed Jesus, a bell tower above it ringing the faithful to come in, he Antonio gives sermons there, looking down at the adoring crowd the loyal, local priest Father Joaquim a former coward, with children from his concubine saying mass, burying the dead baptizing marrying couples. Canudos is contended the Counselor has valuable apostles to govern, a dwarf a cruel woman that killed her infant child, Maria Quadrado a famous outlaw Satan John, now Abbot John the able, canny field commander ... Pajeu, with an ugly scar on his face, an angry fierce Indian that loved to mutilate his victim's noses and ears, a runaway slave heartless Big John, who killed his owner's sister a deformed man they call the Lion, who can read reformed by Antonio but the Republic is not happy sending armies to crush what they fear is an attempt (wrongly) to restore the monarchy, one, two, three, four arrive getting bigger and bigger each one, they're surprised that these peasants fight so ferociously, why? A vicious conflict where prisoners are butchered, by both sides. They will never quite understand the rulers, that these people have something to fight for, for the first time in their lives. A place where they are welcomed, accepted and even loved the criminals, freaks the penniless, somebody is helping the lowest of the low... A tremendous novel based on fact Mario Vargas Llosa, best book many critics believe including himself, not a happy read yet true mostly, an important one too ...
