welcome to...FOR JUNE THE BELL TOLLS. another month. another seminal work of literature added to my currently reading. another beautiful pun combining the two. it's another PROJECT LONG CLASSIC installment. actually kind of brave of me to have a book on my tbr for 8 years without even thinking about reading it. but the streak has to be broken eventually. let's do this. CHAPTER 1 i tried to start reading this with zero preparation, as i have the delusional overconfidence of a tech billionaire or a teenage boy with a tiktok account. almost immediately i fled to wikipedia, which told me "hey this book assumes you know about the spanish civil war" and then told me what that even is. thank you to the world's foremost intellectual property. CHAPTER 2 aaaand we have a love interest. damn, ernest. you work fast. we haven't even seen anything get blown up yet. CHAPTER 3 and just like that, we're four days behind. here is the entirety of my defense: it's summertime. or at least it feels like it is. CHAPTER 4 back to back short chapters. ernest hemingway wrote this whole book for the benefit of a 25 year old a century in the future so she could keep up on homework she assigned herself. it's an absinthe chapter!!!! we're getting hallucinatory. CHAPTER 5 THE SHORTEST CHAPTER YET. everyone say thank you, ernest. so far we have a lot of dialogue about people shooting people but not a lot of shooting...so either we are seriously building tension (and it's working) or this book is whatever the antonym of action-packed is. either way i'm in. CHAPTER 6 no joke...this chapter is even shorter than the one before. heming-way to go, team. loving how this character is only referred to as "pablo's woman" when pablo is weak and she runs everything. the fun thing about reading is that regardless of ernest's intent, i can decide he's conveying a point about misogyny and power. CHAPTER 7 well. we have now exchanged ilys and we have gotten mr. robert jordan laid. time is money, i guess. CHAPTER 8 another What We Talk About When We Talk About Some Action Actually Happening chapter...but maybe the next one will be the kicker. CHAPTER 9 now pablo's woman is referred to as THE woman...i could write essays about this transformation!!! CHAPTER 10 what a brilliant What Humans Are Capable Of During War chapter. which is another way of saying this was impossible to read and horrible and cruel and torturous and today is a one-chapter day. CHAPTER 11 it does seem impossible that 11 chapters in we are still talking about the same bridge. is this the climactic event? i gotta say, i thought we were building toward something bigger. CHAPTER 12 could this be...a wee bit....a hint of...sapphic??? we have gotten roberto laid again and still not a single bridge has blown up. since i started this more bridges have collapsed in my day to day reality (1) than in this book (0). instead we have to deal with a man rationalizing himself into sleeping with a girl he knows he isn't going to marry. 100 year old situationship alert. CHAPTER 14 at this point i have accepted that the lack of action re: the bridge is a metaphor illustrating the futility and bureaucracy of war, and by this reasoning i am back on board. CHAPTER 15 ah, friendship. CHAPTER 16 the bridge is nowhere in sight but we do have people hitting each other. and i've gotta say, i'm feeling like i want to hit this pablo guy in the mouth myself. CHAPTER 17 now we're talking about plans for AFTER the bridge?! it's like i'm the only one who cares about explosions at this point. CHAPTER 18 i have been enjoying this read since i started, but today was the first day i was like...i can't wait to pick this up. and we haven't even blown up a bridge yet! CHAPTER 19 still no bridge, but we do have an incredible poetic description of the composite smell of death, made up of myriad images and scenes coming together into one horrible scent. so it's forgivable, still. CHAPTER 20 classics are important because they teach you things about Eras of History. for example, now i know that people were just as horny in the 1940s as today. CHAPTER 21 ACTION IS HAPPENING!!! i totally and 100% understand the point that hemingway is trying to make about how war crowds out your ability to love, or to even be human, but the extracurricular "women aren't people" type unthinking misogyny really adds to the vibe. CHAPTER 22 man oh man all of these chapters have been so delightfully short. suddenly somehow doing 43 chapters in a 30 day month seems like an effortless treat. CHAPTER 23 took like 3.5 days off to celebrate a multiday national event known as "i saw boygenius live" and i'm still ahead of schedule. thank you, past me. CHAPTER 24 to be honest i just watched all quiet on the western front (great movie, highly recommend, most horrifying thing i've ever seen in my life) so all war content is just going to fail in comparison to that. CHAPTER 25 i have roughly 2 brain cells to rub together today and i am spending absolutely all of their capacity on reading my daily chapter(s) anyway. CHAPTER 26 and hemingway heard my plea from the future and granted me a chapter that's like 3.5 paragraphs long. i can't lose. AND it was really good. sheesh. CHAPTER 27 back to our regularly scheduled programming. (read: a chapter you can actually measure in pages.) i'm just going to say it. you know i'm going to say it so i might as well just get it out of the way: people are now shooting at each other and nary a bridge has seen a bomb. CHAPTER 28 i'm sorry for all the bridge jokes. this is a compelling and real depiction of what war is like and the last chapter was jarring in its rendition of that.x it's just...it really is a case of chekhov's unexploded infrastructure at this point. CHAPTER 29 brain dead day. CHAPTER 30 a chapter so somber and so exquisitely related you immediately feel bad for making a neverending series of unfunny bridge jokes. CHAPTER 31 aaaand now we're comparing boobs to natural terrain again. phew. i almost felt something there. oh, poor maria. CHAPTER 32 enemy chapter. with my level of interest and ability to remember these names it functions like an intermission. CHAPTER 33 is robert...actually...nice? can't be, right? that'd be too easy. i can't be enjoying a classic written by some guy 100 years ago AND think the protagonist is a good dude. CHAPTER 34 someday i hope to be as passionate about anything as hemingway is about bullfighting. CHAPTER 35 this is a very emotional and internal chapter that brings to light the hate that has been building in our protagonist for hundreds of pages, and yet it is fully impossible to take seriously because he literally will not stop telling people to "muck" themselves. CHAPTER 36 tensions are rising and the fate of the characters we most care about are sealed, so it is crucial that we take a quick detour to hang out with some guy on a side quest. CHAPTER 37 for old times sake, as we reach our mortal end...let's get robert laid one last time. CHAPTER 38 love to repeatedly say the spookiest, most superstitious and jinx-y thing i can think of and then go "nah jk jk" aaaaand here comes the action. maybe. CHAPTER 39 okay. so not quite yet. but i haven't heard this much talk of grenades since jersey shore was airing! sorry about that one. CHAPTER 40 "i obscenity you" is better than any modern-day swear, insult, expletive, or curse we could possibly come up with as a society. CHAPTER 41 guys...i can't believe i'm saying this...but we are locked and loaded and at the bridge. CHAPTER 42 we've checked in with the bad guys. it is time. CHAPTER 43 the final chapter. last call to place bets on if this bridge ever goddamn explodes. there were parts of this chapter that were the very best of the book, and there were parts that were wow, sheesh, corny. but the ending itself...so good. OVERALL at points, this dragged (and gave me a ton of time to make very repetitive explosion jokes, and for you to have to deal with them), and i don't think it always carried its purpose across effectively, and wowza did this sometimes feel more about premarital sex than war, but. in spite of all of it this is a good book! rating: 3.5
