The cover of The Collected Poems of Eugenio Montale, 1925-1977 has an impressionist image of a bright, sun-dappled field with trees along the landscape. It’s an appropriate image, since his poetry, especially that in his first collection, Cuttlefish Bones, is like a ray of early morning sunlight in an era (1920-1927) that included some of the densest, darkest, most abstract poetry in Western literature. Montale announces upfront that his poetry will reject the confounding and obscure classicism of his peers. And while the poems often share common modernist themes – fragmentation/fracturing (or “dissolution”), an impending sense of death, a constant wandering in search of existential meaning – these are couched in concrete images of the ever-living natural world. Nature (with a capital “N”) is certainly rough, swirling, and unyielding, but it is also the harbinger of a self-sustaining life force. There is regeneration even in dissolution. In fact, the renewal of the natural order depends upon it. These poems fall somewhere between the harsh fatalism of Naturalism and the inspiring sublime of Romanticism. Montale takes a middle ground: the natural world is that which forges our destiny and carries us toward death, but always on a promise that the vibrancy of its life force continues on, even as we do not. In “Arsenio,” as the protagonist of the title is inundated by that ancient and crushing wave of existence, there remains “some strangled life that emerged on your behalf, / and the wind whirls it away with the ashes of the stars.” I am reminded of Carl Sagan standing on a beach, fierce waves breaking in the distance, launching a dandelion into the wind at the beginning of Cosmos : “The surface of the Earth is the shore of the cosmic ocean … We are made of star stuff.” Yes, Montale agrees in his verse, we will end as ashes; but they constitute the dust of the stars, and the fertile loam of all life-to-come. A refreshing perspective – perhaps even a radical one – in an era of literature defined by darkness and disorder in both content and form.
