I was really excited to read this book, since the peopling of the Americas is one of my favorite subjects. Not only did I get a Master's degree in Archaeology, I live in the American Midwest, where much of the earliest remnants are found. But I was horribly disappointed. I could not even bring myself to finish the book. And I don't understand how so many people have given it 5 stars! First of all, just in the quarter of the book that I managed to get through, there are multiple rapes. It's not totally unreasonable for rape to have happened then, but if it was occurring on the scale that these authors have included, basically every woman would have been raped back then. Plus, it's pretty gross that something as horrific as rape is used as a plot point so often, and treated so casually by so many people in the book - including the victims! Second, the authors make only superficial efforts to assign motivation to any of the characters. The protagonist is a little too selfless and heroic, especially when compared to his (apparently sociopathic for no obvious reason) twin brother or to the medicine man who married the girl he is in love with. And the desire of the other tribe to wipe out the People seems completely arbitrary. Third, the authors have clearly thought about the tools of the People more than basic story requirements like plot and character-building. Even for a fellow archaeologist like me, their descriptions of tools are too technical and detailed. When I'm reading a story, I want to be able to get lost in the prose, not read a scientific explanation of how an object was made. Besides, the most interesting thing about archaeology is that we get to learn about people that we can never talk to; looking at the objects they left behind is just a means to do that. Which brings me to my last complaint: the People as they are written think and behave very anachronistically. The characters in the book are too individualistic. In that time period, people had to get along with each other for the most part in order to survive; if they didn't, they couldn't just move to another city or find another job like we can today. They had to work with their fellow tribe members and therefore often had to think in ways that would be very unfamiliar to us today. This is not to say that they were never selfish or always got along, but the survival of the individual depended a lot more on survival of the group, therefore sublimating the desires and impulses of the individual to secondary status. Also, I read a bunch of other reviews before I even started the book. Several readers who also didn't like it said that the supernatural elements were too confusing and treated as too realistic. I disagree. This was one of the few aspects of the book that I found believable. It's easy for modern people, who live in a post-Enlightenment world, to think that the confusion of the supernatural and reality is over the top, but for centuries, people understood the world partially through supernatural explanations. Finally, the basic storytelling and writing elements of this book are simply seriously lacking.
