I had read a couple of Vargas Llosa books years ago, in Spanish, when I lived in South America and my Spanish was still OK, and I remembered him as a witty, sexy, playful writer. I'm not sure if I have changed, he has changed, my memory is bad, or if this is just a very different book from the ones I read previously. In any case, the overall tone here is as far removed from those three adjectives as possible – relentless oppressiveness is the keynote instead. Which perhaps is appropriate, since the subject is the War of Canudos, an obscure civil conflict in backlands Brazil at the end of the nineteenth century. Gathered around the enigmatic figure of Antônio Conselheiro – ‘the Counselor’ – a group of rural villagers, outcasts and former bandits form a breakaway religious community, which holds out against the state before being, inevitably, crushed by the weight of the country's military. How do you tell a story like this? And for that matter, why do you want to? The two questions are related, I think. I was waiting to discover Vargas Llosa's thoughts on the wider significance of Canudos, or perhaps his exploration of the mindset that led people to join such a movement. But in fact, neither of these things feature much in the book. There are hints that the conflict was interpreted as a struggle ‘of the seacoast against the interior…of the new Brazil against traditional Brazil’, but these hints are not developed very far. Similarly, near the end, one character wonders (as well he might), What is the explanation of Canudos? Hereditary defects of people of mixed blood? Lack of education? A predisposition toward barbarism on the part of men who are accustomed to violence and who resist civilization out of atavism? Something to do with religion, with God? He finds none of these explanations satisfactory. And nor do I! But we ain't going to get anything else. The point, perhaps, is that there are no easy explanations, but if so, this is a rather banal point to labour 680 pages on. Instead, Vargas Llosa's intention seems to be simply to narrate the events of the conflict, in what I'm going to call punishing detail. In the absence of any clear thematic guidance, one event succeeds another in a kind of narrative wasteland where sexual rivalry, rape, violence and military logistics repeat themselves over and over again. There were four military expeditions against Canudos. You could imagine a book which just told the story of the final one, with perhaps some decisive flashbacks to earlier events. But here we get all four of them, with a level of granularity and repetition that – admittedly – does have a kind of cumulative power, but it's the slow power of glaciers, or continental drift. The cast is very large, as Vargas Llosa tells the story by means of a Tolstoyan cross-section of society, ranging across professions, classes and backgrounds. Yet where in Tolstoy this makes everything feel orchestral, polyphonic, here by contrast the effect is frustratingly monotone. Everyone, whoever they are, seems to be in the grip of the same degradation, confusion, and stultifying machismo. Female characters are introduced with throwaway comments like, ‘She had cut all her hair off herself after being raped for the fourth time’, and indeed sexual victimisation is the prime characteristic of all the women here – which doubtless has its historical accuracy, but it would have been nice to see these attitudes examined a bit more. The translation, by Helen R Lane, is really good for the most part, though I found it a bit annoying that the character of El Beatito (a workable handle in Spanish) is translated as ‘the Little Blessed One’, which sounds deeply unlikely in English. There is a nice scattering of Brazilian vocabulary throughout the novel – mostly details of the local flora and fauna – yet the writing in general is quite utilitarian, and scorns the playful prose that I had remembered from other Vargas Llosa books. There is a sense that he is writing every line with an awareness of his subject's importance, and although this helps maintain a serious tone, it also feels laborious at times. What is this book for? I kept asking myself. It's based heavily on the non-fictional account Os Sertões by Euclides da Cunha, a journalist who accompanied the army on the Canudos campaign, and da Cunha is (I'm assuming) immortalised here in the character of the unnamed ‘nearsighted journalist’, who's the closest thing the novel has to a hero. I would really like to read his book and get a feel for how far Vargas Llosa has deviated from the source material; maybe then I would have a clearer sense of what he hopes the novel should achieve. As it is, though the conclusion has an undeniable power, it feels like it's a hell of a long time coming.
