See my full thoughts here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kw8kv... Put yourself in the following scenario: For years you and your family have been at war. Not a modern war with an army marching through your land and bombs dropping from overhead, this is raiding warfare. You spend every moment knowing a band of warriors could charge into your camp, driving a spear into your gut, burning down your primitive homes, and carrying off anything of value. They see you as less than human, if you're unlucky enough to be captured then you'll either be cut into pieces while you're still alive and have your body laid out as a warning (if you're a man) or you'll be repeatedly raped and brought back to some foreign land as a stranger's slave/wife (if you're a woman). You can't fight, your only choice is to run and pray they don't find you. But after generations of running you've reached the end of your rope. The only hunting grounds left are too poor to feed anyone, a giant wall of ice in front of you marks the end of the world, you haven't eaten in several days, and half of your tribe has frozen to death in the winter. This is the situation that the People of the Wolf found themselves in at the start of this book. This book is the story of the first humans to migrate to North America over 12,000 years ago. While you might think that the majority of the plot revolves around their journey to the new world, but it actually focuses much more on the conflict between the People (no really, they just call themselves "the People") and the mysterious Others that have pushed them so far. The plot isn't very focused and sometimes meanders, which is the main reason that this is 4 stars and not 5. It picks up at the end, and it took a few twists I didn't expect, I just can't call it good. However the characters still managed to keep my interest. There are several important ones but I'd just like to mention the two best: Dancing Fox and Raven Hunter. Dancing Fox is a woman who was forced to become the wife of an abusive shaman before the story began. Near the beginning she winds up exiled and is forced to learn to survive on her own. Everyone expected her to die but instead she became a skilled hunter and eventually a leader among her tribe. Watching her grow and gain prestige is immensely satisfying. The way her arc ends annoyed me but that's more of a personal preference, others might be okay with it. Raven Hunter is a young man born into a world of constant suffering. His people are on the edge of extinction and he's powerless to stop it... at first. He's an angry young man, and if there's one thing angry young men are good at, it's war. While most of the main characters have a pacifist approach to life, Raven Hunter hypes the People into fighting back against the Others. But that's all he can do, and eventually it becomes all he knows. Every decision he makes is understandable, and his transformation is one of the most natural and organic I've ever read. I didn't even notice that he had changed until after it happened but it made total sense. In the end the thing that made this book work so well was not the adventure or the epic scale of events but rather the ways that these primitive people change and work to make their world better. Definitely a must for anyone interested in adventure stories with unique settings.
