Thanks to this book, I now know for a fact that I react badly to a stream of consciousness writing style. I took this for a sci-fi book, which it is, and largely is not. The elements of world-building and sci-fi I needed are here drowned under so much irritating stream of consciousness expositions, that you are left unsure of what the bloody hell is happening. The ridiculous way conversations happen, conducted in cryptic half-sentences and jumping from one idea to the next without bothering completing any. No one outside of the french film d'auteur talks this way, and at least there you have the visual medium to clue you in on what is left unsaid. In consequence, the relationships are superbly unengaging. I just wanted the poor woman to die so that we can move on. I wanted the various antagonists to die so we can move on. I wanted the hero to just drop dead so we can move on. The world-building is frustratingly bad. There was an indefinite number of global conflicts, there is some indefinite shortage of energy happening for no particular reason. There are widespread pollution and ecological decay, for no particular reason, slowly killing billions from famine or related illnesses. Almost every nation outside of North America is in total decay. The US itself is in some sort of semi-autocratic state yet with enough high technology and resources to colonize orbiting cities and the moon. People are mauled in public view for not carrying IDs or something, but the here gets away with insubordination, treason even, not once, not twice, but three times. The rest of the world is so inconsequential that no one bothers to tell them what is happening with aliens, yet everyone is afraid of it triggering a nuclear war, yet it's fine when a nuclear explosion happens on Earth. In short, this should have been a nice novella, even a short story, introducing the rest of the series. Since I already invested too much in reading this book to just stop here, but if the first chapter of the next book is written in the same style I will just cut my losses, and move on.
