I've considered myself a Dan Simmons fan since reading *Hyperion*; since then I've branched out to a bit of his horror with *The Terror* and really enjoyed it, so when I saw a Simmons novel I'd never heard of sandwiched in the science fiction section of a used bookshop, I figured it would be worth a couple bucks. And even though this book is in no way science fiction - it's set in our world and feels hauntingly realistic to boot - it was definitely worth the money. It's an interesting exercise in middle age crises and transcendental experiences, and while it didn't touch me like it has some other reviewers, I do think it deserves to be read by a lot more people than who seem to be aware of it... *Phases of Gravity* starts with retired Apollo program pilot named Richard Baedecker landing in India. He wants to reconnect with his son Scott, who's fallen under the influence of a "guru" there. Upon landing he meets one of Scott's friends, an intelligent young woman named Maggie, who plays tourist with him in Scott's absence. Throughout this first section we get various flashbacks to Richard's moon landing years earlier, an experience which doesn't seem to have lived up to the expectations he had for it beforehand. This section does end with an encounter between Scott and Richard, but the former wants nothing to do with the latter, and Richard leaves without saying goodbye to Maggie. Part Two (titled "Glen Oak," the small Midwestern town which Richard spent several years of his young life in) is about Richard getting called back to Glen Oak to be their Guest of Honor for their seasonal parade, an opportunity which the private firm he's now working with feels would be great publicity for the company. Richard isn't too happy about it, but he goes along with it, meeting locals - occasionally going as far as to drink or go shooting with said locals - and eventually giving his "guest of honor speech" half in the bag; it turns out to be rather sad and possibly even critical of humanity's drive to interact with space . The plot between these two segments might feel a bit wishy-washy, but Part Three - "Uncompahgre" - is a bit more engaging. encouraged by a starry sky that a boy in Glen Oak painted on his ceiling, Richard has quit his job. This part is told in two concurrent narratives: that of him climbing up a mountain with his ex-Apollo copilot Gavin and his family, and the steps leading him to meet Gavin's family, featuring him finding Gavin's telepreaching on a hotel TV and of Maggie appearing at Gavin's house, looking to join the trip. Now, nothing untoward has happened between Richard and Maggie, but Gavin doubts that; then again, he doubts everyone, and recently made his son break off his relationship because, after years together, they might have been getting close to having sex. His son's now acting up, smoking and drinking with thrill-seeking ruffians they meet on the trail. The camping trip is pretty surreal (between Richard and Maggie giving into each other and Gavin's son's drunken displays) and morphs into a desperate grasp at transcendence (when Richard ends up hang-gliding off the side of the mountain). Part Four - "Tonerock" - is a little more heartbreaking. It's about the member part of the Apollo trio, Dave, and is told primarily in three parts: Richard investigating Dave's death after his funeral, Richard reacting to his death after the plane he was piloting between his town and his outpost of Lonerock, and the trip up to Lonerock that Richard and Dave took before his death. This is a sad section, especially because Dave's widow was pregnant, but this one section where Richard is able to rule out that Dave killed himself because he was picking up a puppy from a local woman to give his son the same kind of pet-loving experience he had as a kid was really nice and sentimental. It does end in another rash action, though - after maybe seventy pages of Richard seeing Dave's helicopter as a death trap, he pilots it to the California suburb where Scott's guru has set up shop in a desperate attempt to rescue him. Somehow, as we see at the beginning of Part Five, it worked; Richard and Scott are now trying to rebuild their relationship with each other, including a trip to watch a NASA launch. Richard does end up getting Scott's blessing to pursue *something* - even if they don't yet know what - with Maggie, and he ends up chasing her to her parents' place in the Dakotas, ending up on a drug-induced dream-tip with a Native American before Maggie finds him; we can assume that Richard might have found what he was looking for ... The most important thing about Dan Simmons as far as I'm concerned is his prose: he's a really fluid writer who uses evocative turn of phrase without muddying the waters. He's a clear writer who paints really good pictures in your head while maintaining consistent lines of action and character interactions that also never lets himself get... pretentious. This book has at least a good chunk of the writing craft you'd find in any accomplished literary novel, but it's still extremely accessible. I almost think of Dan Simmons as a Stephen King who knows how to write; that might offend some of you, but read this (or one of his horror novels) and see if you still disagree with me then. Just as important as his prose, though, is the way that Simmons chooses to frame Richard Baedecker's journey throughout *Phases of Gravity*. While the journey wasn't entirely convincing to me (I'll explain why in a bit), it's clear that Simmons deliberately placed these events in the order that he did, included the flashbacks he did, and left certain events out of the action. It was all pointed. In the first section based in India he quickly lays out what Richard felt during his moonwalk (spoiler alert, it wasn't all that and a bag of chips), but in Part Two, instead of splicing flashbacks into the narrative, Simmons inserts some self-reflective speeches from Richard to do the job and draw contrast between himself and the others from Glen Oak; it's impressive, and in Parts Three and Four the layers of flashbacks pile on top of each other and gradually spiral into a different kind of journey than the ones proceeding it... it might be hard to explain, but I'm a sucker for a couple good concurrent narratives, and I think *Phases of Gravity* pulls it off. Your mileage may vary depending on how much you appreciate flashbacks, but I'll rarely complain about an elevated story structure. And speaking of elevated story structure, there were a couple bait-n-switches that Simmons pulled off really well. In Part Three, Gavin assumes that one of the thrill-seekers is a druggie thanks to the marks on his arms, but his little girlfriend reveals the marks are from his Epipen; and in Part Four, the reveal that Dave died on his way to pick up a puppy was perfectly foreshadowed by obscure cues like a clump of fur at the crash site and whatnot . It seemed obvious in retrospect; it's all very well done, even though... well... Richard Baedecker's journey didn't do all that much for *me*. I'm a twenty-year old guy, and stories of middle aged crises have a hard time impacting me because of that. I felt the same thing with Robert Silverberg's *Dying Inside*, and it's not a knock against these books. *Phases of Gravity* in particular feels intensely realistic, and Baedecker is a real person even if his whining fails to dredge up sympathy inside of you (Good Lord, you went to the moon, man, your life ain't that bad!). And speaking of realism, contrary to the spine of the book, this isn't science fiction; you could possibly argue that this is an alternate history because Richard Baedecker wasn't a real Apollo astronaut, but there's nothing about this history that's different from ours. Some of its passages may go well with some of the more cynical science fiction out there (for example, Barry Malzberg was not a fan of the NASA programs Baedecker took part in, and some of his fiction made that very clear), but it's not in the genre itself. That's not a bad thing; hopefully, it makes this more palatable to readers. But I did have one big issue with the book: the ending. While it was probably nice and thematic (I'm talking about the Indian dream-trip crap ) and did end with a glimmer of finality, I didn't enjoy this kind of plot obfuscation and would've preferred a more cinematic ending to Baedecker's various internal journeys. Maybe that would've made for a less realistic/lived-in story, but... that is what I was kind of looking for with this one. That's not Simmons' problem, though; that's mine. With that ending, I think *Phases of Gravity* falls just a bit short of four stars; hence, *Phases of Gravity* gets a 7.5/10. It will probably move you, and its literary qualities should impress you. Simmons in cementing himself as one of my ten favorite authors with every novel of his I read, and I can't wait to read something else of his, whether it's more horror or one of his harder-to-categorize reads. But before I can read more Simmons, I have to buy more, so... off to the wild I go? Before I can buy more, though, I need to read more. Maybe I'll go do that... regardless of my next step, thanks for reading this review, and I hope Simmons does even more for you than he has for me. This is Darnoc Leadburger, signing off, but only for now; you can't escape me that easily...
