8/28/20 re-listen, the story mostly held up over time, with a few exceptions. I'd maybe give it a B now. But I still enjoyed the story and the narration, and liked both the main characters. Grade A-/B+ Narrated by Susan Ericksen As a professional butler, Sarah Stevens is trained to manage large household down to the smallest details. She’s also skilled as a bodyguard, which comes in handy in her present position as butler to a retired Federal judge. When an obsessed admirer sets out to secure Sarah’s services by any means possible, Detective Thomas Cahill is brought in to lead the investigation. As the mystery deepens, Sarah finds herself drawn into the investigation. Complicating matters is the attraction that draws Cahill and Sarah to each other. Susan Ericksen, best known for her outstanding narration of J.D. Robb’s In Death series, handles Dying to Please with the same skill. The pacing and dynamics of her performance are excellent. Ericksen’s reading feels natural and there is never any confusion about who is speaking during conversations. She proves her versatility by making Sarah and Cahill sound unique rather than copies of Eve and Roarke. Sarah isn't a typical heroine. She’s capable and tough but not the sassy, bad-ass kind of heroine authors often employ when they want strong female leads. Sarah, in keeping with her butler training, is reserved and professional instead of snarky. Ericksen gives Sarah a cool, understated voice, one that conveys strength and humor. Cahill is a great hero, although flawed and not always likeable. At one point in the story Cahill makes a huge error in judgment. Given Cahill’s job and his past relationship history, the error feels in character. Howard does a great job making us feel his pain when he realizes the damage he's done. It was refreshing to see Cahill take full responsibility for his actions, and I admired his determination to make it right. Ericksen aptly portrays Cahill’s wide range of feelings and emotions, always managing to make him sound completely male. The dynamics between the Sarah and Cahill is especially well done. Their relationship takes some time to develop, and the conflict in the relationship wasn't a misunderstanding that can be cleared up with a five-minute conversation. Instead, it packs an emotional punch. I recommend the audio version of Dying to Please for any romantic suspense fan. It’s a good introduction to Linda Howard, as well as a good introduction to the excellent narrative abilities of Susan Ericksen. In addition, there is this extremely hot wrestling scene, which is not to be missed. Reviewed for Speaking of Audiobooks: http://www.likesbooks.com/blog/?p=8483
