I need to be gut honest here... I wanted to love this book.... The writing is gorgeous... I can see that... I could feel the beauty of horror....but I didn’t want to. I struggled... I WISHED FOR MORE MUSIC in this novel.....( less brutal graphic scenes of bloody soldiers). I love the people who read this before me - with so much respect and admiration for all of them. My friends seemed to easily understand this book’s brilliance. I just feel loss, small, stupid, and not up to par. If there is a low review- I don’t remember reading any. Not sure what I should rate this book. Jim inspired me to read it - which warmed my heart. Still warms my heart. But.... when I finished reading this book - I bawled- then laughed while bawling. I felt sad and inferior. Paul and I are taking an afternoon rest - reading and lying down together — he knows how I can get. His advice — “put the darn book down”. Then a second ago my close friend from childhood texted me a photo of her hubby with the dog on his lap reading a book. They were in a park relaxing and reading. I told her I had just read a book that zapped my energy and left me depressed. She ordered me —“no more depressing books”. She’s a tad older - so she’s the boss she tells me. ...I HONESTLY THOUGHT I’D HEAR AND FEEL THE BEAUTY OF THE MUSIC.....But forgive me.... I couldn’t feel it. ...I DIDN’T WANT TO READ ABOUT EARS SHOT OFF ....or BLOODY bodies, or amputated legs, .....then be tossed a ‘treat-moment-scene’ of a man lusting after a woman eating candy....with bloody bodies just steps away. ...I didn’t want to be in the cemetery with coffins covered with frozen snow. ...I didn’t want to know that our main character was emaciated, exhausted, with a fixation about death. ...I didn’t want to have to visualize our main character stepping into clothes of a dead soldier - then think about how lucky he was to find some boots that fit his feet. ... I didn’t want to read that his parents died. BUT I READ ALL THESE THINGS. NOW I’m a sad zombie. 3 apologetic stars
