The first star is just for the first story. It started off strangely but turned out to be so cute. I quite liked Kate for her pragmatism and determination to be a good mother. Charles won me over for his steadfastness and capabilities. The humor was great, too. The second story lacked consistency. The heroine was forced to marry because of a stipulation in her father’s will… even though he NEVER mentioned marriage to her or attempted to marry her off in the six years she was on the marriage market. The Gardner left when she was twelve… but she wrote to him all the time even though he couldn’t read. The bland hero spent twelve years loving his tween age love despite never seeing her or having any connection to her in all that time… even as he slept with multiple other women. Because nothing says everlasting love like making your way into many women’s beds. The hero also hated her because… don’t know, but it’s what prevented him from reaching out to her. But didn’t he just say he’s loved her since his voice began to crack? Stop asking questions. The hero felt he owed it to the heroine to marry her because…. Who knows. The hero lied about who he was despite knowing the heroine kept asking after him because…. No more questions! The heroine was willing to marry a commoner because… that’s what rebellious duke’s daughters due apparently. We conveniently never get to see society find out about this tidbit. The heroine speaks in bizarre language, even for a historical story. So many “sirrahs, egads, by joves, I says, etc.” It was overdone. The ending after all that secrecy and buildup was so flat. And were they really going to consummate their marriage while he was encrusted with mud? So romantic. Half star for the whip carrying parson’s wife and the black thumb of Victoria. The third story features a shallow witch and a writer who doesn’t understand British history. Peerage titles aren’t in lieu of the word mister. There’s no Duke Sam Gold or Viscount Harry Smith. And There was no way to get married in London without posting banns or getting a license/special license and they all took a while to do/get. No one could marry within hours unless they went to Scotland. Servants didn’t just walk into rooms without knocking, the master’s study would never be right near the kitchens and high tea wouldn’t be around for another thirty years. Ms. James, do your research. The heroine, who has the same name as the heroine of the second story (who let that by?), is so judgemental and angsty. She’s angsty because she has Seen the WORLD and understands that MEN are awful creatures who must NEVER be trusted. She knows this because a few Seasons in London have introduced her to gambling men and ONE philandering spouse who parades his women out in the open. Yeah, no. Men kept their lady loves away from polite society. And if that’s seeing the world’s evil then she’s a lucky gal. This gem of a woman was in despair because her dreams of marrying a handsome man (only requirement) who she could love were CRUSHED. She can NEVER marry. So she decides to create a scandal by kissing a stranger. She doesn’t inquire if said stranger is married, engaged or courting anyone who might be justifiably hurt by seeing them kiss, the hypocrite. She doesn’t ask if HE wants to kiss. It’s only men who are shameless, you see. We then have her very loving father blackmailing an innocent man into marrying his precious daughter because… the kiss was witnessed by the girl’s best friend and ONE other person. So there’s no way to keep it quiet (enter sarcasm). And blackmail is such a wonderful way to start married life. And the last story, well… a BEAUTIFUL woman meets a HANDSOME man and they fall in love with each other’s beauty. The end. Half a star because the author pioneered massive changes in the world of romance. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
