Four stories in one book. 1) The Determined Bride by Jo Beverly - I have tried other books by Jo Beverly but did not really get into them, but I like this short story. Kate is very pregnant and is traveling with a priest to find the man she thought was her husband, but who had convinced her the marriage was not real and he wanted her to leave. Traveling to his army camp, she discovers that he is dead and of all things goes into labor. Captain Charles helps in her greatest time of need in more ways than one. 2) A Kiss After Midnight by Tanya Anne Crosby - Probably tied for my favorite of the bunch. The princess of Blackstone has a best friend, the gardener's son. Her father disapproves and pays to have him sent away, but they promise never to forget one another. Years go by and Victoria's father passes away. With the reading of the will, she discovers that she must wed immediately to keep everything. An impulsive letter to the gardener (who she frequently wrote to in the past) puts things on the path to help Victoria keep what she thinks she needs and gain what she has been missing. 3) Scandal's Bride by Samantha James - My other book tied for favorite. In this one, Victoria's father decides that it is past time that she marry and if she does not pick a groom by midnight, he will. She decides it is in her best interest to cause a scandal so no one will want her, instead of ending up in a marriage like her friend. She follows a stranger onto the balcony and when she hears (supposedly her other friend coming) grabs him and kisses him. Well he would not kiss her when she asked, so she took matters into her own hands to cause scandal. Well things don't work out the way she thought because it turns out her father is one of the ones to come out looking for her. Her father takes her and the stranger back to the house to settle things. That night she is married. With each having plans of their own, it takes Victoria and Miles a while to get down to settling into marriage. Only to have other issues pop up. 4) Beyond the Kiss by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss - decided not to read because is the sequel to another story.
