Financial institutions have given the West an authority it could never achieve on the battlefield. The approach of this essay is characterized by a strong critical tone towards international institutions and neoliberal policies, and through a thorough analysis it highlights the negative consequences of economic globalization, questioning the official narrative that the reforms imposed by the IMF and the World Bank inevitably lead to development. Instead, the author argues that these reforms are responsible for the perpetuation of poverty and inequality. But not only does it document the devastating effects of these policies, it also provides a solid basis for questioning the justice and effectiveness of the current global economic system. Michel Chossudovsky critically analyses the policies of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, their role in globalisation and their impact on developing countries. He explores how the reforms imposed by these institutions have exacerbated poverty, increased social inequality and weakened the economies of the poorest countries. By promoting neoliberal policies they have reinforced global economic disparities. These policies of privatisation and liberalisation of key sectors such as agriculture and energy have also undermined the ability of governments to guarantee basic services to their populations, such as education and health. It shows that countries that accept these programs lose economic sovereignty, as external pressure leads them to the implementation of reforms that go against the interests of their own citizens. The book also addresses the issue of foreign debt, explaining how the unsustainable debt of these loans burden forces these countries to allocate large resources to pay the interest on the debt, instead of investing in their own economic and social development. The author reconstructs and analyses the basic package of reforms and conditions that are imposed on debtor nations. From opening up domestic markets to international competition to cutting public spending... there is nothing natural or neutral about these "market reforms." They are designed to subordinate debtor nations to their parasitic creditors. He contrasts with data the supposed objectives of development aid with the real effects of loan conditions and other sanctions on national economies. In the chapter Policing Countries Through Loan Conditionalities , he shows how these institutions first devalue the currency and cut wages along with government spending; then they cut public spending through a structural adjustment program; then they raise commodity and oil prices, undermining consumption and productivity. Chossudovsky also criticises the ways in which political sovereignty is undermined. Western demands for “governance” only increase Western authority over political institutions. In the name of “democratisation”, countries see their political life dictated from outside. The author's approach also questions the role of progressist intervention. Chossudovsky explains how non-governmental organizations (NGOs) often serve to undermine a nation's political independence, as these Western-funded aid organizations increasingly take over the welfare functions of government. Chossudovsky's ferocious critique of international financial domination makes this an excellent book that challenges much of the accepted wisdom about the moral mission of the international community in the developing world.
