Rating: 3.5 stars / Grade: B - Disclaimer: I am not a professional reviewer, nor was I solicited for this review. My ebook was purchased at bn.com. I read and comprehended the entire text of this book at least 1 time prior to reviewing. Spoiler Warning: I do my best to label spoilers, but I’m not perfect. Please read at your own risk. Johanna Lindsey is probably one of the more influential authors of true vintage romance novels. Her work encompasses the “bodice-ripper” tropes that were so trendy in the 1970’s and 1980’s, which may not sit well with newer romance readers. I admit my feelings about Lindsey novels are ambivalent. I’ve read several of her historical romances, some I really liked and others I’ve abhorred. Lindsey is nothing if not adaptable and she has managed to sustain a lengthy writing career despite inconsistent quality in her works. I picked up and read “Angel” because many of Lindsey’s backlist novels are now available in ebook for $3.99 and I read so many positive reviews of “Angel” I felt I needed to check it out and make sure I hadn’t missed an exceptionally good read. My experience with this historical western romance is very mixed. The first half read quickly and kept me very engaged. I found Angel and Cassie very intriguing and mostly fun to know. The secondary characters usually didn’t disappoint, either. The plot elements stretched pretty thin and beggared belief, but taken as a comfortable, relaxing “popcorn” read, I was still mostly entertained through the first half. In the second half, the love story plot imploded. Angel seems to have fallen for Cassie, but there’s no believable transition of his feelings from attraction to love. Meanwhile, Cassie is afflicted with perpetual bad judgment and terrible decision-making skills. I’m unclear why it took so long for the two characters to admit they cared about each other and wanted to remain married. I didn’t perceive any serious impediment to the arrangement beyond each character believing the other didn’t want it. It seemed out of character for Cassie not to openly discuss it since she was so extroverted and open about everything else. Angel deals with several obstacles reconciling with his family and rescuing Cassie from a vengeful criminal and he perseveres more often than not through coincidence and good luck. I realize the novel would have been much larger if Lindsey portrayed Angel actually working for his victories, but things fell into place a bit too neatly for any real tension to occur. The love scenes in the book are more desperate/lonely than romantic – always a turn-off for me. However, I enjoyed the more sensuous language and limited description in the love scenes compared to more recent romance and erotic romance works. They were present, they made an impression, but they didn’t take over the book nor were they exceptionally graphic or explicit. The emotional tension is beautifully crafted and there’s a lot of beautiful language and structure in this novel. If the plot had been more substantial, I’d consider this a great book, but the plot and subplots were not “meaty enough” to sustain the novel’s word count. As it stands, I do see “Angel” as one of Lindsey’s better novels and I understand its popularity. “Angel” is definitely worth a look. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
