For a 4-popper... it was okay. First book (and the reason I got it) was actually pretty good. 'The Determined Bride' was about women who followed soldiers into battle. I'd heard about how they did that, but never had I read about anyone who had, and it was something I wanted to read. The story itself wasn't as good as I'd hoped, but ... it's a four-popper. They're not good. The second book A kiss after Midnight') was a 'if I have to marry by my __th birthday, I'll marry someone who won't take my land/monies' plot... with her childhood friend rescuing her, only (((stOopidly))) she doesn't recognize him until the end. And very stereotypical characters and annoyingly bossy heroine. It was lame, lame, lame... but would've been a good idea, had the authoress invested herself in it, somewhat, instead of being lazy about the story. Like you wouldn't expect that from a four-popper, though? The third book ('Scandal's Bride') was the whole 'I thought she was a gold-digger and underhanded biotch who trapped me by way of a well-planned scandal, so I treated her that way, the later discovered she wasn't' plot. Only not done charmingly. I read it, but... it wasn't good. But then, it's a four-popper. What do you expect? 'Beyond the Kiss' - the fourth one, and a sequel to something I'd read sometime in the past and obviously didn't enjoy enough to remember - SUCKED. Usually two are *meh*, one is fantastic, and one sucks... THIS was the sucky one. I slogged thru it. Dumb broad just off the boat in Charleston is about to be sold to a stereotypical German pig when handsome, rich Geoffrey (gah!) swoops in and marries her, sight unseen, and speaks in Wuthering Heights romantic syrupy tones until she's kidnapped by the German and he has to save her booty (naturally). It was horrible. But aside from the sucky one, the other three were okay. Not just *meh*. But there wasn't a glimmering jewel, which is why it's only three stars, and not four. There should be a jewel. Do better, next time.
