Superb, amazing, emotional Hollywood Park is getting such fabulous, well-deserved advance publicity, with early reviews and interviews and sneak peeks at the songs written based on events in the book that I don’t feel there is anything left for me to say except if you don’t read any other book this year you must read this one. It is amazing. It will touch you deeply and won’t let go. When I received the ARC from Celadon Books I didn’t know what to expect. I had never heard of Mikel Jollett or his alternative band and wasn’t sure if maybe there was something from NPR or any articles he had written I was familiar with, but probably not. I knew a little about the Synanon cult from what I read in the paper years ago and I knew that Hollywood Park used to be a racetrack. So I thought maybe this book was another tell-all expose of life in a cult and the story of the cult leaders. Wrong. This is the story of a boy and his brother and what that cult and their mother did to them, took from them, marked them. Jollett was only five years old and leaving the cult as the book began, so the part of the story about his life there is small. But the effects of those five short years he lived at Synanon are large. Huge. Tragic. Heartbreaking. When Jollett is first speaking in the 5-year old’s voice in the book I was confused and hoped this wouldn’t continue throughout the entire book. But as the story progressed I realized what a masterful approach this was. You are put right in the experience of his world at that age, with the accompanying confusion and fear of the young child, and then the adolescent and so on. What is already compelling and powerful becomes even more so, unbelievable, sad, haunting, making you remember events and feelings from your own childhood that you had chosen to forget. The harmful effects of the years in Synanon and the later years with his mother can’t be overestimated. He became the superchild, the achiever, the boy who knows boys are born to take care of their mothers. After all, she told them often enough, didn’t she? No, they weren’t hungry, scared, angry, sad. She was. Didn’t they realize all she’d been through? So he took up the job of taking care of her. At age five. His brother got the role of scapegoat, the one who always acts out, who fails. Mikel Jollett was destined for greater things so therefore couldn’t fail. I wanted to rescue this little boy and his brother or make his mother go away. Jollett’s father is initially painted as the bad guy, the ex-con, the drug addict, the one who left his mother the victim. But as time goes on you see what a good man his father is, how hard he works to take care of “his boys.” As for the mother, even though she was later diagnosed with mental illness I found it hard to feel much sympathy for her. Perhaps if this had been the story of her life, but what she did to her sons can’t be easily forgotten or forgiven. Jollett is a superb writer. Hollywood Park is not always easy to read, but that is because of the painful lives they were living. The words flow smoothly, the descriptions vibrant and clear, the feelings real, the story compelling. I often did not want to stop reading because I just had to see what happened next, if just one thing would go right for him and stay that way. By the end of the book Jollett makes you feel as if you know him, and you are proud and happy for all he has achieved against such odds, for what a brave boy he was and what a brave man he is. Thanks to Celadon Books for providing my advance copy. This is truly the best book I have read in a long time. All opinions are my own. I so enjoyed this book and highly recommend it. And have my copy of the Hollywood Park album on pre-order! #HollywoodParkMemoir #CeladonReads
