Imagine enjoying Guacamole. Nachos, Pesto Pizza, Macaroni and Cheese, Strawberry Shortcake or Hazelnut Cheesecake without the slightest bit of guilt because you know they're all low in fat. You'll find each of these taste-tempting recipes and some 300 others in The Wellness Lowfat Cookbook, a book that proves once and for all that lowfat eating doesn't mean giving up the foods you love. Here are kitchen-tested recipes for lowfat appetizers and snacks, soups, meat, poultry and fish dishes, meatless main courses, pastas, main-course salads, sandwiches, desserts, breads and breakfasts -- each accompanied by a comprehensive nutritional breakdown that lets you see at a glance just how healthful these dishes are. And every recipe is easy, requiring no fancy cooking techniques, exotic ingredients or special equipment. But The Wellness Lowfat Cookbook is far more than a collection of delicious, healthy recipes. The book also features a revolutionary new lowfat eating plan called "The Healthy Heart Solution," which can help lower your risk of heart disease. Developed by doctors and nutritionists at The University of California at Berkeley in conjunction with The Wellness Cooking School, this easy-to-follow plan teaches you how to cut fat from your diet meal by meal. No more tedious You simply establish a "daily fat-gram target" and then go for it. And as long as you don't exceed your target, you can eat all your favorite foods -- even butter, cheese, steak, cookies, ice cream, peanut butter and pizza. Included in the book as well is an extensive food glossary to help you shop for lowfat foods; a guide to ordering lowfat meals when dining out; and a comprehensive chart detailing the fat and cholesterol content of more than 350 commonly eaten foods. The book also offers the latest information on the role diet plays in preventing heart disease. You'll learn what causes heart attacks; where cholesterol comes from; whether the antioxidants -- vitamins C and E and beta carotene -- an really help fight heart disease; and how dietary fiber, potassium, iron, sodium and alcohol affect your heart. With The Wellness Lowfat Cookbook you'll not only be preparing delicious, satisfying food, you will also be adopting a healthful way of eating that could well add years to your life.
