Are you tired and rundown all the time? Do you diet and never seem to lose weight? Do you feel older that your age? Do you feel something's wrong with you, yet you can't identify what it is? Do you want to start a health and fitness regimen, but don't know where to begin? Each year, Americans spend $28.5 billion on diet and weight-loss programs, yet we're fatter than ever. World-renowned health and fitness authority and nutritionists to the stars, Oz Garcia, has the solution to your problems: It's a matter of balance. Oz has helped celebrities from Karen Duffy and Winona Ryder to Nicole Miller and supermodels like Yasmeen Ghauri and Daniela Pestova look and feel their best. Now--for the first time--he provides dietary guidance on how you, too, can achieve maximum physical and mental balancing, Garcia helps tailor your diet whether you have a fast metabolism, a slow metabolism, or a mixture of both. Are you a woman who angers easily or a man who suffers from depression? How often do you need extra sleep? Are you constantly worrying? The answers to these questions will help determine your metabolic profile. You will discover what kinds of foods will boost your body's efficiency and what kinds are best avoided, as well as learning what proportions of proteins, carbohydrates, and fat work best for you. Oz demonstrates how to create your own unique, customized program, that combines nutritional planning and exercise with cutting-edge supplements and stress management--all specific to your own natural metabolic rhythm. When you eat the proper foods for your metabolic type, you don't have to worry about counting calories, and you won't feel hungry or deprived. You'll lose weight and keep it off, but that's not the only benefit of supermetabolism. It also produces: Enhanced energy and endurance Improved concentration and mental function A stronger immune system Improved digestion A reduction in premature aging An end to mood swings No more PMS and menstrual cramps A reduced risk of developing heart disease or cancer By following the Balance program, you will gain energy, lose weight, and reduce your risk of heart attack, diabetes, and other diseases. You will feel better emotionally, and extend your life. What is the Balance? The premise is startling simple: The reason so many of us are overweight, depressed, fatigued, stressed out, and just plain sick is that we are eating precisely the wrong foods at precisely the wrong time. The goal of this revolutionary and personalized plan is to correct metabolic imbalances and bring your body back where it is meant to be, into The Balance. This test will change your life I would be more likely to crave: bread, pastas, bagels cookies, candy bar, dessert My cravings vary During the day I: sometimes forget to eat meals get hungry often eat 3 meals a day with nothing in between Around evening time, I: come alive gradually slow down go to bed early No matter what I eat: my weight stays the same I have trouble gaining weight I gain weight easily My sex drive is: fairly low elevated normal What's your metabolic type? The answers to the above and 45 other questions will determine whether you are a fast burner, slow burner or a mixed burner, and which of Oz Garcia's diet and supplement plans will provide you with optimal health and fitness. To find out more, take the test today!
