In this volume of his critically acclaimed series, The American Aces Speak, noted military historian Eric Hammel brings fresh first person accounts from thirty-nine U.S. Army Air Force (USAAF) fighter aces who blasted their way across the skies of North Africa, the Mediterranean, and northern and southern Europe in the great crusade against the vaunted Luftwaffe and the other Axis air forces. Coupled with a clear, concise historical overview of America's brilliant air war against the Axis in Europe and North Africa, Hammel's detailed interviews bring out the most thrilling in the-cockpit experiences of some of our country’s best pilots. Climb aboard a P-38 Lightning as Maj. Bill Leverette fights America's highest scoring single personal air battle against the Luftwaffe. And get into the cockpit of a P-47 Thunderbolt as 15 victory ace Capt. Don Bryan scores his dream kill by outwitting the pilot of a far speedier German jet in the closing days of the war in Europe. As he did in four companion volumes, Hammel has collected some of the very best air combat tales from America's war against Germany. Nearly all the stories in Aces Against Germany have never before been told, and the others have been enhanced by details and viewpoints brought out by Hammel's superb interviewing Together, the five volumes of nearly 200 first person aerial combat stories from World War II, Korea, and Vietnam stand as an enduring testament to the combat airmen who fought their wars strapped into the cockpits of America's lethal high performance fighter aircraft. 'Aces Against Germany' is a highly charged emotional rendering of the now-dim days of personal combat at the very edge of our living national history. There was never a war like it, and there never will be again. These are the stories of America’s eagles in their very own words. Critical Acclaim for The American Aces Speak Series The Book World says: Aces Against Japan is a thunderous, personal, high-adventure book giving our men in the sky their own voices. Book Page says: Eric Hammel's book is recommended reading. It is a must for any historian's bookshelf. The Library Journal says: No PR hype or dry-as-dust prose here. Hammel allows his flyers to tell their stories in their own way."Exciting stuff aviation and World War II buffs will love. The Providence Sunday Journal says: A treat that deftly blends a chronology of the Pacific War with tales that would rival a Saturday action matinee. Infantry Magazine says: If you would like to read one book that will give you a broad overview and yet a detailed look at what a fighter pilot's air war was like, this is the book. The Bookshelf says: Hammel is one of our best military historians when it comes to presenting that often complex subject to the general public. He has demonstrated this facility in a number of fine books before [Aces Against Germany] and now he does so again. Not to be missed by either buff or scholar.
