The American Academy of Pediatrics Guide to Your Child's Nutrition is the most authoritative, easy-to-use, and comprehensive guide to children's diet and eating habits available. This state-of-the-art reference book was written under the direction of two prominent pediatricians, William H. Dietz, M.D., Ph.D., F.A.A.P., and Loraine Stern, M.D., F.A.A.P., and extensively reviewed by an advisory panel of experts. The American Academy of Pediatrics knows that the real challenge for parents isn't simply being aware of the right foods to feed their children--it's getting children to actually eat those foods. The Guide to Your Child's Nutrition gives parents all the information and strategies they need to take care of the dietary requirements of children from birth through adolescence, as well as providing special insights into the ¸ What's best for newborns ¸ Introducing solid foods ¸ Nutrition basics for toddlers, school-age children, and adolescents ¸ How to deal with outside influences, including grandparents and TV commercials ¸ Identifying food allergies ¸ Recognizing and treating eating disorders ¸ Alternative diets and supplements; food safety and additives ¸ How to tell if a child is too fat . . . too thin . . . too short With vitamin and mineral tables, nutrient-drug interactions, and resources, this accessible and attractively designed book places special emphasis on problem how to plan healthy menus, how to battle the junk-food pressures of television and other media, and how to make mealtime something the whole family looks forward to. The American Academy of Pediatrics is the most respected authority on child and adolescent health in America, and the Guide to Your Child's Nutrition is an indispensable home reference for every parent. The American Academy of Pediatrics knows that the real challenge for parents isn't simply being aware of the right foods to feed their children--it's getting children to actually eat those foods. The Guide to Your Child's Nutrition gives parents all the information and strategies they need to meet the dietary needs of children from birth through adolescence, as well as the facts about standards of weight and height; eating disorders and special dietary needs; alternative diets and supplements; allergies; and concerns over food safety.
