Jonathan Hemlock, the art professor whose free-lance counterassassinations in The Eiger Sanction turned on hundreds of thousands of readers, returns in an even more masterful exploit in THE LOO SANCTION, the new, exciting, sexually uninhibited suspense novel, as brilliant in execution as only Trevanian can be. Jonathan this time has gone to England for a presumed rest. But the head of an almost autonomous branch of British Intelligence needs his highly skilled services. He informs Jonathan that he must take over the mission of a British agent whose murder was so bizarre and terrifying that no other agent could be found for the job—Jonathan must take the assignment or he himself will be "framed" for murder. His task: to locate a set of secretly made films incriminating a number of high-ranking British officials. His target: a top underworld figure taking perverse delight in insidious forms of debauchery and torture, a man determined to get a fantastic sum for the films in an international auction, presumably to enemies of the British government. Facing this threat, Jonathan is drawn deeper and deeper into a labyrinthian network of intrigue, yet has time for a lustrous green-eyed Irish gamine named Maggie as well as Amazing Grace, an incredibly tiny black bombshell whose frequent appearances in the nude always seem to herald a deadly confrontation for Jonathan. As all the pieces in the dangerous puzzle come menacingly together, trapped and almost fatally drugged, Jonathan is forced to attempt one of the most daring escapes ever conceived, a plan on which his life depends. With his unimpaired flair for savage sophistication, Trevanian has done it again: the same superb characterization, the same superb writing, the same breathtaking suspense. Whether engaged in a chase across the rooftops of London, or struggling against kidnappers under the eyes of the police, or plotting to betray the sanctity of the National Gallery, Hemlock is Hemlock—cynical, witty, as irresistibly resourceful as ever with sex and gun. Eagerly looked forward to, THE LOO SANCTION is a worthy successor to The Eiger Sanction , and will surely generate the same fantastic enthusiasm and explosive edge-of-the-seat excitement for the expanding Trevanian cult. From the first-edition hardcover dust jacket (1973).
