Reviewer: Vinn Sends Writing like this is why I miss the 1970s! This might be the time for which Russ' story of stranded humans in denial is best suited. People today should be better able to relate to Russ' grim tale. Within a decade or so of the publication of "We Who Are About to...," the US congress learned from climatologists of the threat of global warming and the greenhouse effect. Congress could not honestly face the truth of what the scientists were telling them. It all seemed so far off in the future back then. In 1979 President Carter warned the Nation about our polluting and destructive way of life and the dark trajectory we were on. He addressed the Nation directly on television. Most Americans couldn't own up to their culpability in Carter's truth. In 1980 the newly elected President Reagan immediately removed the solar panels from the roof of the White House to display his solidarity with the fossil fuel industry and polluters. People quickly forgot about Carter's warning and partied through the 1980s in a cocaine induced bliss. In the 1990s Vice President Gore presented excellent scientific evidence for the already manifesting catastrophe of climate change and gave the world a severe warning. Gore's warning was ignored. By the time Americans had gotten rid of automobile (vehicle) emissions testing and settled into two unfunded wars, even fewer Americans accepted the scientific evidence for global climate change than in the 1990s. The propaganda used to get people to deny global warming had been very effective. In 2016 President Trump withdrew the United States from the Paris accord, which was a dedication of Russia, China and many other Nations to seriously address climate chaos. For the last 20 years the ecologist, Guy McPherson, has been notifying the world of the climate catastrophe that is already underway and will inexorably get worse and worse due to already engaged positive feedback loops and the increasing release of methane. As Russ portrays so brilliantly in her book, "We Who Are About To...," civilization is based on participation, reproduction, expansion, and consumption. Civilization also tends to be deaf to the warnings of the wise. In Russ' tale the female protagonist wants to opt out, but the unjust, ad hoc society demands her full participation - regardless of whether it is good for her or not. She is a female Bartleby the scrivener. She is enlisted to labor hard, against her will, for the useless task of prolonging and advancing the socially dominant, unpleasant, and likely doomed male order. The social machine wants the protagonist's labor, and her womb, but not her voice or her wisdom. Unlike Melville's Bartleby the Scrivener, Russ' protagonist finds herself set upon by a violent group of people, who are all in total denial of their situation. We are in a similar condition within our current socio-political order. The market needs one's participation - provided one is able bodied. One cannot simply drop out. One must labor toward an end whose reality is denied by the very power structure that is bringing about the unpleasant end. Provided one understands what the scientist, Guy McPherson has been shouting from the rooftops, one is more in the situation of the protagonist than one probably cares to admit. The protagonist says, "I kept telling them we were all dead." This story is no more grim than our current socio-political and ecological trajectory. That is a hard fact to hold in one's conscious mind. You might think that given the way things are that there is no need to read such a grim novel, but take some time before our approaching collective doom to read this wonderfully prescient book about inexorable social collapse and death due to being on a planet with no sustainable human habitat. I think you'll at least find it cathartic. Good Luck... Read less
