Reviewer: Nilesh Chogle The Notebook My very first Nicolas Sparks book. Amazingly written! The story briefly,is of a teenage lover Noah who very intensely and passionately loves, Allie,a girl from a rich and famous family. Allie,a teenager too sees pure love in their relationship, whilst both feel for each other in New Bern, during the short summer. They unfortunately, separate,because of some reasons. They loose touch with each other for as long as forteen years. But when they meet again, the fire of love rekindles in them. What happens to Allie,is now a well known disorder and a mighty illness, Alzheimers Disease. I even saw the movie "Note Book",later to verify the facts from the novel,vis-a-vis the presentation of the story in the movie. The movie moves at a much faster pace than the novel, but the intensity of the characters which Nicolas Sparks have portrayed in the novel, the emotions drives you to think of how the author has created these characters in his mind and brought them out in to a book. The movie,ofcourse is a later event, so much scope for change and evaluation for improvement, which could suit from the spectators point of view. Nicolas is very well able to capture raw feelings and instinctive persistent happiness through true love that the lovers enjoy !. A great book, to my mind. An eye-opener to "Alzheimers' and Dementia", in simple words,loss of memory and power of understanding, issues surfacing this angle. I would recommend this short novel to people who are distressed by their loved one's going through,this very melancholic and debilitating disease. A must read also for true lovers, to understand the depth of relationships,in an environment of todays, enjoying fleeting relationships and breakups. The writer is an Author of a similar book "Together With You Forever". This topic has therefore been very close to my heart. The novel deserves a true 5 * from me. I am richer,with Nicolas Sparks style and content as a creative writer and author. Read less
