Reviewer: Mr. S. D. Coy I have read this book, and have been left deeply unimpressed. The author talks big in the introduction, claiming to point out serious errors of reasoning, which he calls 'cognitive illusions', or 'mental tunnels', which apparently affect pretty much everybody in society, causing serious errors in judgement. I would say, however, that the examples described in this book have serious shortcomings in that they are either so obvious that I (or you, I suspect), would never have fallen for them (a 'problem' concerning the probability of babies of the same sex being born in different hospitals is an example), or are so complex, so contrived, that they have absolutely no resemblance to real-world situations whatsoever, and so are irrelevant. Examples of these contrived 'problems' include the famous '3 box' or 'Monty Hall' problem, the so-called 'Prisoner's Dilemma', and a problem concerning sealed bids for the right to choose between two different gambling tables which is so ridiculously complicated that I can't believe the author wasted his time including it in the book. An explanation of Bayes' Theorem is given which is very awkwardly and confusingly written. I also feel the importance Bayes' Theorem has been exaggerated somewhat. It is a way of predicting the true likelihood of a person having a disease given a positive test result where the symptoms of a patient are not known. But this has little relevance in modern-day pathological diagnosis, where it is extremely rare to diagnose a disease based on a single test result, and where symptoms are either absent or disregarded. I understand that Bayes' theorem has had some application in the complex world of economics, but in the world of medicine it has little relevance. A whole chapter is dedicated to a rather pompous and disingenuous counter-critique to criticisms he and his colleagues has received. I agree with many of the negative reviews on this site in that the writing here is a little counterproductive, with many of the criticisms being pertinent and valid. One of the author's arch-enemies appears to be Gerd Gigerenzer, director emeritus of the Centre for Adaptive Behaviour at the Max Planck Institute of Human Development. Judging by his Wikipedia page, this guy appears to be a more accomplished psychologist than the author, and to call his and his colleagues' criticisms of the author's work 'pathetic' to me appears egregious and smacks of sour grapes. It leaves a nasty taste in the mouth and I don't think a book such as this is the place for such writing. I don't think I have learned very much by reading this book. As I said before, the 'mental tunnel' examples given are either too obvious or too artificially contrived to be of any relevance in everyday life. I feel the author and his colleagues have been barking up the wrong tree for most of their careers, and if there are any 'tunnels', they are the ones the author has buried himself in, believing his findings to be more important than they actually are. In my opinion there are many, many more important examples of 'wrong thinking' in todays society which have much more relevance, which aren't even mentioned, such as racism, sexism, antisemitism, anti-science conspiracy theorists, etc. I cannot recommend this book. Read less
