Reviewer: Mrs Helen S Leecy I love The Notebook film so much (probably like most women!). It’s hard to describe why maybe because it is a feel-good movie along with being utterly heartbreaking. It is so full of emotion and the perfect Romantic film! So, I decided to give the book a read; I hadn’t even realised it was based on a book until I was doing the research for my Reading Challenge ‘a book made into a movie you’ve already seen’. I’m not a big lover of reading the book after seeing the film; I’d much rather do it the other way around. I figured, though, I couldn’t go much wrong with this choice and it only being 215 pages if it were terrible it wouldn’t take me long to read! I definitely couldn’t go wrong with the book; it was just as amazing as the film. The two run very well in parallel; there isn’t a lot different between the two, other than the order it is all presented to you. In the film it is more chronological, we see Allie and Noah meet, forced apart and the reunion etc. However, in the book, it is a little more reminiscing involved, so the timeline isn’t as fluid. I can certainly see why certain things were adapted for cinematic storytelling. It wasn’t hard to follow everything in the book, though. It all flowed well but wouldn’t have translated to the big screen if it had followed the same chapter to scene etc. It was so lovely to read this and be able to visualise how everything and everybody looked based on the film. I’ve seen it so many times everything is very familiar. I thought I would be bored reading it knowing how it ended and everything that was going to happen but this wasn’t the case at all. It entrances you just as much as the film does. The characters are wonderful, the story enlightening and tragic. It was beautifully written, and I am tempted to read the follow on story of Noah and Allie’s children. So very happy that I chose this book for this category of the Reading Challenge and that I gave a book after a movie a chance! It wasn’t anywhere near as bad and experience as I’d expected! More was the case with this book of a feeling of visiting old friends! Read less
