Reviewer: Emmanuel "Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word." --Psalm 119 : 114 Psalm 119 and verse 114 is where the title of this book is derived from. Everyone & Anyone can be inspired by this story. But it has enhanced meaning for those that love Christ and those that study Black History. Since I meet both conditions, this book has a double impact upon me. First to those that study Black History, you might be asking how & why? As this story takes place in occupied Holland during World War 2. To my knowledge, there's not a single character of African Descent in this story. However, when you study the Underground Railroad and their illegal activities during slavery, in the United States. Their activities took place just prior to the Civil War, we'll find that the parallels are amazing. When we apply Dr. Martin Luther King's definitions, we can begin to see it as the forces of light against the forces of darkness. Using that definition, there is a strong relationship and can be viewed as the same struggle for Human Rights. William Still, who was a conductor of the Underground Railroad (who's book I also purchased from Amazon) also quoted a scripture in his authentic narratives he later published. Deuteronomy 23: 15 says, "Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thee." The next verse goes on to say, "He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him." The Hiding Place was also an Underground Movement operated by the same principles. When I read Casper Ten Boom's (the author's father) words to the German Oppressors that he would not turn away any in need that come knocking on his door...I hear the same sentiments coming from Thomas Garrett a White Man & Abolitionist who answered the Oppressive Majority in the same way. Although stripped of his money and everything he had, Garrett proudly proclaimed that he would befriend a runaway slave and anybody in need. In this age of ego & selfishness, such words and sentiments are inspiring indeed. The Hiding Place is a story of doing the right thing even though you know that you're going to be caught eventually. For those that follow Christ, the scriptures already illustrate the connection. However, we see God's presence throughout this story. God didn't stop doing miracles after the Bible was released. They are all through the Hiding Place. In prison, Betsie Ten Boom (Corrie Ten Boom, the author's sister) has a limited supply of medication. Which she was more than willing to share with her fellow inmates. The bottle never ran out, until another inmate managed to secure some more of it. While Corrie was trying to figure it out, Betsie knew it could only be the power of God. I'm truly inspired by the faithfulness of Betsie Ten Boom. It was revealed from the beginning that she had health problems and was unable to bear children. She was not of good health and incarcerated for doing the right thing, yet she had joy and peace in the midst of the jail and was thanking God for everything! She even thanked God for the fleas that were biting them. While, I agreed with the author that this was extreme, the fleas did turn out to be a Blessing! They had more autonomy at this installation because of the fleas. The Fleas also kept the German Soldiers, who would rape them, away! But the best shout, they saved for last. Betsie died in prison, in perfect peace, but Corrie was later released. Corrie Ten Boom was to discover years later that her release turned out to be a clerical error. She was actually scheduled to die, in the gas chambers. For those that trust God, we know that God doesn't make mistakes! Corrie Ten Boom was released, so she could as Betsie said, "Tell everyone about this." Also, that the power of love is greater than hate! Read less
