Reviewer: Music Critic I originally read this book many years ago, I forget exactly when, but I would guess sometime around the early to mid 70's. I even have the hardcover first edition somewhere. I picked up this paperback edition because I wanted to re-read it in preparation for reading the sequel - From Time to Time - which I have never read. I admit - I'm a sucker for time-travel stories. When I was younger, I was a huge science fiction fan, but not so much now. I still love SF movies, but as far as reading goes, only certain types of SF appeal to me. Time-travel stories are definitely one of those types. I'm also a fan of history and historical fiction, if done right. So this story really hits the nail on the head. Finney's research on the time period (1882 New York City) is impeccable. Of course, this was written pre-internet, but today, if you look up the historical persons, events, locations, and social environment mentioned in the book, you'll see he's spot-on. The story is part time-travel, part crime story, part historical fiction, and part love story. But the true reason for the book, in my opinion, is the description and re-creation of 1882 New York City. If you are familiar with the city, so much the better. But even if not, as long as accurate and detailed descriptions of a by-gone era appeal to you, you will enjoy it. The way he weaves the actual with the fictional is remarkable. The time travel aspect raises some interesting philosophical and "scientific" issues relating to the nature of time. It doesn't dwell on this however, and the story couldn't be considered "hard" science fiction with respect to the mechanism of time travel used (unlike, for example, Timeline by Micheal Crichton). Most time-travel stories use some sort of machine, or door, or portal, or tunnel (anyone remember The Time Tunnel - Volume One TV series?). However, the mechanism used by Finney is innovative and compelling, and the same mechanism was actually used by author Richard Matheson in his 1975 novel Bid Time Return (which was the basis of the 1980 movie Somewhere in Time , another favorite of mine). However, the actual mechanism of time travel isn't usually the important part of time-travel stories. As long as there is some plausible explanation, it is likely to be accepted by the reader. I mean, does anyone really go into a story about time travel expecting an actual nuts-and-bolts discussion about how it's done? No, of course not, any more than anyone reading The Hobbit expects detailed directions to Middle Earth (no offense New Zealand). No, the important part of any time-travel story is what actually happens to the protagonist after - or as a result of - traveling through time. And/or what happens to the rest of us as a result of the time travel. The reason is because we CAN"T actually travel through time. So we want the author to create a vision of what might happen if we actually could. And that's precisely what makes "Time and Again a great story and a fascinating read. Finney recreates 1882 New York in exquisite detail, and both it and the protagonist's interactions with that era are believable and exceptionally entertaining. And everything is wrapped up very nicely by the end of the book. Finney wrote many time-travel short stories, and I have read a lot of them, and I recommend them. Of course, his most famous story is The Body Snatchers , which was made into the oft-remade movie Invasion of the Body Snatchers (the one with Donald Sutherland is my personal favorite). Read less
