Reviewer: Pierce Timberlake Many hard science fiction novels published in the 1950s had sort of a sociological tone. Examples would be The Space Merchants, by Frederik Pohl and Cyril M. Kornbluth, which depicted merchandising run wild, or Gunner Cade, by Cyril Judd (Cyril M. Kornbluth again, and Judith Merril) with its depiction of a triumphant and oppressive militarism. In its underlying premise, Star Bridge follows the same idea, with its vision of a thousand-year-old business venture, the Eron Corporation, that has become so rich and powerful that it rules the inhabited galaxy -- it is now the Empire of Eron, reminiscent of ancient Rome. The basic plot: Against the immense, corrupt, decadent and pitiless Eron Empire, fate (or maybe something else -- a shadowy master manipulator) pits a single man: Alan Horn. Horn is a cold, hard-edged, and extremely competent outlaw, who is eventually forced to give up his embittered, detached loner mindset when he finds himself pursued by the entire might of Eron. Horn avoids capture for a while with his sure reflexes and extraordinary resourcefulness, but eventually he realizes that no man can stay ahead of Eron forever. His answer: He will fight back. He will single-handedly bring down the mightiest empire of all time. Along the way, he gets entangled with various colorful characters, and falls in love with Wendre, the daughter of the Emperor he has assassinated. While Star Bridge may reflect a certain fifties sci-fi mindset, such a categorization doesn't do it justice. With its fast pace, amazing imagery, brilliantly imagined physical situations, terse but subtly philosophic tone, and its constant action, Star Bridge transcends its time and place of origin. More than fifty years have passed since I first read it, and many books I admired as a teen don't hold up so well when I try them again now. Star Bridge holds up completely. This is not only a classic tale of hard science fiction, arguably the best ever written, but one of the greatest stories of high adventure, regardless of genre. Read less
