Reviewer: Bryan Sebesta Asimov has often been criticized for not developing characters’ emotions with realistic or even minimal complexity. I was surprised, in so many ways, to find that this book read oppositely: it was an engaging tale that absorbed you into a too-human organization too-seeming to be omnipotent. The lead character, Harlan, is fascinating, as are the other characters. They are well developed, full-fleshed, and I grew really, really attached to many of the plot’s characters—and Asimov need let my initial impression of any character remain fixed. Asimov’s time-tale story doesn’t content itself with dealing with paradoxes only, although those are discussed. Rather, it deals with evolution, what’s best for humanity, love, what it means to have a “sense of place” (and time), and the ethics of the multiverse. For example, what dangers lie in separating ourselves from the concept of “home” and “time” and “place"? Who should (and should anyone?) decide what is best for humanity? What is the cost of having a moderate human history, void of extremes or risk-taking? What is man’s destiny? It’s also a fascinating (and largely forgotten) prelude to the Foundation series. Certain elements of this book—which I won’t go into too much, to avoid spoilers—suggest that the “Eternals”—those who run the time-engineering organization called “Eternity”—have much to do with foreshadowing the rise of the Galactic Empire. The connection isn’t explicit, but I find sufficient value in it. Both Seldon and Harlan are intimately involved in an organization that seeks to guide humanity toward something greater. (The differences, by the way, such as how the organization of the Foundation and Eternity came into being and it’s intended duration, are also fascinating.) Some questions that my friends and I have discussed include: -One reviewer wrote that "[Asimov] has fun making digs at the unchanging fundamentals of human nature... amid centuries of changing social mores.” What values *are* unchanging? What change? -The main characters pretend objectivity, but are any of them truly objective? Is subjectivity “good”? -What evaluation does the book make on the concept of adjusting history? (What are the costs and benefits?) -What key philosophical differences exist between the Eternals and those of the Hidden Centuries in how they employ time travel and temporal tampering? -Does Asimov see change, evolution, and adaptation as good? Are those three terms interchangeable? -Given that both attempt to “guide” history, what are the differences and similarities between Eternity and the Foundation? What does Asimov seem to suggest about each? Read less
