Reviewer: Amerigo Vespucci In short, First Contract is the story of what happens to Earth when technologically advanced aliens arrive at Earth and economically obliterate human corporations with their superior technology. After all, who wants to buy a Ford or Tata when you can have a supersonic flying car for just a few thousand dollars? The protaganist, a technology CEO by the name of Johnson Mukerjii, sees his company fall apart when the aliens' superior technology and production methods show his company's stock in trade to be hopelessly obsolete. Mukerjii, along with more than half the United States, soon finds himself to be out of work and homeless, cast aside by the "worst financial crisis since the fall of Rome." That historical analogy is just one of several that pop up throughout the book. Mukerjii and others wonder if Earth is following the Aztec example in the historical collision between the Spanish and that nation -- hopelessly out of date and forced to give up what few valuables it has in a vain hope of getting a leg up. Eventually, Mukerjii figures out a way to turn Earth into the Japan -- not the Aztec Empire -- of the galaxy, and the result is an incredibly interesting story. For someone interested in science fiction, the story is a gold mine of ideas and techniques. Far too often, writers have their characters embarking on vast Galaxy-spanning quests in Earth-built spaceships with no thought to the economics that allow those ships to be built in the first place. It's always been a turn-off to me that writers fail to address such a basic requirement of human society, but I've always thought the subject of first-contact economics and sales was just too dry to address in a novel. Costikyan proves that wrong. To tell his story, Costikyan almost ventures into antihero territory with his main character, CEO Johnson Mukerjii. Mukerjii is vain, has an ego a mile wide, and is insufferably arrogant. Costikyan always provides a reasoning behind Mukerjii's actions, however, and though I found myself disliking the character on a personal level, I didn't dislike his presentation of the character, nor did I think the character was evil. He shows the same fear of death, fear of failure, while brimming with a seemingly-misplaced confidence that almost made me wonder if Mukerjii was just a characture. Later, as he becomes more developed, that impression disappeared. I can't say the same for his supporting cast, but that's likely only due to the fact that the story moves at a lightning pace that leaves no time for development. Still, what time is spent is used superbly, and even though the secondary characters are somewhat cardboard in places, not all of them are -- particularly Mukerjii's initially reluctant capital backer, who I'll leave you to discover for yourself. My only problem is that despite being a CEO, Mukerjii seems to be everywhere during the initial first contact, inserted into events from the initial meeting to visiting the United Nations and meeting with the U.S. President -- with whom he seems to have a friendship. Because all this takes place in the first fifth of the book, it seems to come out of left field and is more sudden than the characterization allows. It seemed kind of a stretch until I got to know the character more. But these minor faults pale in comparison to the rest of the book, which is magnificient. If you enjoy world-building or colonization novels, particularly science fiction ones, you'll love this book. It's not only a good story but should serve as an example to any aspiring writer who wants to put down a few words about humanity's first contact with an alien species. Read less
