Reviewer: Val Kornea Ayn Rand wrote "It's not that I don't suffer, it's that I know the unimportance of suffering. I know that pain is to be fought and thrown aside, not to be accepted as part of one's soul and as a permanent scar across one's view of existence." Speaking of Dagny in Atlas Shrugged: "She survived it. She was able to survive it, because she did not believe in suffering. She faced with astonished indignation the ugly fact of feeling pain, and refused to let it matter. Suffering was a senseless accident, it was not part of life as she saw it. She would not allow pain to become important. She had no name for the kind of resistance she offered, for the emotion from which the resistance came; but the words that stood as its equivalent in her mind were: It does not count--it is not to be taken seriously. She knew these were the words, even in the moments when there was nothing left within her but screaming and she wished she could lose the faculty of consciousness so that it would not tell her that what could not be true was true. Not to be taken seriously--an immovable certainty within her kept repeating--pain and ugliness are never to be taken seriously. She fought it. She recovered. Years helped her to reach the day when she could face her memories indifferently, then the day when she felt no necessity to face them. It was finished and of no concern to her any longer." What was more fundamental to Ayn Rand--her acceptance of reason, or her rejection of suffering? This book shows that the answer is: her rejection of suffering. When confronted with the choice of regarding herself as a tragic figure, or departing from reality, she departed from reality. This is not a condemnation of her philosophy, but an affirmation of it--a proof that nothing can alter the absolutism of reality, not even one's refusal to accept pain. Ayn Rand had an adversarial relationship with emotions--not philosophically, but psychologically; she was tortured by loneliness, and fought against it with all her power. Her refusal to accept suffering as part of her soul made her a giant, until it clashed with reality and led her to act in a way she herself would objectively regard as most despicable. This memoir, while it presents the author of Objectivism as a tragic figure, is a brilliant and life-affirming validation of her philosophy and of the absolutism of reason. Nobody is immune from reality, not even its greatest champions. Nor is this a condemnation of Ayn Rand personally--her achievements in philosophy are held in the highest regard, as is her person; but it is a fascinating psychological portrait of a tortured genius who refused to regard herself as pitiful--at all costs. `Definition of tragedy: A hero destroyed by the excess of his virtues.` - Aristotle (384BC-322BC) Read less
