Reviewer: Uday Reddy Why this book is the essential SCI-FI: - • Amazing story, captivating till the very last page. • Easy to read prose which flows like waterfalls. • The amazing world building, and the fact that humanity lives in underground steel caves. • This book is set some 1000 years in the future. • It's written by Isaac Asimov. The long version: If you are starting out with Science Fiction, this book is the first book that you'd want to read. This is generally considered the essential sci-fi. The story is mesmerizing, even after finishing the book the effect of the story, the characters, still linger in your mind. The story is simple enough, a murder investigation. But that only forms the surface of the main plot. But, if you observe, behind the dialogues, the world building, lies a hidden meaning. The dialogues throw a direct punch to the present human state, and how we are destroying the one home we call EARTH. The characters are well developed. At the end, you'll find yourself having sympathy for a robot. The story doesn't slow down anywhere. The action starts right from the 3rd page. The writing is also not very complicated and there is a unique flow to the chapters. The backstory of the events is described throughout the story, mainly, how earth ended up the way it was, why humanity had to live in large underground "Steel Caves". There are also some philosophical thoughts thrown in some of the dialogue. This is a story which hides a deeper meaning within its facade. There is philosophy, politics, and mass hysteria. What's profound about the story is its relevancy to the present world. I sometimes caught myself wondering whether the future mentioned in the book, might eventually catch up to us. Because the present condition of the world is eerily like the ones mentioned in the book. Perhaps, Asimov did predict the future. One of the greatest things about the book is the class system, it mocks our present state of inequality, income differences and the social structure. The prose is quite detailed and rich in meaning. Overall, this is one of the greatest Sci-Fi books for a reason. If you're starting out with the genre, start with this book. Read less
