Reviewer: Roger D. Launius A few days before my comprehensive examinations for my Ph.D. in American history in 1981 I went to see my advisor in the History Department at LSU. In the course of our conversation he asked me, in what could only be interpreted as a rather strange question that I think says more about my advisor's weird sense of humor than anything else, to name for him the three great colonial America historians whose names began with "M." Who thinks like that? I answered with Edmund S. Morgan, Perry Miller, but I blanked on anyone else. He had been thinking of, in addition to Morgan and Miller, Samuel Elliott Morrison. I nodded in agreement. I hadn't really read any of Morrison's work at the time so he was not much on my mind, but I also don't put him in a class with the other two historians; he was essentially an historian of naval warfare and seafaring. Moreover, I didn't have much interest in those subjects. I still don't have too much interest in those topics, but my appreciation of Morrison is somewhat enhanced by reading this volume, a condensation of a massive two-volume work called "The European Discovery of America," with a volume dedicated to "The Northern Voyages" (1971), 500-1600, and "The Southern Voyages" (1974), 1492-1616. It is an exhaustive and exhausting work, not quite as massive as the original but still hefty, and filled with stories and anecdotes, sea lore and witticisms, some of which are even true. In it one will find more than one ever wants to know about Christopher Columbus, Ferdinand Magellan, John Cabot, Jacques Cartier, Francis Drake, and the like. It's not a bad read at all, between stories of voyages of discovery, Morrison tells us the minute differences between a square rigger and a sloop, the nature of 8 bells, the origins of the "smoking lamp," and the like. The many stories of explorers and voyagers are well narrated. There is an old fashioned feel to the narrative, as the author regales us with extravagant stories as if we were sitting in his club with a glass of sherry during an evening gathering. Morrison does everything but use the term "dear reader" to draw us into his asides; in fact I think he might use that term too. I kept thinking to myself as I read, "well, they don't make them like this anymore." Perhaps that's for the best. Even so, I stayed with the 752 page book so it held my attention well enough. For a more useful and up-to-date take on the subject, however, I would recommend Felipe Fernandez-Armesto's "Pathfinders: A Global History of Exploration" (Norton, 2006). I should say something about the oddly-structured account offered here. Morrison originally wrote two books overlapping in time and geography, but the mash-up of them in this single volume does not work all that well because of a loss of chronology. Accordingly, the northern voyages are discussed first and then we go back in time to pick up the southern voyages. It might have been better to restructuer the chapters a bit to create a reasonable chronology. Even so, it is an interesting book. Well worth reading, but perhaps not as an introduction to the exploration of the Americas. Read less
