Reviewer: Char Ruth Graham saved and collected all sorts of minutiae--meditations, brief stories, humorous incidents, memory fragments of her experiences in life. Many of these accounts, which are diverse and impossible to neatly characterize, are gathered in this book which mostly resembles a Journal, yet some small amount of it is quoted material rather than Ruth's own writing. She has saved things by other people that she finds striking and worthy of cherishing. Altogether there are 132 entries that take up 218 pages. One memorable longer story Ruth heard from eye-witness Rev. James R. Graham. It centered around a certain brutal massacre of missionaries at Shansi, China in 1900. This was connected with many martyrdoms at the time of the "Boxer Rebellion." Ruth decided to record the story as if it were a scene in a novel. What happens in it is that secretly, under cover of darkness, one of the cold-blooded soldier-murderers of the missionaries afterwards seeks out a certain Western missionary in his home. What this executioner wishes is to confess the long story of his involvement in the murders. At last, he tells the pastor how deeply touched and moved he had been by the way the missionaries behaved as they were taken from prison and brought to their martyrdom. He says he saw with wonder how they were calm, peaceful, and unafraid. He tells how they were even matter-of-fact as they left the prison and proceeded to their execution. And they sang together. This soldier-captain tells the pastor that he was most struck with the fact that the condemned missionaries FORGAVE THEIR MURDERERS. This executioner captain, who had carried out so much cold-blooded killing in his lifetime, wants most deeply to ask the Christian pastor if HE himself could ever be forgiven by this God of the missionaries. The missionary listens and then explains to the captain that his sins were great indeed but that all men are sinners and that Jesus died for all men. He tells the captain of Jesus' great mercy. He explains to the soldier how God the Father CAN truly forgive him--for the sake of His son Jesus who died on the Cross for every person. The story closes with a pointed statement: "The captain listened closely. Foreign words these, to a mind schooled to hate, to kill--but not to forgive. He drank in every strange word. 'Love...Forgive...Life.' He listened. The little he could understand, he accepted, simply, asking an occasional question and again listening closely. ...It was late when the missionary escorted the captain to the gate and bowed farewell. It was the last he heard or saw of him....The missionary sat a long while thinking. Fresh in his mind were hundreds of new graves strewn across China like wheat sown at random...No more the anguished, 'Lord, why this great waste?'...The harvest had begun." I should have expected this ending of the story but it came to me unexpectedly after a long focus upon the Chinese captain's spiritual need rather than the need of the troubled missionary whose heart was still sore from the martyrdoms. Suddenly there was also a significant and one-might-even-say "converting" realization experience for the pastor as well as for the Chinese captain. Ruth has a way of putting a simple wallop into the end of a story or the brief few words of a poem. As I flounder in an attempt to describe the sense of Ruth that I'm getting from reading a few of her books and hearing how her family members and friends have described her, I can say that there was something about her personality that I would describe as "pointed." They say that she enjoyed playing jokes. She even startled people with little practical jokes. Although she liked to "poke" fun, it seems to me that she also liked to joyfully "poke" serious "points" at people with her writing. From among Ruth's wealth of collected quotes: She turned the words of a road sign into the epitaph which appears on her gravestone: "Construction ended. Thank you for your patience." Under the heading of "Ever New Beginnings": "How did you learn to skate?" someone asked the winner. "By getting up every time I fell down was the reply." On the subject of Fortitude, she quotes a poem by Jane Merchant: "God bless and fortify them,/God hear when they entreat,/The strong courageous people/Too brave to own defeat./ And oh, God, bless and help them,/God answer when they call,/The tired defeated people/Who are not brave at all." A quote (from A. B. Simpson) she saved under the heading of "Pure Joy": "God is preparing His heroes. And when the opportunity comes, He can fit them into their places in a moment. And the world will wonder where they came from." It seems as if Ruth could take almost any experience from everyday life and see a spiritual lesson in it: For instance, an old family story about a certain dog's extraordinary obedience, she turned into a lesson about how an individual's simple obedience must surely be what we do that gives God the greatest pleasure. Another time she compares God's people to fountain pens, like her own pen that she has to shake and clean at times because it gets clogged up or dry. People also have to be shaken and cleansed, and filled up time and again. Ruth's every thought and perception seemed to turn to the Lord and to lessons from the Scriptures. She could have been a great writer of sermons. Many of the entries in this book are just that: mini-sermons. There are humorous anecdotes. One that I found funny, unexpected, and memorable would probably appeal to any reader who has ever experienced being embarrassed because of the color-emphatic markings of baboons at the zoo. Ruth and a friend were visiting the zoo with several youngsters in tow when the children became fascinated with the baboons, especially "that particular [red] portion of the anatomy upon which the baboons sat (which we usually referred to as the 'back porch')..." Ruth notes, "Our hostess and I were looking elsewhere and commenting on other things. Not the children. And I heard the Zoo's Manager say to them, kindly and with dignity, 'For a baboon, that is considered quite magnificent!'" (Great perspective! Who ever would have realized what the zoo manager had to teach us politely clueless folks about the redness of baboons' bottoms!) There are many delightful and faith-building items to be discovered in Ruth's stuffed "attic," so replete with small but important scraps collected over the years. I find it's best to read the book bit by bit; it would be indigestible taken in all at once. It's a good bedside book or daily meditation book to spend a few minutes with when you have brief moments for a coffee break. Also a good book to take along when you expect to wait in the doctor's office. The cartoon cover of this paperback book shows a happy little rat holding a huge basketful of books. Lots of book-loving readers can identify with that image. The back cover offers a photographic view of Ruth's attic and her at work in it. A quote from Ruth's writing offers a glimpse of what's up there: "...And the wonderful old attic continued to accept contributions graciously, endlessly, never complaining. A trunk going back to my childhood in China...Newspaper clippings of the fall of Shanghai to the Japanese in 1937...High school in Korea, old love letters from Bill, boxes of photographs...My old wedding dress (the veil was used to trim four bassinets; when Ned, the fifth, arrived he had to make do with a cradle): Enough old luggage to start a used luggage shop...A veritable treasure trove of disorganized surprises." Read less
