Reviewer: Rudolf Spoerer to this very well written and masterfully crafted erotic fiction .. Although the black lace series of books prides itself as being ' erotic fiction written by women for women' this book surpasses that goal in numerous respects. It's erotic writing at it's best, hands down ! From the beginning even the title of this book 'out of bounds ' is so appro pos and meaningfull one can't help but thinking of the author just sitting back and chuckling as she leads us down into a garden of delights to taste that forbidden fruit.... The plot sizzles, character development is complete concise and totally identifiable, and the location of a hidden cottage in the remote hills of France is just plain perfect. Twenty seven year old Katie, after breaking up with Robert, her unfaithfull boyfriend, and travels from England to France to take posession of her grandfathers remote farm that had been unused for some time. She arrives only to find the house occupied by two squatters, Miguel and Eric, who have been living there for some time as a very happy and frisky couple. It only takes a second for Eric to hate Katie and see her as a threat to the staus quo of things while Miguel is an immediate enigma to Katie that she finds irresistible...Katie having nowhere to run or call for help is forced to stay and the plot thickens ... The book slowly takes us step by step down a wonderfull path to Katie working to take Miguel at least away from the 'dark side' when a goup of wandering gypsies and Miguels' sister appear on the scene. The mood changes from electric to nuclear as Miguels sister explores a side of Katie and takes her judgemental attitude of the boys down a notch or two. When the reader thinks that this is about as hot as it can get Katie's ex shows up and she finds herself being taken to the dark side of passion .. etc .. etc .. The stereotypical concepts that we have about eroticism and sexuality are are twisted turned and exposed by the author in such a skilled fashion that we follow the story as if the reader was there as a player in a five part play.If it's every man's voyeuristic dream to see two women getting it on then this book takes that dream and and develops a womans dream and awakening ...... This is probably one of the best modern erotic book ever written, and i've read a lot of them, and it's a MUST HAVE for your erotic library! Well done Mandy Dickinson well done ! Read less
