Reviewer: Sharyn Gellis weaves the lives of Dionysus, Ariadne and the Minotaur together and creates her magic once more. We meet Ariadne, daughter of the King of Crete, as a young girl who is being consecrated priestess to Dionysus. The God has not responded to any of their priestesses for generations to bless the vineyards. On the day of consecration Dionysus does appear and thus begins the story of Ariadne's love for him. He is a tormented God due to the fact that his emotions are transmitted to others and he is often enraged which leads to one disaster after another. Over the years Ariadne and Dionysus develop a deep and loving relationship of God/priestess and due to their blessing of the vineyards Crete flourishs once more. The Minotaur, a result of the coupling of Queen Pasiphae of Crete and the God Poseidon, is born and Ariadne is the only one who sees the Bull God as anything but her little brother. All in all this is a marvelous read. Ms. Gellis is renowned for her ability to give depth to her characters and her touch remains true. While reading this book I experienced the entire gauntlet of emotions. From tears of laughter over Dionysus' grumblings when Ariadne calls him too early and wakes him up after a bout of carousing to disgust and contempt at the machinations Queen Pasiphae is willing to do to get her own way. From gentle enjoyment watching Dionysus, first acknowledge his growing love for Ariadne and his resulting confusion as to how to deal with it to sorrow, despair and heartbreaking pathos over the poor Minotaur who is truly the most innocent and pathetic character in this tale. This book will join A Dazzling Brightness, A Shimmering Splendor, Enchanted Fire and The Roselynde Chronicals forever on my keeper shelf. As always Ms. Gellis' characters won't leave you alone; you get to know them and they affect you as would any other person you meet in life. Some of my best friends come from Ms. Gellis' books and this holds true for this one....I will visit Ariadne and Dionysus again. Thank you Ms. Gellis for once more giving me pleasure. Read less
