Reviewer: Em Miller This review is not plot-driven. It won't be a summary, but it will tell you whether or not I think you should take the time to read "The X-FILES: Antibodies. Back in the day, my son kept all things X-Files on my bookshelves - all of which remained unopened by yours truly. It was my son who introduced me to the TV series halfway through the first season. I immediately felt like The X-Files had been written and produced just for me. I could easily fill a book of 300 pages with my thoughts, feelings and the whys of my love of the entire series... but will spare you ... and you're quite welcome. 😇 I'll just say this.. I'm currently in the middle of my sixth re-watch of the series and the Creator above willing, the tenth (or fifteenth) will be in my future. (A stroke some years back played havoc with my memory capability but it also had a plus side! The X-Files never fails to surprise me at least a handful of times per episode .. so it never gets boring!) All said in an attempt to figure out why in the world I could NOT bring myself to pick up one page of written material having "X-Files" in the title. Reading has been my life for 68 years, with books about the paranormal (aka X-Files subjects) being my main interest. Yet X-Files books sat on the shelves untouched by me for decades after series end, until last night. It's hard to admit one was a huge idiot for the past thirty-odd years! But wearing a sign reading "IDIOT WOMAN" would have been the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help me Creator above. Thank you, Kevin J. Anderson, for putting an end to my wearing of the dunce cap! That dang thing drooped down over my eyes and blinded me to all the reading enjoyment just waiting for my hand to reach out and grab it. Hand finally grabbed and Mulder and Scully live again! Pick up "Antibodies" and you will hear Mulder's voice. You will see Scully's expressions, especially the ones she makes when Mulder can't see them. All the characters are very real, but best for me ... the storyline is UNreal. Oh... and the dog!! 😍 Anderson - with his wild imagination - takes Mulder, Scully AND the reader on one helluvah ride! A terrifying ride it is, too, because it seems so flipping possible in today's world. The only neutral thing I could say about this book is I wouldn't complain if Mulder and Scully had gotten a little more "air time". Even so, I thoroughly enjoyed the story! If you're a fan of The X-FILES but haven't yet read any of the book series, I recommend you make a change. If you've never watched the series but you appreciate things paranormal and related stories, I believe "Antibodies" has no problem standing on its own! Read less
