Reviewer: Greywolf In 1957, Jack Kirby created a team called the Challengers Of The Unknown for DC Comics. In one of their adventures (issue #3, September 1958), Rocky, the group's test pilot, flies an experimental rocket into space, is exposed to cosmic rays and returns to Earth with super-powers including super-strength, invisibility and the ability to shoot flames. In 1961, Kirby created another group for one of DC's rivals, Marvel Comics. This group also included a test pilot. They dressed in blue boiler suits as opposed to the Challengers' purple ones. They flew an experimental rocket ship into space, were exposed to cosmic rays and returned to Earth with super-powers including super-strength, invisibility and the ability to shoot flames. This second group are called The Fantastic Four and their first appearance is credited with having saved Marvel Comics from bankruptcy. And there the problems start. Stan Lee, a hack writer who owed his job as Marvel's editor to being a cousin of his boss's wife, had given himself the job of dialoguing Kirby's stories and those of Jack's fellow artist, Steve Ditko. Lee has subsequently insisted, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that he created the Fantastic Four. For years, Kirby didn't complain (he had to put food on the family table), but kept turning out stories that Lee would then add dialogue to, based on notes that Kirby initially gave verbally but then took to writing into the page margins of his pencilled artwork. By 1970, however, Kirby had finally had enough. He had created not only The Fantastic Four but The Uncanny X-Men, The Incredible Hulk, The Mighty Thor, The Silver Surfer, Galactus, The Inhumans, Nick Fury: Agent of SHIELD, Doctor Doom and a host of other characters for Marvel. He created the plots for their adventures and provided story notes for Lee to work from. In spite of which, he was only rarely credited with having any hand in creating the stories, nor was he paid for doing so. To add insult to injury, Lee had even taken to radically altering Kirby's stories, often asking Kirby to redo without pay pages that didn't fit the changed stories. When Kirby left Marvel for DC in 1970, it sent shock waves through the comic book world. As he quit, Kirby handed in one last FF story to the Marvel offices, called 'The Menace of the Mega-Men' and intended to be FF #103, ending his record-breaking unbroken run on the comic since its inception nine years earlier. Stan 'the Man,' however, had other ideas and threw out the story in a huff. A partial change of heart a few months later led him to dig out the rejected pages, chop them around, rewrite Kirby's story and give it to John Buscema and John Romita to provide new art to fill in the gaps his ham-fisted editing had created. The result was the deeply unsatisfactory FF #108, called 'The Monstrous Mystery of the Nega-Man.' Lee's reason for issuing Kirby's old story at that time was that it coincided with the release of the first issues of Kirby's epic Fourth World saga for DC. It was supposed to be a spoiler. Instead, it was just spoiled. This hardback book contains Kirby's original story restored from archive material to pretty much how he meant it to be. Lee has provided new dialogue based on Kirby's marginal notes that he had ignored first time around. A nice touch is that Joe Sinnott, Kirby's inker on much of his original FF run, has been brought in to ink this new version. As for the story itself, it's not exactly Earth-shattering. By the time he created it, Kirby had pretty much given up providing big ideas to the company that had never properly recompensed him for the hundreds he'd given them already. Even so, it's a Kirby FF story and a perfectly good one. Lee does a serviceable job scripting it and it's been nicely coloured in the style of its era. Following on from the restored Kirby story is a section containing Kirby's original pencilled artwork, complete with most of his marginal notes on plot and dialogue so that we can check the extent to which Stan has followed them. Seeing Kirby's pencils is always a treat. He was a truly great artist, establishing a language of visual storytelling that has influenced virtually every creator in the medium since. We then have the story as it ended up in FF #108 after being hacked around by Lee and partially redrawn by Buscema and Romita. It is nowhere near as good as the original Kirby version. In fact, it's a bit of a mess. We are then offered what is proclaimed as 'The Last Fantastic Four Story,' called 'World's End' and dating from 2007. This is scripted by Stan Lee and drawn by the ever dependable John Romita Jr. This is followed by the 1986 story, 'Homecoming!' produced to mark the FF's 25th anniversary. This is also scripted by Lee, though its most interesting feature is that the first 10 pages are pencilled by the excellent Barry Windsor-Smith. The remaining 50-odd pages are by other hands and are very much of their era, by which I mean they're extremely average. The final offering is a 9-page Stan Lee story in his best comedic style, featuring a guest appearance by, would you believe, Stan Lee? Wow. Here, the story is helped along by some Kirbyesque pencilling by Nick Dragotta, rendered more Kirbyesque by the great Mike Allred's inks. All in all, it's an odd selection of tales related only by the fact that they're scripted by Stan Lee. The undoubted highlights are the restored Kirby tale and the pencilled pages that follow it. The rest, to be honest, pretty much feels like filler, with the exception of the few Barry Windsor-Smith pages. It's interesting to see this distinctive artist's take on the FF. Oh, and for some reason, Marvel have chosen not to number the pages in this book. Why? Who knows? Still, for all its faults, I'm pleased to add this to my collection. Well, it's Kirby and he is still the King of Comics . Read less
