Reviewer: diamondgirl This was a very good story; also a little different as far as setting. Nina & her brother Emilio Juarez were very young when their parents were murdered as a result of the Mexican-American war. So in 1856, they turned to horse stealing as revenge against the American "gringos" who caused them become orphans and homeless. Lt Clayton Youngblood was a US Army officer tasked with an unusual project - pick up a shipment of camels. These were to be used as an alternative to pack animals thus saving the US government money (this was a true historical event). Nina wants a home and family but Emilio keeps putting her off by playing on her fears and loyalty to their murdered parents. She meets Lt Youngblood when she tries to sell him their stolen horses which they stole from another gang of murderous bandits. Nina and Clay's relationship takes twists and turns over the year; he helps her escape first in sympathy with what happened to her & Emilio. But Emilio leaves her when she is again captured by Lt Youngblood to face possible hanging. Clay by now is in love with her and she with him; she knows Emilio is never going to settle down to a quiet live in Mexico. Clay has to rescue her again from a prison in Santa Fe by falsifying documents to get her released. Now he has become a law breaker but they go back to Nina's parents ranch in Mexico where they are happy and feel safe. Until Emilio enters their lives; now he is a mean killer that tries to destroy what Nina & Clay have struggled to build. Keep reading to see how Clay and Nina finally find their happily ever after. Texas border with Mexico is a dangerous place where gangs of bandits raid ranchers and travelers. These large murderous Mexican gangs are under the protection of the Mexican government who benefits from the sale of the stolen horses, cattle and item. The small group of Texas Rangers were tasked to protect over 600 to 700 settlements from these dangerous bandits. They were the only protection since the military was stretched so thin The Texas government did give them lose authority to deal with captured gang members on the spot which they did. Unfortunately some innocent people got caught up such as with Nina. diamondgirl Read less
