Reviewer: Bella March Claire is a vivacious party girl, with men lining up to do her bidding. Then she meets Paul, a mysterious, intense lover who doesn't allow her to take the reins of their relationship. In fact, if anything, he shows her that her role in his life is that of his submissive. Paul's been raised in a family where men dispense corporal punishment liberally to any female in the family who disobeys or makes a mistake. Paul will take his background and show Claire the rules he demands she follows if she wants to be his. There's no way around it. Claire is a spoiled girl, who thinks she can get her way by whining, screaming and throwing temper tantrums. This petulance was typical of her behavior for greater than two-thirds of the story, making her incredibly difficult to like. There are two young men in her life, Gary and Tristan, who treat her like a queen and in turn she speaks to them condescendingly all under the guise of being loving. It's clear she needs a dominant to put her in her place. Either that, or a good spanking. The latter is what Paul provides. Paul seems to be more into Domestic Discipline rather than BDSM. It's clear that he is dominant, but whether he should be considered as A Dominant may be debatable among some readers, even though BDSM is said to contain many behaviors along the kink spectrum. If readers are seeking toys, bondage or dungeons, this story does not provide such accessories. Instead, Paul concerns himself with liberal corporal punishment sprinkled with a heavy dose of sex. Keeping the upper hand in the relationship seems to be more his goal than a true romantic pursuit. To be honest, it may not even be appropriate to consider this an erotic romance novel, for the HEA of the story is rather cloudy. I had such high hopes for this story and was left a bit disappointed. Some readers may revel in Mr. Lowrie's storytelling. Unfortunately, Journey Round A Darker Sun did not deliver for me. Courtesy of Fallen Angel Reviews ([...]) Read less
