Reviewer: Schtinky The most astonishing detail of this book is that, out of all the stories available, two stand out so startlingly clever that the two alone gave me cause to raise my rating by one star. 'Skeeter Junkie' is a fascinating tale of a heroin addict's transformation into the body of a mosquito. 'Ten Things To Be Grateful For' is one of the most hard-impacting shorts I've read in a long time. "Be thankful, because this could be you", Shirley warns, as he covers being beaten and having your spine pulled apart, being sold as a child to a $ex factory, being a multiple diabetes amputee ignored by health care, and other equally heinous scenarios. Here's the lineup: Really Weird Stories: 1) "I Want To Get Married" Says The Worlds Smallest Man 2) Will The Chill 3) Tapes 12, 14, 15, 22, And 23 4) Don't Be Afraid 5) Lot Five, Building Seven, Door Twenty Three 6) Kindred 7) The Word "Random," Deliberately Repeated 8) Voices 9) The Last Ride Really Really Weird Stories: 1) ... And The Angel With Television Eyes 2) The Sweet Caress Of Mother Nature 3) In The Cornelius Arms 4) Quill Tripstickler, Out The Window 5) I Live In Elizabeth 6) Morons At The Speed Of Light 7) Silent Crickets 8) Screens 9) Brittany? Oh: She's In Translucent Blue 10) Ticket To Heaven Really Really Really Weird Stories: 1) Ash 2) Triggering 3) When Enter Came 4) Skeeter Junkie 5) What Joy! What Fulfillment! 6) 199619971998 7) Preach 8) Preach: Part Two: The Apocalypse Of The Reverend John Shirley 9) Modern Transmutations Of The Alchemist Really Really Really Really Weird Stories: 1) Just Like Suzie 2) Cold Feet 3) The Peculiar Happiness Of Professor Cort 4) Tahiti In Terms Of Squares 5) Equilibrium 6) What Cindy Saw 7) The Almost Empty Rooms 8) Ten Things To Be Grateful For 9) The Sea Was Wet As Wet Could Be There are more than just two good stories in this collection, but many of them were simply too disjointed for me to relate to, and I'm a Shirley fan. This is Shirley's most comprehensive collection, comprised of shorts and some flash fiction. Some other talented pieces are "I Want To Get Married" Says World's Smallest Man, a tragically doomed marriage. 'Lot Five, Building Seven, Door Twenty-Three' is an excellent vampire tale, with one of the most unique and grotesque vampires. '...And The Angels With Television Eyes' has a shudderingly well described Metal Man. 'Sweet Caress' is a nice kitty tale, and 'In The Cornelius Arms' is a great tale of goth culture. In 'Ash', a criminal runs the streets, insane from the Yoruba inflicted revenge for his crime. 'Just Like Suzie' is probably the grossest of the tales, and worth a drippy mention. Ending the collection is the flash fiction piece 'The Sea Was Wet As Wet Could Be', a haunting tale of expansive demise. If you're a first time reader of John Shirley's short fiction, I'd have to recommend 'Black Butterflies' over this collection. Some of these tales seemed to border on unintelligible rather than just weird. Thanks to Alan M. Clark, there's some nice cover and a few pieces of very bizarre interior art that add to the flavor of the book. Pick this up if you're a Shirley fan, or just a fan of 'way out there on the edge' bizarre tales. Enjoy! Read less
