Reviewer: "cat472" Erotic literature, as a genre, has for its theme the most important of all human impulses. Unfortunately, erotica all too frequently treats its main theme in isolation from its human practioners, making them look anything but human. It is therefore quite refreshing when an author shows his characters struggling with the burden of their condition. In Journey Round a Darker Sun, Simon Lowrie exposes and then carefully examines the sufferings of two people trying despartely to solve the problems created by their own sexualtiy. Neither is able to effectively solve the conundrum of sex in the real world, and Mr. Lowry has shown just how devasting such a failure can be. Claire is young, divorced, and beautiful, and like nearly all beautiful women, she knows it. She has fawning admirers, but none of them are able to arouse her. In particular, her most ardent and most obsequious admirer, Tristan, has for years asroused little more than barely concealed contempt from the woman he loves. That he has hung on as long as he has seems, at first, ridiculous, but Mr. Lowrie soon convinces us that Tristan's obsession is heartfelt, genuine--and potentially deadly. And yet Tristan's position is so familiar that no reader will fail to reconize him or sympathize with him. Indeed, all of us at one time or another have been exactly where Tristan is, and Lowrie's description of his horrible predicament stunningly recreates that awful, uncomfortable feeling of unrequited love. So powerful is Lowrie's portrait that I was compelled to contemplate my own past before plunging ahead to find out what would happen to Tristan. Claire, the woman who so enjoys tormenting Tristan, is herself just as unfulfilled as her would-be factotum. She has two children and several former lovers, but as the story opens Tristan is the only live male in her life. That she wants and needs another male is clear, but she herself could not describe the male that would be perfect for her. It is inevitable that a man will find her, though, and when Paul enters her life he endeavors to turn her into the perfect female--at least from his point of view. The fates of Tristan and Claire hinge on whether he succeeds, and it is the journey toward his success, or failure, to which the title refers. The reader who travels with Claire, Tristan, and Paul, will find himself (or herself) cheering, hoping, sometimes praying, for just the right ending. And that, surprisingly, is just what Mr. Lowrie provides. Read less
