Reviewer: Perceptive Reader Sometimes, on very-very rare occasions, you come across something that's truly exalted and yet exciting, profound and mind-boggling, poignant and brutal. "2001: A Space Odyssey" was one such book for me. This one, probably the best book to have done justice to the award named after the great Arthur C Clarke, was another. What's it about? Many-many years from now, in an incredibly advanced earth, science and technology, supported by various regimes, achieve things that have been never achieved, even attempted before. In the process they overlook and overrule all ethical, natural considerations. Invariably, they generate a backlash. In that great fight between the inwards & outwards, earth gets wasted. Its colonies and settlements are ruined by electronic virus aimed at crippling life support and everything else. Darkness falls. A terraformed earth is about to be populated by monkeys, to be guided by humanity from above, when the "naturalist" insurrection takes place. The mission is sabotaged. The station is destroyed. So are the monkeys. Only Doctor Averna Kern, the monstrously single-minded scientist responsible for this project, survives. She uploads herself into system to stay "alive" and to be awaken in case of finding a response to signals being thrown by the satellite. Something else survives too. The nanovirus supposed to trigger mutations taking the monkeys ahead in the path towards civilisation reaches the planet surface. It doesn't find its intended recipienta, since the monkeys had burnt away. But, it doesn't give up. Sentience finds a way. Countless years later, the runt of a humanity treading the toxic steps of their gigantic forefathers, realises that Earth is uninhabitable. They prepare an arc-ship named "Gilgamesh", and leaves for a place where humanity may survive. Inevitably, old maps and desperation bring them to that green dot burning bright against overwhelming darkness. They find that the planet is not empty. A civilisation already exists there! How did this happen? How could this happen? And, what happens next? Believe me, if you have decided to read only one science fiction book in near future, then this should be it. Why? Because this is a book where science acts as the matrix for a vast human and non-human portrait of ascent, descent, travails and accomplishments, love, sacrifice, intelligence, faith, fury, and eventual glory. Recommended as a must-read. Read less
