Reviewer: SebFox What makes a "good book" is a very subjective thing. What makes a "great" book you could argue is even more subjective. Though others might try to distill the qualities of a great book down to highbrow facts as they try to intellectualise their emotional reaction, for me it is, "does it make me want to keep turning the pages?" Do I want to forgo sleep so I can feed the insatiable appetite of needing to know what happens next? Am I eager to sneak away on my lunch break so I can slip back into a world I so reluctantly had to abandon at the office door. This is fundamentally what tells me whether a book is good or not. But what makes me keep turning those pages... ah, now that is a very subjective matter. Children of Time is one of those books that you really don't want to give too much (if anything) away about the plot when speaking about it. Particularly if you want others to read it and get the same emotional experience as you did. I first heard about the book when doom scrolling through other peoples top 10 sci-fi books and saw this one kept popping up. So after over indulging in too many retro 90s detective books I decided a palate cleanser was in order. Without too much second guessing, I lept in and found myself entangled in a web of future imaginings and temporal sky hopping, that was nearly impossible to get out of. Now when reading other reviews you will hear people say that this book has "great evolutionary world building", is "massive in scope and ideas", and that it poses some deep human philosophical questions of the ages. And in fairness to those reviewers I agree, it does all that, it does all that and more! But for me it was the incredible story told through the many eyes of the incredible main characters. Following their stories and their emotional evolution, is what made me want to keep turning those pages and keep burning that midnight oil. I found myself leapfrogging alternate chapters as I was keen to know how certain characters' stories played out and could not bear the tension built up by the alternating chapter approach the author took to his storytelling. Of course I immediately went back to pick up the other story threads and found myself equally invested in what I had earlier pushed out of the way. That is how good the storytelling is, and how engaging his characters are. Now you will find you gravitate more to one set of characters in this book than another, as Adrian Tchaikovsky's skillfully uses them to carry forward different philosophical arcs, but he never lets that overwhelm his incredible ability to tell a very dramatic, emotional story. And it really was this that made me turn those pages. And ok, if I am being honest I did fall in love with 3 of the most delicately written characters that moved me to tears on so many occasions. And for me, particularly with this book, it was the emotional wranglings of the author that kept me hooked. The way chapters would end on a cliff hanger or with a dramatic reveal, that kept me saying "just one more chapter before I go to bed". The way he knew how to tug at the heart strings just as much as he knew how to spike those adrenaline levels. He knew what buttons to press and how best to calm those fraying nerves. Now if you are not a sci-fi reader, or are considering this book as a way to help alleviate the effects of a recent book hangover, then can I just say please give it a go. The science is accessible and the emotional storytelling is universal, no matter which characters you follow. You will find yourself challenged as well as entertained. It will make you think about our own evolution and how present our own world is in the future Adrian Tchaikovsky's writes about. And most important of all, it will stay with you long after you finish the final chapter... and that is for me what tips this book over from being "good" to being "great". Read less
