Reviewer: G. Davies I'm fairly confident and competent in using LLM and generative AI because I have to use LLMs in my work some of which involves giving performance feedback on LLMs and bug reports. I'm still finding this book to be very useful and more useful than I thought it would be. Both the depth and, especially, the breadth of coverage is impressive. From prompt engineering to generating code and integration with Excel (including accuracy checking) to discussion of ethics, the book impresses. It’s the clarity of the narrative and the very generous frequency and high quality illustrations that make the book standout. Hitesh Motwani’s skill is not just one of technical and subject knowledge but also a very unusual ability to explain both simple and more challenging concepts in an incredibly accessible, logical and simple manner. Even simple concepts that most users take for granted - such as generating LLM responses to basic prompts - are approached in a structured manner so that higher level skills can be developed in an effortless way by building on the concepts that were introduced for the lower level skills. This is the case for example with the discussion on “fine tuning” and then “retrieval augmentation”. The latter discussion of retrieval augmentation builds on the discussion of fine tuning and then develops fine tuning further. The examples (prompts, outputs and software integrations) are heavily titled towards ChatGPT with only fairly small mention of CoPilot and Gemini for example. This isn’t a big problem especially because, over the past few months or so, there’s been convergence between the abilities of the different brands of LLM in terms of abilities. The user interfaces are though different and more mention of this, throughout the book with illustrations, would have been welcome especially perhaps in terms of CoPilot’s integration with Excel. The diagram of “Famous LLMs” on page 104 is perhaps a bit surprising - Gemini is present but CoPilot isn’t and Mistral is present. Elsewhere “Bing” is mentioned instead of Copilot. These are minor issues and reflect the pace of change and development in the LLM marketplace rather than the core value of this book. Its core value is huge including as a family reference guide. A couple of the pages in my book had been subject to what looks like printing press crease. It’s fairly minor in that it doesn’t impact the ability to read the pages. I would recommend this book and even if, like me, you have a good understanding of LLM theory and practice. The author has a very rare skill in breaking down both simple and more complex issues into shared and brilliantly explained concepts that aid not only understanding but also immediate practical applications. The illustrations help a lot but even more than the richly coloured and easy to read screen shot style illustrations, the explanatory text and conceptual structure is outstanding. Read less
