This book is filled with sadness, with longing for love, of what might have been, what could have been or should have been. I heartily disliked Marilyn and James Lee who favor Lydia, their middle child, while they ignore oldest child, Nath, and youngest child, Hannah. These parents treat these two as if they don't matter. As the book continues, I kind of begin to see their way of looking at life, somewhat. James and Marilyn meet at college, both excellent, dedicated students. Marilyn has her heart set on being a doctor. She and James have an affair, James is so different than any man she has ever met. She becomes pregnant, so the two marry. Son, Nath, is born. Marilyn didn't want to be a doctor bad enough or she wouldn't have let this happen. But she loves James, she would have married him no matter what. Her divorced mother disowns her. Doris says her marriage to an Oriental isn't right. But for many years, Marilyn looks at women doctors and remembers that could have been her. James, a Chinese born in the United States, goes to a school in Iowa, the only Chinese student. His parents work at the school, his father a handiman, his mother a cook. He always felt out of place, never fitting in, being ashamed of his heritage. The children, Nath and Hannah look Chinese. Lydia has her father's black hair, but her mother's blue eyes. She looks very much like her mother, very Caucausion. James wants his daughter to be popular, for her peers to like her. He tells her continually to smile, to speak nicely to people, tells her ways to make others like and approve of her. James is never popular, well liked. He is a history professor in a small town college in Ohio, has tried to get a professor's job at a major university. He feels he is discriminated against because he is an Oriental. Marilyn has never cared about being popular and well liked. After Lydia's death, he has an affair with a young woman, Louisa Chen, his teaching assistant. This is the kind of woman he should have married he thinks. Lydia's mother wants her to be the doctor she never was, is buying her books about medicine, enrolling her in science classes, taking her to science fairs, pushing her towards medicine. Lydia loves her mother, hates to disappoint her mom, fears her mother will run away, will desert the family. Lydia turns sixteen and is tired of having to be somebody she is not and doesn't want to be. This this book is about another dysfunctional family and is filled with pain, with characters who want to love each other, especially Hannah, but don't know how to let others know. James feels inferior because he is Chinese. The book begins in the 50's with parents in school, continues until 1977. Have things changed since then? Let's hope so. The writing is sharp, good, detailed, beautiful writing. However, the book is too bleak and painful. The characters don't know each other nor do they want to. I feel sorry for the children for having such terrible parents, for not allowing them to be the characters they need to be and want to be. This book is so sad. A story of a marriage that never should have been. Of the cast of characters Marilyn is the worse, not knowing what she wants out of life and insisting her daughter, Lydia , be the person her mother always wanted to be. Read less
