It pains me to write unfavorable reviews for books written by favorite authors, and Susan Mallery is definitely one of my favorites. But as painful as it is for me to write this, it was just as painful to read it. I must state that yes, I knew this is a re-publish of a much earlier work. I was expecting the book to have less polish than her newer ones, I like it when authors re-release oldies that I missed the first time around. I wasn’t expecting a literary masterpiece. I was expecting a harlequin type soft and fluffy easy Christmas read. What I got? Frustrated! Molly is at a crossroads in her life. In one short week her life completely unraveled and while she waits for more bad news (because our Molly is a pessimist) she decides to go on an adventure. When Molly was a girl she had a huge crush on her older sister’s boyfriend, Dylan. When Dylan and her sister broke up he left her with a ring and a promise for adventure. She decides to cash in on that deal. And although he hasn’t seen Molly in forever, he joins her. OK, so the plot sounds unbelievable, but that’s what I wanted. A little Christmas magic. Unfortunately there is little to no Christmas and zero magic. What the book is about is a whiny, self-pitying, repetitive woman who is too annoying for words. There isn’t one aspect of her life where she isn’t ‘poor Molly’ yet as she’s relaying tale of woe after tale of woe she constantly states that she’s ok, or over it, and the hero keeps telling her how brave and amazing she is. I just wanted to scream “If it no longer bothers you why are you boring me and poor Dylan talking about it!?! Oh, yeah, she’s also a tease so not only does Dylan have to listen to her grip, he walks around blue and in pain half the book. She also has a spectacular habit of running off like a 5 year old to cry. Granted, she’s going through some serious stuff, but the way all of it was handled and laid out was just too much. I couldn’t stand her. Their relationship never develops, the whole adventure seemed so one dimensional and it lacked any chemistry. Had I not been obligated to review this book, I would have quit reading it. As it is, it took me way longer to read than it should have. I kept having to set it down while I tried to regroup and find my happy place again. Definitely not a fan of this story, I am very disappointed. If you’re looking for a feel good read, this isn’t it. Cherise Everhard, October 2014 Book provided by and reviewed for the Amazon Vine Program
