It is very rare that I give a read a five star rating. I have a high list of literary criteria that a book must meet before I consider this. First, the point has to be solid. There must be a story within the story. History must be included or considered in the craft to be considered complex enough for me to consider this art. There must be an emotive quality or drive both for the protagonist and characters and for the "audience". Culture richness in this world is something easily avoided in books and movies but I find when this is the case, something serious is lacking. Even if the book is fantasy, culture should exist as well as a semblance of belief, even if that belief is science. There must be believable tension. It must benefit the reader in some way. It must show perspective, contour lines AND negative space. The book should carry a level of insight. Which brings me to metaphor and irony. These are the most important. A good voice for each character/narrator and an understanding of how that voice will be understood by the reader. Vivid, clear images that stay in a person's mind. I would rather read a good book than watch a movie because the pictures are better. I should be able to say this at the end of any decent written work. Characters must have complexity and depth. Extensive research must show. We do nothing great alone including invention. Every part of any work of art carries with it some element of influence. New ideas can be built from that influence and in my mind become the very definition of art when this is achieved. The editing must be done professionally, but not necessarily by a professional and I couldn't care less where you publish. My list is much longer but this will give you some idea of what I look for in a book. Having personally lost someone in my immediate family and having that death permanently destroy the family's structure even twenty years later, I can tell Celeste Ng, has done her homework in one way or another. This book exceeds above and beyond all of my expectations and I highly recommend it. Even a realistic take on human psychology is considered in this book and I have compared it to works such as, "As I Lay Dying," by William Faulkner, where in the midst of poverty (any kind of poverty such as physical OR emotional needs) people become Islands even in a crowd. This is the reality of competing for resources. Ng points out both the love and the damage that can unfold in the midst of communication absence and emotional neglect or emotional poverty. These two chaotic events existing under one roof can only result in both pain and enlightenment. The only negative thing I have to say about this book is, there is a typo in the last chapter - a "he," where there should be a "she". It's minor, but jarring for the reader. It pulls us out of the story. It's important to double check the work of editors. Regardless, I would be honored to read anything this writer has to offer. I would probably even resort to reading her calendar if the opportunity presented itself, just for fear of missing any element of the Muse. THIS book is timeless. Read less
