The Christmas Wedding Ring was a very sweet holiday romance about taking risks and learning to live life to the fullest. As a teenager, Molly Anderson couldn’t help having a crush on bad boy Dylan Black, her older sister’s boyfriend. After things didn’t work out between Dylan and her sister, Dylan left town but not before he promised Molly an adventure when she was older. Fourteen years later with her life taking a few unexpected turns, Molly is ready to take Dylan up on his offer. Dylan always enjoyed being around Molly and after she unexpectedly comes back into his life, he’s more than willing to whisk her away for a few weeks of fun. Molly didn’t have the best childhood as she never seemed to be enough for her parents who either ignored her or constantly criticized her. Her relationship with her sister was also strained until they were adults and were able to rebuild the relationship. Prior to her decision for a break from her life, Molly had a rough few days with one bad thing happening after another. After finding out everything she went through, I more than understood her need for an escape. Dylan grew up on the wrong side of the tracks with an abusive father and an alcoholic mother. To say Dylan was ready to leave his hometown behind is an understatement. After leaving, Dylan opened a motorcycle shop where he does custom modifications to bikes. His business became quite successful and Dylan actually has more people wanting his bikes than he’s able to take on. After seeing each other after fourteen years, Molly and Dylan develop an easy friendship with attraction layered beneath. I enjoyed their ability to talk to one another and how they were able to open up about the problems in their lives. The attraction between them is well done and I was happy to see that the barriers that kept them from advancing their relationship sooner were legitimate issues. When things did progress, it was done perfectly and I enjoyed the direction things went. The ending of the book was one of the best parts in my opinion and I really liked the way everything wrapped up for Molly and Dylan. Overall I really enjoyed The Christmas Wedding Ring and it was the perfect read to put you in the holiday spirit. I definitely recommend this book if you’re looking for a fun, holiday romance.
