This book is deeply engrossing, sad, heartbreaking, and disturbing. I didn't always understand or agree with a character's logic, but at least the characters were empathetic. The short of the story is that beloved seemingly perfect daughter, Lydia Lee, beautiful, intelligent, blue eyed, daughter of a Chinese-American father and white mother, is found missing, then finally found in the bottom of the lake. The character I was most disappointed in was James Lee, Lydia's father. He had a bereft, friendless childhood, make further miserable by racism. He lost opportunities because of his race, and his inability to be more than taciturn. He should have known better, and he should have shielded his family better. James is a terrible father, and I suppose singling out Lydia, who has blue eyes, was a method of coping - and his consolation. This book to me is all about the misfortunes about forfeiting honesty. No one speaks the truth, so the worst is imagined. It is so sad to see how good intentions, ambitions, and independent opinion can be suppressed, misinterpreted, when just talking - would have made so much so clear. I know older brother, Nath, who is going to Harvard, and is protector of his sister, is going to Harvard. Lydia loved her older brother, but childish jealousy, stubbornness, and ignorant pride got in the way. Everybody ignored the youngest child, Hannah, who was all too perceptive, and did not perceive the family as unhappy, but intuitively hid. I understand Lydia's pain. The complexity of her emotions and her abject fear. She is the middle child. She didn't want pressure and attention and the adoration of her parents, but she made a promise to herself when young, and she tried to keep that promise. She does not see that her parents are barely functional as parents - their efficacy long gone. Lies are relied on, and no one is more delusional than the parents. It is Nathan and Hannah, who know the truth. There is an eloquence to Celeste Ng's writing. A starkness and nakedness, but rendered with such love, the lines read like a lovesong. It was a joy reading the book. I didn't want to take a break from it. Even when describing awful painful things, I continued to read - not just to find out what was next, but for the sheer beauty of her writing. This isn't a perfect book, but upon the first few sentences, it will ensnare. I give this book five stars, because of its creativity, beautiful writing, sincerity, dearth, and absolute bravado. This is a brave book. And I embrace its existence. Read less
