Reviewer: Lone Wolf I needn’t tell fellow snake-lovers that it’s quite the task to find a book with a serpentine protagonist! This book instantly grabbed my attention as its main character, Sherahi, is a Burmese python. Hatched in the wild, she is captured as a youngster and taken to America, where she performs exotic dances with a young woman. When she becomes too large, she is sold to an unscrupulous animal dealer who treats her poorly. Along with a rattlesnake, a coati, a langur and a macaw, Sherahi escapes and sets out to find the fabled haven of Sandeagozu (San Diego Zoo). The author gets around the difficulty of how snakes (which lack external ears) communicate, especially with other animals, by giving them the power to read minds. Sherahi can pick up on other animals’ thoughts and project her own to them, even influencing them to do as she wishes if she so desires. The strangeness of some snake senses is also addressed, with unique words such as “fnasting” for the combined smell/taste afforded by the Jacobson’s organ and “wurping” for the heat pits picking up on body heat. This gives you a fascinating reptilian point of view. This would have been a five-star book if it wasn’t for the factual errors. Whilst the author is clearly knowledgeable about snakes, she occasionally makes basic mistakes like referring to them closing their eyes (something they can’t do), stating that the Jacobson’s organ is located in the lower jaw (it’s in the upper jaw), or using the word poisonous when she means venomous. Sherahi is also far too large for a Burmese python – by the end of the story, she’s bigger than any extant species of snake. There are various factual errors regarding other species too (e.g. the suggestion that birds evolved from crocodiles), and the animals often use human terms, phrases and place names – this can possibly be excused for Sherahi, who can dip into human minds, but not for others. On the whole, however, I thoroughly enjoyed this book. If you like snakes and animal stories, it’s a must-read. Read less

Reviewer: goodeville I read this book many years ago and loved it. It came again to mind recently, but I had loaned out my copy, and it never make its way back to me. It took some searching, but once I found it (now out of print), I ordered it immediately. I was pleasantly surprised at the near perfect condition it is in and the speed at which it safely arrived. I am looking forward to rereading this wonderful tale. Read less

Reviewer: Lime A very solid adventure story, with some dated language that marks it as a product of its time. Sandeagozu shifts between many different perspectives, but none of them are as interesting as that of the main character, Sherahi the Burmese python. The book features some unique terms such as fnasting (how snakes taste-scent the air with their tongues) and inwitting (projecting one's mind/consciousness across space), and overall it does a good job at showing the world through the eyes of its different animal species. Sandeagozu doesn't have the most in-depth characters or themes to it, with only glimpses of these greater moments showing up at times such as Manu's "stars run blind" speech, but it does succeed at making an enjoyable animal adventure with a satisfying (and even moving) ending. Alongside the much more recent Serpentia series, this is one of the only snake-focused fantasy series I've found, and so if you're interested in that niche, then this one is definitely worth a read. Read less

Reviewer: RoscoeBoscoe The imagination of the author is extraordinary. The characters, the plot, and the language are unlike any book I've ever read. A surprise twist at the end. While not a snake fan, I was fascinated by and sympathetic to the amazing main character. Highly recommend Read less

Reviewer: jeramy r. What a incredible metaphor was captivated from page one ! The subject matter can get racy but i think for young teens and up it is an epic journey few writers can provide Read less
