Reviewer: TyMotor This has become one of my favorite books, and I have re-read it multiple times. Ballard does an expert job of spelling out the basics of LDS theology in simple terms and with everyday examples. The beauty of this book is its ability to appeal to such a wide-ranging audience; from someone who knows little or nothing of the LDS church and beliefs to the life-long member with deep knowledge of doctrine. For those who are being introduced to the LDS church for the first time, this is a wonderful introduction and a way to familiarize yourself with not only what the beliefs are, but the "why" behind it all. For longtime members of the LDS church who find so much of the gospel wonderful and inspiring, it can be difficult to know where to start or what to focus on when curious acquaintances inquire about beliefs. The last thing anyone wants is to overwhelm the curious mind who speaks up with a simple question with an extended discourse. This book does a wonderful job of concisely linking many of the practices and gospel beliefs behind them. For anyone between this is a great book that will explain, uplift, and inspire. I have loved reading this book every time I have read it. I have loved giving it as a gift to friends who are interested in knowing more, but maybe aren't open to meeting with missionaries just yet. I would highly recommend this book to anyone! Read less

Reviewer: Jon lanģley Brilliant book, at last a self help book that really works! I thoroughly recommend this, potentially life changing work, by the always reliable M Russell Ballard. Condition as stated, delivery ahead of time. Read less

Reviewer: Richard I read this book as a teenager and it had a deep influence on how I see the world. Since then I have enjoyed giving this book to a number of friends who have all appreciated it. Read less

Reviewer: Barbara A. Mackelprang Terrific read Read less

Reviewer: Desert Gal53 This book is an excellent read. It's very easy to understand and it gets down to the nitty gritty as to why there was an apostasy and why there had to be a restoration of the Gospel. I bought this book because I had questions, many questions, and this book really helped to answer those questions for me. It really pulls it together, many of the beliefs of the Mormon Church, and the answers are easy to read. This book should be read by every investigator! It should be read by anyone who is interested in learning more about the LDS Church, it's just that good. I am getting ready to read it a second time, it's a book that will be on my book shelf forever. This book made a huge impact on my life. When you are finished with this book, you should read the next one, When Thou Art Converted, another great book by M. Russell Ballard. Read less
