For the most part, I found this to be a very convincing, and therefore immensely sad, novel about a modern family. Marilyn (from Virginia and of European ancestry) and James (from somewhere in the West or Mid-West and of Chinese ancestry) are the loving and devoted parents of three children. Either one of them would ‘do anything in the world’ for their children, but each of them is convinced that that means protecting them from what he (she) feels to be the problems that blighted his (her) own life. It is the middle child, Lydia, who is the primary focus of the resulting passionate, parental expectations . Above all else, James wants Lydia to be ‘popular’, accepted by her peers. The book is set in the 1970’s and his vision of ‘popularity’ doesn’t apparently need to include relationships with the opposite sex. As a professor in a small college, he takes pride in what he thinks is her academic potential, but this is of secondary importance in his mind. It is ‘acceptance’ by the group that she ‘belongs’ to that matters. Teenaged Lydia spends hours apparently talking on the phone to her girlfriends. In reality she has no friends, but only her two siblings understand that this is so. For Marilyn, the mother, Lydia’s happiness depends on something very different. Lydia must become the doctor or the scientist that Marilyn had desperately wanted to be. A life spent in domesticity, striving only for the satisfaction of ‘making some man content’, is a life utterly wasted to Marilyn’s way of thinking. Happiness, satisfaction, a sense of self-worth can be Lydia’s only if she succeeds in breaking into the real world of achievement which used to be reserved for men only. Since Lydia’s earliest childhood, her mother has worked to inflame her interest in scientific learning. Marilyn has no doubt about her daughter’s abilities. She has no doubt that Lydia is, effectively, a younger version of herself. The story opens with Lydia’s disappearance. For the most part it is a chilling, compelling and fast-paced read. Toward the end, it became a little less compelling for me. Perhaps, I would have been more swept-up in the last part if it had been just a little shorter, but I think there was another reason also. I found the character ‘Jack’ (a teenaged neighbor) less interesting, less convincing than any of the other major characters. It is true that he was also not so ‘major’, but somehow his inclusion in the story (though it had some justification in the plot in terms of what Lydia’s brother’s reactions were) bothered me just a little. For these two reasons, I am going to rate this book with four (four and a half in my mind) stars. Read less
