I wasn't entirely sold on Amelia's character when the book first began. She was almost too flighty for me, but I really liked the storyline and stuck it out beyond the first couple chapters. I'm very glad I did! It turned out to be a very wonderful story, one that I enjoyed greatly, and it was delightful to see Amelia change and grow over the course of the plot.

It was an okay story but there were too many weak points. The H took FOREVER to tell the h what he was doing and why, making her think he didn't really care and didn't mind being away from her. Then, both waste time trying to act nonchalant and flippant, with the H actually telling her (since he refused to accompany her to social events) she'll probably take a lover and try to pass his child off as the H's! I don't blame her form going ballistic on him, though she had her TSTL moments, like when she was quick to believe the H's former mistress was pregnant with his child. And on the subject of children, the h took so long to tell the H she was pregnant (and before she could, he heard from a third party) that you could almost believe his accusation was right, if the story wasn't focused on her POV. Because it was, it's easy to be biased against the H, which in his case isn't really fair, though he made their situation more complicated. Not a bad story but could have been better. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review

This was just okay. Amelia starts out a bit immature and has this idea of what Hunter is like. When Hunter returns from the war he is very cold and distant. While Amelia grows up during the story, I never really got a feel for Hunter. To be honest I just didn't like him. The second half was a bit better, but I think the book/story suffered from having Hunter absent, if we could have heard his POV more maybe I would have felt for him more. Overall, I just thought it was okay. I wanted to like it more than I did. Content: PG13-Warm. Probably would have given it a higher rating if it were a bit cleaner. It wasn't overly descriptive, but pushes it. Per www.likesbooks.com sensuality rating: Moderately explicit sensuality. While our characters do make love, and the reader is there with them, physical details are described, but are not graphically depicted. Much is left to the reader's imagination.

One of my favourite Regencies of marriages with estranged/in trouble marriages. Hunter returns from the war a changed man...
