Reviewer: Ian M. Engaging story with lovely plot twists... Read less

Reviewer: J. A. Sergent The Golden Torc pretty much picks right up on the heels of The Many-Colored Land. Julian May is an excellent writer. Her prose flows well and keeps me going through the story at a good pace. And she’s not afraid to do bad things to her characters. Felice, my favorite from the first book, changes, grows, suffers, changes more, which leads to a jaw-dropping moment - for me anyway. My favorite part of this volume was seeing the influence the exotic races had on mythology and (to an extent) geography. I’ll defintely be continuing the series. Even though it’s sf, I’d recommend the series to fans of science-fantasy and high fantasy. Read less

Reviewer: A Brief Elaboration of a Tube The Saga of the Exiles on e-reader! Excellent! First read Julian May's brilliant Saga years and years ago and still have the paperbacks. Went on from the Pliocene exiles to Jack the Bodiless and Diamond Mask and all the rest of the Milieu stories. Fabulous stories of telepathically and psychokinetically operant humans and how they got there. Yes, it's nonsense by any normal, everyday standards but the story is a huge sweep of imagination with cleverness and wit woven right the way through it - Aiken Drum, the trickster and arch-manipulator being the spitting image of Machiavelli, for instance. If you're an SF buff I highly recommend this series. Funnily enough, I was looking idly for it as e-books just a few months ago and there was nothing available from "official" channels - an unofficial copy I found and downloaded had no formatting. You'd be amazed how flat and boring a story becomes with no paragraphs! Then they appeared as "trade copies" - not quite sure what that means, but perhaps it's associated with one gripe I do have about the e-versions - that scanner misreads haven't been sub-edited out. For example, one of the Firvulag Great Heroes is called Sharn-Mes; usually abbreviated to Sharn. In the e-version it appears about 70% of the time as "Sham" which grates badly every time. There are other examples. Nonetheless, I'm ploughing my way through the whole lot all over again and loving it. Give yourself a treat. Get at least the four "Saga" books and read them! Read less

Reviewer: ANTHONY Very fulfilling a little long winded in the creative build up but it captures your mind leaving you wanting to know if the fate of your known hero's. Read less

Reviewer: David Corbett One of the best fantasy series ever written. Fantastic idea and fantastic characters, especially Felice Landry and Aiken Drum. The follow up series, which is actually a prequel is also a fantastic series in its own right. Read less
