Reviewer: Uday Reddy Why this book is the essential SCI-FI: - • Amazing story, captivating till the very last page. • Easy to read prose which flows like waterfalls. • The amazing world building, and the fact that humanity lives in underground steel caves. • This book is set some 1000 years in the future. • It's written by Isaac Asimov. The long version: If you are starting out with Science Fiction, this book is the first book that you'd want to read. This is generally considered the essential sci-fi. The story is mesmerizing, even after finishing the book the effect of the story, the characters, still linger in your mind. The story is simple enough, a murder investigation. But that only forms the surface of the main plot. But, if you observe, behind the dialogues, the world building, lies a hidden meaning. The dialogues throw a direct punch to the present human state, and how we are destroying the one home we call EARTH. The characters are well developed. At the end, you'll find yourself having sympathy for a robot. The story doesn't slow down anywhere. The action starts right from the 3rd page. The writing is also not very complicated and there is a unique flow to the chapters. The backstory of the events is described throughout the story, mainly, how earth ended up the way it was, why humanity had to live in large underground "Steel Caves". There are also some philosophical thoughts thrown in some of the dialogue. This is a story which hides a deeper meaning within its facade. There is philosophy, politics, and mass hysteria. What's profound about the story is its relevancy to the present world. I sometimes caught myself wondering whether the future mentioned in the book, might eventually catch up to us. Because the present condition of the world is eerily like the ones mentioned in the book. Perhaps, Asimov did predict the future. One of the greatest things about the book is the class system, it mocks our present state of inequality, income differences and the social structure. The prose is quite detailed and rich in meaning. Overall, this is one of the greatest Sci-Fi books for a reason. If you're starting out with the genre, start with this book. Read less

Reviewer: AJA This is a science fiction thriller. Very well written. I highly recommend reading this book. I bought the paperback version of this book. The pages are of not very good quality. I think it is better to have the kindle edition. Read less

Reviewer: Lomaharshana “The Caves of Steel” is the first volume of the four-volume Robots series of novels by the great American sci-fi writer Isaac Asimov. It was first published in 1954. This edition that’s available from Amazon India is from 2018. It was published by HarperCollins Publishers in England. I really don’t know why some reviewers did not like the quality of the paperback. I think it is great. Certainly much better than most other paperbacks. The cover artwork is so evocative. And the text is typeset in the elegant Janson Text typeface. The binding is not going to last for fifty years, but then what do you expect from a paperback. The story is set in New York City of the future, a couple thousand years in the future. New York City is an entirely enclosed, underground, hive of millions of humans—a cave of steel. Strangely though, just next to the City is another enclosed settlement. This one is called Spacetown. It is occupied by Spacers, who are human beings from the planet Aurora, descendants of humans who left Earth centuries ago to colonise other planets. Spacers are hated by native Earthmen, and envied too, for their wealth and health. Well one day a man is found murdered in Spacetown. A smart detective from New York City, Elijah Baley, is summoned to solve the crime in collaboration with a Spacer, Daneel Olivaw. … It is a beginning of a story that will last fourteen novels and 20,000 years! How can one not want to read these books! How can one not want to buy these books! Read less

Reviewer: Amazon Customer Brilliant storyline. The absolute logic used to build the storyline is outstanding. In addition, the visioning of the future done by Asimov way back in the past is an additional benefit to read and be amazed. Read less

Reviewer: Mithilesh Kumar Jha The best novel I ever read. The way Asimov blends Mystery with Science Fiction is truly unbelievable. Read less

Reviewer: Buyer1 Good Read less

Reviewer: Vipul Singh The beginning of an incredible saga, concluding some 20000 years later on the Moon! Read less

Reviewer: Vikrant K. 3 stars for the quality of pages and cover. Content is good but the print is not up to the standard. It looks like a pirated copy. Read less

Reviewer: adrian The book hooks you from the beginning with an amazing story and unexpected twists. Completely worth it. I recommend it. Read less

Reviewer: Nicolas Gabillard Offert en anglais à un ami mais déjà lu en français en ce qui me concerne. Excellent ouvrage, très bon point d'entrée dans le Cycle des Robots. Très bonne intrigue et analyse de société dans un contexte futuriste. Read less

Reviewer: David Wooldand I’m rereading these and I find them still a classic look at potential of integrating robots , and it’s inherent problems not at all dissimilar for me to racial related problems. Read deep read light , still a great read.love the new covers too Read less

Reviewer: Bill B. Good read. I liked the mid century feel of the book. Like popular mechanics when I was a kid.. Simple relationships and a neat look at how we saw the future when I was young. Good story and all it held my attention throughout . Recommended to all Sci Fi lovers. I chose this rating due to the timelessness of the story line. Will reread the rest of the series. Read less

Reviewer: Tobia Ho regalato questa versione del libro ed è stata molto apprezzata sia per la rilegatura che per lo stile ASIMOV vintage. Consigliato per chi ama il genere e vuole avere un pezzo da collezione. Read less
