*3.5 stars* There’s a quiet and almost simple beauty to Celeste Ng ’s storytelling. She’s not a writer that relies on a breakneck pace or frilly overtures to capture readers. Instead, Ng employs the emotional beings that live among her pages and their relatable family dynamics to do the job. Each character takes a turn tiptoeing into the room, catching the reader almost unaware, and inciting a level of curiosity. Curiosity that morphs into a quest for answers in more ways than one. Something to keep in mind, should you find yourself as eager to pick this book up as I was, this is not a plot-centric novel, but rather a slow-paced character study. The storyline delves into who these characters are to their very core and what experiences have fed into their outlook on life. Again, it's an unhurried but purposeful narrative. Everything I Never Told You brings readers into the lives of the Lees, the lone Chinese American family living in small-town Ohio in the late 1970s. The story opens with the disappearance of the middle child, fifteen-year-old Lydia. Naturally, when the daughter they’ve pinned all of their hopes on—she’s the favorite—fails to show up to the breakfast table, the parents panic. Amongst the pain, following Lydia's demise, is the somber unraveling of things once held true. Ng utilizes the Lee family to explore the intricacies of relationships when truths remain unsaid. When a misguided sense of self-preservation or a desire to spare feelings, allows thought and truth to remain unspoken. “People decide what you’re like before they even get to know you.” That message is the talisman I’m choosing to pocket from this experience. Those words are a simple reminder to stand up to the expectations and generalizations coming from every angle. Finding the confidence and gumption to make my voice heard is essential. I know, easier said than done in some situations, right? This being my second experience with Celeste Ng ’s work, I thought I knew what I was in for, but not quite. The cloyingly depressive nature of this storyline caught me a bit off guard. Which, I have to be honest, led to a longer read time than anticipated. On the days when I did succumb to the gentle tug of the pages, the Lees stole a tiny sliver of my sunshine. Still, while their reality is stifling at times, the overall message is one I can respect. Even though this novel hasn’t earned a place among those I’ve deemed best-of-the-best , I certainly wouldn’t hesitate to pick up the author’s next release. And, if you haven’t already, I highly recommend checking out Little Fires Everywhere . If I'm being completely honest, I enjoyed that one a tad more. With that novel, Ng again explores the intricacies of relationships, namely between mothers and their daughters. *Thanks to my lovely local library for the borrowed copy.
