SPOILER ALERT!!! I really enjoyed this book. I was hooked from the beginning and it kept my interest all the way through. Celeste Ng writes beautifully and I am excited to read more from her. Like many reviewers pointed out this isn't an uplifting book (I didnt get the idea it would be), the author does get a little over the top with some of the plot points, but I think that actually works to magnify (what i believe) the extreme individual motivations of the parents James and Marilyn. Clearly this isn't a whodunnit mystery I think the superficial first layer of the book is to find out why Lydia died, but after we delve into who Lydia was alive, and who her siblings are, we get to the crux of the novel-- who the parents are-- because this is really all about them-- and this is why I really thought Ng really shone. I loved the way she let exposed the personalities of the parents, let it unravel slowly until we really see how this all ties in . Also, I don't think this novel is about race. (whether or not in Ohio in the 50's or 70's or whenever the kind of racisim could happen-is not the question) This novel is about perceptions and misperceptions. It's about what happens when you have a distorted and one dimensional viewpoint-- that such a 'chip on the shoulder' perspective-- can distort your personality. Here, it's through the distorted lens of James who views every experience and event in his life as a by product of his Chinese background--through Marilyn, a woman raised in the 50's, and see's her experiences as the inevitable product of sexist times. Other reviewers have pointed out that James and Marilyn are a little too exaggerated, but I disagree, I think they are self-involved -- so much so that their kids are direct extensions of themselves and therefore they play out their personalities in them. Long after James left his childhood behind-- after Harvard, after getting married, after having children, he continues to view his experiences (and now his kid's) lives through his warped lens, and in trying to get his son to have a different life-- actually creates the very same traits in him-- now Nathan bleieves he's being ridiculed when it doesnt happen much like James continues to believe. (certianly i'm not denying the racism he encountered-- but the author takes pains to show many (if not most) of his interactions James would assume racist overtones when there was no evidence of it -- ex. interactions with Fiske, and his assistant) Marilyn believes her ambition of being a doctor was thwarted by external forces-- she doesn't take repsonsibility for her own choices and in fact makes incredibly selfish decisions that would have a catastrophic effect (she could have realized those ambitions, she chose not to). The interesting point here is that Lydia's death exposes these incredibly narcissistic parents. They have no clue or empathy beyond themselves, neither of them really communicate or know each other or their children-- or seem to care to know them. Both of these educated and brilliant parents are clueless, and believe they are unselfishly motivated to give their children better lives. and each one defines this "better life" by what each parent wants for themselves and what would make THEM happy, and not what actually makes the kids happy. It's interesting that the child with the most empathy and intelligence and with (the most) objective point of view, was the youngest child, who James and Marilyn (and even the siblings) barely paid any attention to (and perhaps that's the point) was the most well adjusted. I agree with one of the reviewers that said we are not supposed to like John and Marilyn. Who could? I do think that the way Ng peels back the layers to reveal their personalities is brilliant. I especially liked the ending-- there is no poignant revelation, no redemption, not even the epiphany of realizing what really happened to their family-- just a vague, amorphous general feeling- they pretty much remained clueless, (which is why i believe many people found this depressing) -- I found it to be well done because it was far more credible and authentic. Read less
