I liked this book because it gave me food for thought. It was recommended to me by some Mormon friends as I was interested in their religion. It has led me to explore the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day-Saints in more depth. There were places where I had to stop reading in order to contemplate what I read and times when I thought I was not going to finish because of what I read, however it would nag at me and I had to pick it up again. Powerful.

This little gem of classic LDS literature was written nearly 30 years ago by a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles specifically for non-members as a means to improve understanding of the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He specifies in his introduction that this was not written to convert anyone but to help those outside the faith understand us better. The focus is on the doctrine and explaining it in the most basic and concise terms. You will not find any treatment here of the sensational controversial issues surrounding the church, which is perhaps why this short book has garnered so little attention. But if you’d like a simple understanding of the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, then this is a great resource that doesn’t take too long to read.

I read this book as a full time missionary and it changed the course of my entire mission and the direction of my life. Fabulous book about what makes us truly happy.

I really enjoy learning about different Faiths. Over the last couple of years I have made many friends who are Mormon. I admittedly do not know very much about the Mormon faith. A dear friend who is LDS has been answering my questions and sent me this book. It has been a great help in understanding her beliefs and the religion better.

Terrific overview of what it means to be LDS. Delightful insights and reads like a conversation.

My absolute favorite part in this is Ballard's recounting of his father's sacred experience of being visited by the Savior. Although I know these experiences are usually too sacred to be shared, it was comforting as a young missionary to be reminded that modern prophets do have these visits, such as the one the David B. Haight recollected in General Conference back in 1991 or '92. Since then I have realized that many of the members of the church have these experiences--mission presidents, institute directors, Sunday School teachers--there is no Church callng that is a prerequisite, only worthiness and the Lord's will.

A basic practical introduction to the beliefs and practices of the LDS church (Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, aka the Mormons), for members and nonmembers alike. A quick, pleasant read with some stories and principles that will stick with you regardless of your religious persuasion. A good book for non-Mormons who only want to know what we believe but have no particular interest in converting. Easy read.

Next to the scriptures, this little gem of a book is probably the most profound and concise explanation of beliefs held by Latter-Day Saints. It's explanations are simple, clear, and carry with them a unique sense of truth. I recommend this to everyone, whether they only seek to understand their Mormon neighbors, coworkers, and friends or are struggling to find the meaning to life.

I highly recommend this book to anyone wondering about the basic beliefs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. If you are to study a faith, it is best to learn about it from its' members, rather than those who mock it.

Easy to understand why we feel sometimes unhappy! :)

This book provides fair insight into what makes the LDS church different from others. Highly recommended for anyone to read, LDS or not.

Excellent book for someone looking to understand the Mormon Faith.

I've recently come across LDS adherents (Mormons) in my ministry. One gave me this book, and I read it in order to have better conversations with the person. Simply, LDS is a lie. It is not Christianity. This book demonstrates it rejects the trinity, believes we all existed before our birth choosing to come into existence at the cost of our memory, believes God continues to give new revelation, and more. Joseph Smith claims to have been visited by God the Father and Jesus in two light forms. Yet God declares that no one can see him and live. Additionally, we are warned in the bible that Satan deceives others by portraying himself as an angel of light. They simultaneously uplift the bible in order to appear as another Christian sect, but readily deride it when its teaching contradict what Joseph Smith made up. They question the bible's reliability by saying it's been through "countless translations" with is a blatant lie. We have manuscripts in Hebrew, Greek, and Aramaic. All of these are translated directly into the receptor language. This takes just one translation. Also, it's worth noting all the archeological work that has supported biblical claims from thousands of years ago, yet these alleged golden plates provide a "new revelation" about civilizations that have no archeological or historical evidence. And after this troubled young man "translated" these golden plates, they were taken away. Their view of the priesthood contradicts the bible. Their belief that the apostleship was disrupted until Joseph Smith is absurd. First, the apostleship ended with the death of the apostles. It is not to be continued. However, we have a priesthood of all believers. There's so much more. Maybe I should take the time to organize my notes and write up a proper review of the book. However, simply, LDS is a cult. It is not Christianity. And because they think they have prophets giving new revelation, they can always make up new things.

I read this when I was Mormon. At the time, I liked it, because it affirmed my existing beliefs. I was also told to use it as a missionary tool to convert non-members into members. Unfortunately it doesn't address any of the more sinister aspects of the church of the past and/or present: racism, homophobia, murders, polygamy and predatory behavior, whitewashing history, gaslighting members and ex-members, hoarded $100B, etc. Read this book if you want to know what Mormons think about themselves. It's not an accurate portrayal of the church, but it is an accurate portrayal of what the current members know and think about their church.

What a great perspective and view on our lives, the plan of God, and the Restoration.

Synopsis: This book serves as an introduction to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, written by an apostle of that Church. Elder Ballard discusses the beliefs that members of the Mormon Church have in regards to the apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel, the Book of Mormon, the plan of salvation, the Articles of Faith and missionary work. My Review: This book is a near perfect introduction to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It should be required reading for members and anybody in the media who is attempting to write an unbiased article about the Church.

I really liked that it presented the basic beliefs of the Mormon church to someone who didn't know anything about it. It was a great reminder to me of the basic doctrines and how important it is to share what I believe in a loving way with others. My favorite quote is from page 3: "Our tendency is to mistrust anything that departs from our own perception of normalcy, focusing so much attention on the things that divide us that we lose track of the many things we hold in common that should unite us." That quote was a good reminder to me look for the things I have in common with others instead of the differences. It was an uplifting and inspiring read.

What a great read for anyone curious about LDS religious beliefs or current members. Brother Ballard says everything so eloquently. Some parts I loved... I continue to believe that faith-real faith, whole-souled and unshakable-can be as important to a healthy, balanced life as a sturdy anchor to a ship bound for the open seas. You can never look at yourself in the same way if you know that you are a child of God and that he knows you, loves you, and cares about you. And you can never look at others dispassionately if you know that they are your eternal brothers and sisters who, like you, are here on earth trying to learn and grow through mortal experiences, both good and bad

A great read for both those who do and do not belong to the LDS religion. Elder M. Russell Ballard does a marvelous job of explaining the doctrines of the LDS religion so that one who has never heard of the faith can understand its many intricacies. On the other hand, one who is a life-long member can still learn things that they did not know about before.

This is an excellent book portraying why members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints believe what they believe in a way that is understandable to the general public. I like how it doesn't push the readers to believe what we believe, but simply increases understanding, thus promoting peace and love between different belief systems.

I've had this lovely little book stashed on my book shelf for some time when I finally decided to read it. I love Elder Ballard's writing style - down to earth and genuine. I could hear his voice when he shared personal stories. Just warms my heart. If anyone is interested in what we believe this gem is perfect.

Not what I was expecting from the title (though, the subtitle clued me in, so it wasn't a total surprise as I read it). However, I found the text a short and simple, yet powerful overview of my faith. I particularly enjoyed the examples from Elder Ballard's own life and his ending testimony.

This is a great book for someone trying to get a basic understanding of Mormon beliefs. Written for individuals who are not members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the Mormons), the book does a good job of summing up our beliefs and explaining why we believe what we do.

Love it! I'd recommend this book to anyone, it explains the doctrine of our church so clearly and also why we have that doctrine. I love his writing style too, he's so friendly and fun it's like visiting with a friend. :)

This is intended for individuals who are not members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints as an introductory to the religion. It is a fairly comprehensive volume but I feel that it is an overwhelming amount of doctrine for most.

El libro está direccionado a personas que no sean miembros de la iglesia. También lo leen mucho los misioneros y futuros misioneros. A los miembros de la iglesia nos sirve como un repaso doctrinal muy ameno.

This is a simple and conversational explanation of what members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the Mormons) believe.

This is a new book to the missionary library.

After reading this I'm pretty sure it was written for nonmembers. It was basically a 101 guide for what we believe as members of the church. Some good quotes though: "The best thing about living a Christ-centered life, however, is how it makes you feel--inside. It's hard to have a negative attitude about things if and when your life is focused on the Prince of Peace. There will still be problems. Everyone has them. But faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is a power to be reckoned with in the universe and in individual lives. It can be a causative force through which miracles are wrought. It can also be a source of inner strength through which we find self-esteem, peace of mind, contentment, and the courage to cope. I have seen marriages saved, families strengthened, tragedies overcome, careers energized, and the will to go on living rekindled as people humble themselves before the Lord and accept His will in their lives. Heartache, tragedy, and trauma of all kinds can be focused and managed when the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are understood and applied." (pg. 15-16) "It should be noted, however, that the mere fact that a man holds the priesthood isn't enough in and of itself to give him any kind of authority. Those who are ordained to the priesthood must diligently strive to keep God's commandments. The Lord taught Joseph Smith that "no power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood." Rather, the Lord said, that influence comes as a result of living such Christian virtues as persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, and meekness, love unfeigned, and kindness and pure knowledge, "which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy and guile." (D&C 121:41-42.) The Lord also warned Joseph that "when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of theLord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man." (D&C 121:37)" (pg. 60) "Husbands and wives are unique in some ways and free to develop their eternal gifts, yet as coequals in the sight of their heavenly parents they are one in the divine goals they pursue, in their devotion to eternal principles and ordinances, in their obedience to the Lord, and in their divine love for each other. When a man and woman who have been sealed together in a temple are united spiritually, mentally, emotionally, and physically, taking full responsibility for nurturing each other, they are truly married. Together they strive to emulate the prototype of the heavenly home from which they came. (Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 4 vols., Daniel H. Ludlow, ed. [New York: Macmillan, 1992], 2:487)" (pg. 65) "Indeed, life itself is filled with harsh realities that tug at the heart and tear away at the soul. Child abuse. AIDS. Natural disasters, from hurricanes to earthquakes. Famine. Prejudice and intolerance. Humanity's ongoing inhumanity toward one another. One cannot look at human suffering, regardless of its causes or origins, and not feel pain and compassion. It is easy to understand why one who lacks an eternal perspective might look at horrifying news footage of starving children in Africa or the devastation of a hurricane and shake a fist at the heavens. "If there is a God," the empathetic observer might wonder, "how could He allow such things to happen?" The answer isn't easy, but it isn't that complicated, either. God has put His plan into motion. It proceeds through natural laws-which are, in fact, God's laws. And because they are His, He is bound by them, as are we. In this imperfect world, bad things sometimes happen. The earth's rocky underpinnings occasionally slip and slide, and earthquakes result. Certain weather patterns turn into hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, and drought. That is the nature of our existence on this planet." (pg. 76) "I continue to believe that faith -- real faith, whole-souled and unshakable -- can be as important to a healthy, balanced life as a sturdy anchor is to a ship bound for the open seas." (pg. 118)
