This is an excellent book if you want to learn the basics of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. These people out there like to talk about planets, baptisms for the dead and magic underwear. Think of them like those who would write "Hebrew" on some business door so the Nazis could go and kill as many Jews as they wished, or those friars who would burn protestants on the stake for wanting to read the Bible, or protestants shooting Catholics in Ireland, and Muslims wanting to kill the infidels of the Western world. They are the same and want to make us look bad so we don't get elected to government and such. Well, in this book you will see that we are Christian and then, later you can read things within context and they will not look crazy. If you say that some people are taking a wafer thinking they are eating the actual flesh and drinking the actual blood of their God you will find them weird but within context that will not sound so bad. If you hear someone saying that God told his people to kill every man, woman, child and old, and even their animals if they stood in their way to a promise land, you will not want to get even close to that religion but you see that in the Bible and the Jews believe that as much as the Christians so. Out of context it all sounds bad. So, give people a chance, don't judge Jews, Catholics, Protestants, Mormons, anyone by what bigoted people from those same religions say about others. Read this book and give the Mormons a chance to tell you what they believe.

The first book I read after joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It really helped to clarify some of the things that had always caused me to wonder about religion. I've always been a believer of Jesus Christ but how His church became so many different churches believing such different doctrine puzzled me.

Don't get me wrong this isn't a bad book, I am more concerned with what the book is attempting to do. There is a natural tendency that all of us engage in called "Confirmation Bias" it is once we have accepted a certain opinion or view we seek hard to strengthen it by finding only those things that confirm our held view. It also makes us discredit or easily write off anything that challenges our view. This book is essentially that, a now outdated attempt at nothing but confirmation bias. I no longer believe in the necessity of trying to prove faith. I think once anyone has undertaken to prove faith it is no longer faith, but a rational abstraction. A church's or a faith's power to build up lives is not based on if it is the only true church, like some winner of a philosophical competition, but its ability to change lives for the better. It shouldn't matter how true its foundation myths are, or if they are even factual. Nor should it be a competition of numbers to secure that bias, where the more people you have believing a certain view somehow confirms it.

I tried to read this book cover to cover like a novel, or biography. I began over a year ago, got about half way, put the book down for a while, then picked it back up and finished. This book would probably be better to use like a reference book. LeGrand Richards is an amazing man, and this book reflects his intellect and love for missionary work. Being written in book form in 1950, there are a few things "outdated" in this book. But, the gospel of Jesus Christ is eternal truth, and those truths written in this book are never "outdated". Elder LeGrand Richards wrote much of this while serving as the President of the Southern States Mission of The church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. At the conclusion of his mission in 1937, he left this material in outline form as a guide to assist the missionaries in their study and preparation for teaching people about the gospel. Because it was intended to be used as a reference to missionaries, there is some information that was duplicated in the various chapters. I really enjoyed reading the book, and learned more about a gospel that I have been living for many years. Some of my favorite chapters include: Evidences of the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, The Gathering of Israel, Why is Man Here?, and Predestination and Foreordination. I will keep this on my bookshelf and use it as a reference anytime I am teaching a lesson or giving a talk.

Elder LeGrand Richards was alive when I was in college, in his upper 90's. To hear him speak and his wisdom and sense of humor are treasures I will always remember. I specifically remember him speaking about enduring faithfully to the end, and that he prayed he would be able to do so. This book is one of the ground works of the LDS faith, that all newer members should read and grasp. I was a little older when I read it the first time, but it is a treasure in teaching fundamentals.

This is an extensive harmonization of the Standard Works of the LDS Church. What I mean by that is that this book is a harmonization of the Holy Bible , The Book of Mormon , The Doctrines and Covenants and The Pearl of Great Price . LeGrand Richards aims to systematically present the doctrine that emerges from all four texts together, moving through various topics from chapter to chapter. This book is perhaps at its most interesting in the middle third. Much of the earlier portion deals with matters held in common with more mainstream Christian groups. The middle section tackles a number of more controversial and more radical questions. The final chapters are taken up with relatively briefly running through the various successes of the LDS movement, particularly in the State of Utah. This book used to be a part of the Missionary Reference Library (the collection of four books - besides the Standard Works - which missionaries are permitted to take with them on mission). It's been removed since, in favour of a much shorter work ( Our Search for Happiness ). It seems to me a strange choice, because A Marvelous Work and a Wonder is a remarkably systematic book. It deals with its topics comprehensively, and yet as briefly as is reasonably possible. Perhaps some areas could have done with updating (for example, I'm not sure how valuable various statistics about Utah in the 1940s would be to a modern missionary), but in general I think that much of it works just as well now as I imagine that it would have done when it was written. A Marvelous Work and a Wonder delves much deeper into LDS Theology than any casual (or non-LDS) reader is ordinarily going to be interested in learning about. Nevertheless, it does a great job at what it attempts to do. Harmonizing these texts is no small or easy feat. That LeGrand Richards did such a comprehensive job in only ~400 pages is very impressive.

This is a great book for both the investigator and any member wanting a good outline of what it means to be a member of the church.

This was probably my first introduction to a book that covered the doctrines of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). Originally published in 1950, this book has stood the test of time and continues to provide a valuable resource for individuals seeking to deepen their understanding of LDS teachings. It is written on a basic level as an introductory text. Richards, was an apostle in the LDS Church. He was related to a close friend of mine. He arranged a small group meeting in his parent’s home in 1981. At that time Richards was 94. He spoke off the cuff with no notes and answered some questions. He was an engaging speaker. At one point during the discussion he asked for a glass of water. When it was brought to him he declared “Take away the coffee, whiskey, and tea, ice-cold water is the drink for me.” It was quite an experience listening to him that night. I read his classic book a few years earlier. The book presents a basic overview of fundamental doctrines, principles, and beliefs that form the bedrock of Mormonism. His writing style is clear, concise, and accessible, making complex theological concepts understandable to a wide range of readers, including both devout members of the LDS Church and those seeking to learn more about it. Richards covers a broad spectrum of topics, including the nature of God, the divinity of Jesus Christ, the plan of salvation, the role of prophets, and the importance of personal revelation. Each chapter builds upon the previous one, creating a cohesive narrative that enhances the reader's understanding of LDS doctrine as a whole. The book's greatest merit lies in its ability to inspire and strengthen faith. Richards weaves personal anecdotes, testimonies, and real-life examples throughout the text, illustrating how the principles and teachings he discusses have practical application in daily life. Readers that are not LDS find it challenging to fully connect with the book's content. While the author makes efforts to address potential questions and concerns, it may not satisfy those seeking an objective analysis or a critical examination of LDS doctrine. Its purpose is not deep critical analysis but more inspirational in tone. LeGrand Richards was a treasure. His passion and life-long commitment was inspiring. Whether one is a devout member of the LDS Church or simply curious about its teachings, this book provides a basic yet valuable resource. As a young missionary I would have rated the book 5 stars. As a mature adult with decades of churchy service and leadership behind me I rate it 3 stars. Not because I'm critical, but rather it is a bit more fluff than what I feel like I need now. Nuance and ambiguity is the sign of a mature faith, which requires a bit more than what this book did for me 40 years ago. Nonetheless I value the book and certainly Elder Richards.

I have and read the 1976 edition and first read the book in 1977 but have reread portions of it over the last 31 years. This is a great book for learning and sharing the basic truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It provides very clear and concise pricipals of the Gospel. Very easy and enjoyable reading.

This book made a difference in my testimony of the restoration of the gospel to the earth. LeGrand Richards explained the apostasy and restoration in such a logical and understandable way that left me convinced that Church has been restored to the earth with the proper priesthood, organization and ordinances.

When reviewing nonfiction books, I think it is important to rate based on research, execution, and accuracy rather than on subject matter. Let me explain why this book only gets one star from me. This book is not meant to be read in one sitting, or even in large chunks. Many of the chapters repeat themselves, but this is because many of the chapters cover similar materials. Here is an example of LeGrand's extremely biased sources. On page 406, we are told by LeGrand that "a writer for the New York Herald who had visited the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1842" wrote an article singing the praises of the Mormon church. For context, he presents this blurb as evidence that the world recognises mormon accomplishments. However, LeGrand puts the source after the quote....George Q. Cannon. And the quote is not in fact pulled from the New York Herald. It's pulled from "Life of Joseph Smith." This is deceptive for two reasons. First, LeGrand wanted readers to think the quote came from the New York Herald. Second, he wanted readers to think that Cannon was not Mormon. In fact, Cannon was a highly prolific Mormon that was "visiting" with Joe Smith in 1942 because he was already a convert. In many other cases throughout the book, LeGrand doesn't even give a name to go along with a quote. He will simply say something along the lines of "a visitor to SLC said" or "a writer." These types of anecdotes DO NOT count as credible sources. For all we know, these "quotes" are misremembered at best and made up at worst. It is clear that LeGrand was incredibly biased towards his subject. This is not a bad thing necessarily. But his sources are twisted to suit his narrative.

This is an in-depth treatise to the world on why the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the true restored Church of Jesus Christ. The author starts with the heavenly visitation of God the Father and Jesus Christ to Joseph Smith to usher in the restoration of all things prophesied by many ancient prophets. He discusses the apostasy that preceded this, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, restoration of priesthood authority, sacred ordinances, the setting up of the kingdom of God, the mission of Elijah in the latter-days, the eternal ordinance of marriage sealings, the gathering of Israel, missionary work, questions regarding where we came from, why we’re here, and where we are going after this life, Sabbath worship and other laws restored to the prophet Joseph Smith in our day. This restored gospel truly is a marvelous work and wonder, a gift from God. The author uses Bible scriptures and other references to prove these things. It’s a very well researched and laid out book that I enjoyed.

I read this book to fulfil the goal "read a book your pastor recommends" being lds, we call our "pastors" bishops. i asked my bishop what he would recommend and this is what he told me. this book explains what we believe in why. i gave it a lower rating though because there are a lot of quotes in it, and i had a hard time staying awake because of its textbook style of reading. it is a great resourse though if you are trying to quickly find an answer about a single topic.

A book written in 1950 by an Apostle of Jesus Christ to explain the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day , its teachings and Organisation. At the time of writing it had 1 million members and now has over 16 Million members worldwide. I joined the Church in 1962 at the age of 12 and tested it in many ways and can bear testimony of the truthfulness of it. A fascinating book.

Honestamente, me dio miedo. Pero así como a unos hace que temas, a otros puede brindarle la mejor de las tranquilidades. Cualquier duda que se te presente, sin duda aquí recibirás una respuesta clara y sin metáforas o rodeos. Recomendado sobre todo antes del bautizo y para investigadores que quieran conocer más sobre la iglesia de Jesucristo

Overall the book does a great job at accomplishing it's task. It walks the reader through restored truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ and His church. I do think the book is outdated a tad and excessive with it's use of Acts 3:21--but I do enjoy the end when Richards explores deeper "questions of the soul" and doctrinal insights. Overall a good and lighter read.

A fantastic book on the Restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ. This was the first book my father read as we investigated the Church in the early 1970's and was instrumental in our joining the Church!

Excellent source of information about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. I like that scriptures from the Old Testament, New Testament, and The Book of Mormon/ Doctrine and Covenants are all used to explain beliefs.

Love this book! Being a life long member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, I wanted to read this book to possibly get more insight into certain doctrines and scriptural accounts along with my own scripture study. It definitely did that for me!

A good book for someone wanting to know more about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. I knew most everything in here, but still I found a few tidbits of interest. The print was awful tiny for me. Lots of scriptures, sometimes too long to make the point.

This book was part of my mission library. It is good book that clearly explains the restoration of the Gospel and its prophetic spread across the world.

A boring but comprehensive defense of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Can't remember the date I finished it; was several months ago.

Milagres associados ao trabalho Missionário na Dispensação da Plenitude dos Tempos.

Well written with so many previously overlooked details of the Restoration. I would recommend this book to anyone

I think every member of the Church of Jesus Christ or anyone investigating the church should read this book. It breaks down the doctrines and organizes them in a way that is very compelling. There is a reason why this is/has been approved to be read by missionaries.
