The dynamics and tentative balance of the Lee family is a study in racism and the fierce battles to belong. The technical talent of Ms. Ng is remarkable. She is able to move the reader from the climax of the plot and invade our senses with flashbacks of this family in crisis. A terrible tragedy occurs to Lydia, the teenage daughter of Marilyn and James Lee, an “American” mother and Chinese father. No one knows the feeling of exclusion from society better than James, who apparently feels ostracized even as an adult. He is a college professor, teaching the history of the cowboy, of all things. He is accustomed to ridicule and wants his children, particularly Lydia, to have many friends, popularity and feel a part of a social crowd. Marilyn, on the other hand, is angry because she did not become the doctor or scientist and decides Lydia will be the one to attain those goals. Living vicariously through Lydia is a main thrust of the story. It is a sad commentary on our society and the mistakes too many parents make when believing their children want what they want. The family is dysfunctional, the oldest child, Nathan, is overly anxious to leave the nest and poor Hannah, the youngest, is almost totally ignored and starving for affection. Ng’s most credible perception of the family’s catastrophe is seen and through her eyes and heart. She is the omniscient one without knowing it. Marilyn’s presence as a mother comes at a great cost to the family. Her expectations preclude her from delving into her children’s hearts and knowing who they are. For an intelligent woman, she really believes her children have the same aspirations as she does. James is floundering and because he does not have a sense of belonging, it becomes a tragic tale. The plot is precise and the author’s prose enriches the story as the fabric of this family is shoved aside. It is heartbreaking but there are responsibilities that Marilyn has abandoned. At one point in their lives, Marilyn leaves and returns to school, abandoning her family. James is not equipped to help his children get through this upheaval. When Marilyn returns, she asks the children if they behaved while she was gone. She did not apologize or offer any explanation. Tragic consequences are now entering their lives. This is an outstanding first novel; I highly recommend it. Read less
