3.5 stars! This was a cute holiday read featuring an innocent heroine and a 'bad boy' hero. I enjoyed and liked it but I didn't love it. And for anyone who knows me, this is the kind of books I tend to love. Unfortunately, this was just an okay read for me. Molly Anderson had been in love with Dylan Black ever since her older sister introduced him to their family. But Dylan Black only had eyes for her sister and Molly was content to fade into the background and suffer silently from her unrequited love for Dylan. Unfortunately, Dylan and her sister broke up and the day of her sister's wedding, Dylan gave Molly a ring and promised her that if ever she is in need of some adventure that she would come and find him and they would go on an adventure together. Forward to 14 years later, Molly is a successful accountant, on the verge of a life-changing event, when she finally took up Dylan on his offer. Dylan also has some decisions to make, and what better way to think about it than spending it with an old friend. My Thoughts As much as I like Susan Mallery, I really had a hard time suspending disbelief at the thought of Molly just walking up to Dylan, who's basically a stranger at this point, to go on an adventure with her. Yes, Dylan did promise her an adventure but I would have loved it if they had reconnected prior to going on that adventure. I did like the slow-burning element of their romance. Plus, I'm always a sucker for the unrequited, friends-to-lovers trope anyway, so it's kind of a given that I would enjoy this. While I liked Molly, but there were times when she was just too insecure. Yes, I get it, you're not beautiful. There's no need to remind us that every single second. There's nothing more annoying than a heroine who keeps thinking she'll never ever be good enough. Dylan is the quintessential Mallery hero. He's supposed to be a 'bad boy' but I never got to see that. Yes, he rides a motorcycle and he wears leather jacket, but I do think there's more to being a bad boy than just the clothes. Overall, this was an okay read. I still enjoyed parts of it and I would still recommend this for those in the mood for a short holiday read. Plus, the ending was really good. I love a good old-fashioned HEA wrapped in a pretty bow. An ARC was provided by Harlequin in exchange for an honest review.

Good story of two people at crossroads in their lives, how they helped each other and found love at the same time. Molly had known Dylan when she was a teenager and he was her sister's boyfriend. He'd been a bad boy motorcycle rider who always had a kind word for her awkward self. He left town the day of her sister's wedding, but not before promising Molly an adventure any time she wanted it, once she'd grown up. Molly had had a huge crush on Dylan and was sad when Dylan left town. Fourteen years later her life is a mess and she needs a break. When she comes across the ring he had given her, she remembers his promise and decides to look him up, hoping for an adventure that will take her mind off her troubles. She screws up her courage and reminds him of his promise, challenging him to keep it. When Dylan left their hometown he set out on a path that has transformed him into the owner of a successful motorcycle design company. It's so successful that he has had an offer to buy the company. He's not sure what he wants to do, as he spends so much time now on paperwork he no longer has time to do the design work that he loves. If he sells, he can concentrate on designing, but he would be working for someone else. If he doesn't he's still stuck with all the paperwork. When Molly arrives, he remembers the promise, and thinks that some time away may be just what he needs to clear his head and make a decision. I loved seeing Molly and Dylan together. Molly still has her crush, but is working to keep it contained. She's grown out of her awkward stage, but still doesn't see herself as attractive enough to appeal to a hunk like Dylan. Her self esteem has taken a hit with the loss of her job and her ex-fiance's cheating. She's also undergoing a health crisis that has her on edge. But with Dylan she's learning how to have fun. She's also discovered that her crush never really went away, and being with Dylan those feelings are turning into love. She's impressed with the man he has become, not just his success but also the way she can talk to him about anything. When their attraction blossoms she has a hard time believing he could really want her, but he does a great job of showing her. Dylan was a great guy. His "bad boy" status doesn't really apply any longer, as he is a responsible businessman. He was surprised by Molly's arrival and how pretty she had grown up to be. When he hears her request he realizes that helping her could help him also. I loved seeing how connected he felt to Molly from the start. As they began their adventure, Dylan seems to have an instinctive sensitivity to what Molly needs. He sees her insecurities and works hard to show her how special she is. The more time he spends with her, the stronger his feelings for her grow. In spite of his success, he still doesn't feel like he is the type of person she would want in her life. When their adventure is over, both Molly and Dylan have decisions they have to make about their futures. Both of them discover that they are not happy without the other in their lives. I loved seeing the difference the trip made in Molly's outlook and how that affected her decisions. Dylan also had to face the fact that he had fallen in love with Molly, something he had never thought possible. I loved seeing what he did with his decisions. His big moment with Molly at the end was really sweet,

It pains me to write unfavorable reviews for books written by favorite authors, and Susan Mallery is definitely one of my favorites. But as painful as it is for me to write this, it was just as painful to read it. I must state that yes, I knew this is a re-publish of a much earlier work. I was expecting the book to have less polish than her newer ones, I like it when authors re-release oldies that I missed the first time around. I wasn’t expecting a literary masterpiece. I was expecting a harlequin type soft and fluffy easy Christmas read. What I got? Frustrated! Molly is at a crossroads in her life. In one short week her life completely unraveled and while she waits for more bad news (because our Molly is a pessimist) she decides to go on an adventure. When Molly was a girl she had a huge crush on her older sister’s boyfriend, Dylan. When Dylan and her sister broke up he left her with a ring and a promise for adventure. She decides to cash in on that deal. And although he hasn’t seen Molly in forever, he joins her. OK, so the plot sounds unbelievable, but that’s what I wanted. A little Christmas magic. Unfortunately there is little to no Christmas and zero magic. What the book is about is a whiny, self-pitying, repetitive woman who is too annoying for words. There isn’t one aspect of her life where she isn’t ‘poor Molly’ yet as she’s relaying tale of woe after tale of woe she constantly states that she’s ok, or over it, and the hero keeps telling her how brave and amazing she is. I just wanted to scream “If it no longer bothers you why are you boring me and poor Dylan talking about it!?! Oh, yeah, she’s also a tease so not only does Dylan have to listen to her grip, he walks around blue and in pain half the book. She also has a spectacular habit of running off like a 5 year old to cry. Granted, she’s going through some serious stuff, but the way all of it was handled and laid out was just too much. I couldn’t stand her. Their relationship never develops, the whole adventure seemed so one dimensional and it lacked any chemistry. Had I not been obligated to review this book, I would have quit reading it. As it is, it took me way longer to read than it should have. I kept having to set it down while I tried to regroup and find my happy place again. Definitely not a fan of this story, I am very disappointed. If you’re looking for a feel good read, this isn’t it. Cherise Everhard, October 2014 Book provided by and reviewed for the Amazon Vine Program

Supposedly a Christmas romance - yea, not buying it. Our 'heroine' is constantly running away over some unexplained tragedy (which once explained does not justify her repetitive hysterics). Overall, blah. I cant believe I found a Susan Mallery book I didn't enjoy.

I have yet to read a Susan Mallery book that I didn't at least like and what better time to read a book than at Christmastime. The only problem is it wasn't near the holiday when I read it. That didn't make a difference but I generally like to save my holiday books for the holiday it was set in. Molly and Dylan are a cute couple. Who doesn't love it when a couple young, impressionable 14 year old kids get a crush. One thing that I believe is true for women, is that we never forget a promise! After stumbling across something one day when she is packing, Molly remembers such a promise that Dylan made to her years earlier. For me that's where the fun began.

The secret that sends Molly over the edge is one any woman could understand, to say nothing of losing her job and hearing from her fiance that's he's jumped the traces with his secretary. What a jerk! What's a girl to do? Why, find a place other than home or her sister's place to lick her wounds and try to come to terms with what to do with the rest of her life. But who to do it with? Molly's a smart girl and when she rediscovers the little gold ring her sister's former boyfriend had given Molly the day her sister married someone else, she knows who she needs to see--the guy she had a crush on at age 14, the guy her sister didn't marry. But would he do when he sees her? As it turns out, Dylan needs time away, too, to decide if the offer for his successful motorcycle design company is worth taking. Why not accept Molly's out-of-the-blue request to get away for a while? She's not the same 14-year-old in-braces kid anymore. That's for sure. ... So off they go and what happens over that two-week period proves to Dylan that life is more than selling out for the huge amount he's been offered and that Molly is way more than the little sister of a former girlfriend. For Molly, Dylan helps her--with all the ways life has buffeted her. How refreshing to be able to set those issues aside, including the life-stealing secret, and to confront herself as she plans her new life. Setting it all in the Christmas season makes this redone story all the better.

I read this story as my 1998 published book for my "A Lifetime of Books Challenge". I absolutely adore the work of Ms Mallery, especially the Fool’s Gold Series. As much as I enjoyed this story, I can tell that it was an early work of hers, originally published as The Wedding Ring Promise. The writing style is a little less refined, as compared to other, more recent, endeavors. I really like the fact that the heroine in this book is from Mischief Bay, where Ms. Mallery’s latest series of books takes place. This is a contemporary romance, where the heroine, Molly Anderson, is a young woman that had a crush on her older sister’s boyfriend, Dylan Black, when she was a teenager. Now, battling some upheavals in her life, she decides to take stock and look up her sister’s ex, to make good on a 14-year-old promise. This is their story of running away from life’s problems, finding common ground, and battling the challenges that life has thrown them, and maybe, just maybe, finding love along the way.

Although there were aspects of this book I liked very much, as a whole it fell short for me. Or, in another sense, I could just as truthfully say it fell "long." Perhaps it's because I don't normally read category romance novels, but I found the constant, repetitive introspection irritating. Every time you turned around, the girl (or the guy) was launching into another internal monologue about how inadequate s/he feels and how the other could not possibly care for him/her, ignoring mounting evidence to the contrary. Tell me once or twice; that's enough. If you boiled this book down and cut out all the unnecessary filler, this could have made a really lovely novella. There wasn't enough plot to support a full-length novel.

This was such a cute Christmas read! I love Susan Mallery's books and this one was so good! Loved Dylan like crazy! I suggest this book for an easy and fun Christmas read!

I'm so disappointed because Susan Mallery is in my top three authors, but this one is just so conventional and obvious, and lacks the laugh out loud comments and occasional snark that SM has accustomed me to. Plus all the "will he be disgusted with me when he finds out my *secret*" and all the Molly self-doubt was really wearing. I'm sad.

3,5 - Carino, nella sua semplicità. Un soft-romance, dove la dolcezza la fa da padrona. E tuttavia molto belle le pagine dove l'uomo tutto d'un pezzo si dimostra capace di empatia e tenerezza molto rare. Una lettura adatta per chi ha voglia di sognare e crearsi un po' di energia positiva.

I wanted just a little more Christmas vibe from this book.

I can’t believe I read another one you guys. I’m done.

This December I wanted to read a nice Christmas story. This book had very little about Christmas. Simple, repetitive writing for this short rewritten novel.

Continuing with my holiday listening and reading.

Molly Anderson: FMC Dylan Black: MMC Janet: mollys sister Starts 14 years ago at Mollys sisters wedding. But Janet was marrying Thomas because he was a successful lawyer and his family owned a huge law firm in San Francisco. Thomas was marrying Janet because she was beautiful. Janet got nearly everything because she was beautiful. Dylan: “Tell you what, Molly. When you’re all grown up and ready for that adventure, you come find me. Give me this. We’ll go anywhere you want.” Molly: She was going to make him fall in love with her and they were going to live happily ever after. She had his promise. A wedding ring promise. December 5th, fourteen years later Dylan: He already knew the reason, and it had nothing to do with magic or even the devil. He was willing to sell his company because the deal on the table was too sweet to pass up. Not only was he being offered an obscene amount of money, but he had a guaranteed position in the new firm. He would finally have the resources to do all the research he wanted. He could design to his heart’s content. All those projects that had been on the back burner could finally be explored. He would be a fool to pass up the offer. Black Lightning: Dylan’s business Molly to Dylan: “I didn’t want you to go. There were assorted reasons, but the only one I was willing to tell you was that you’d promised me an adventure when I grew up. So you handed me the ring and said that when I was ready for that adventure, I was to bring this to you.” She cleared her throat. Color stained her cheeks, and she ducked her head so that she was staring at the table. “Well, I’m ready if you’re still willing.” Dylan: “I’m wrestling with some difficult decisions myself. Mostly about my business.” He made a dismissive gesture with his hand. “I won’t bore you with the details, but for many reasons, I’m at a crossroads right now, too.” Dylan: “We’re not taking a car on our adventure. We’ll be riding on one of my bikes.” Dylan’s thought that really pissed me off…: The truth was, when faced with the reality of seeing her naked, he doubted she would actually turn him on. Molly: “I have to check my voice mail once a day, but that’s about it.” “Exactly.” Molly tucked a loose strand of hair behind her right ear. “What really bugs me is that I’ve lived such a small life. I didn’t realize it at the time, but I do now. I have a degree in business and I was an accounts receivable supervisor at a communications company. We were recently bought out by one of the really big firms. I found out last Monday that I’d been downsized.” He said they’d changed their minds and that they were letting me go. At least the compensation package was decent. What really frustrates me is that I’d turned down two other job offers when I thought the new company wanted to keep me. Of course both those other jobs are filled now.” “On Tuesday my fiancé—” She shook her head. “Make that my ex-fiancé called me from Mexico. It seems that he and his assistant had been working late hours in the past couple of months. One thing led to another and they ran off together to Mexico. Dylan: “I’m not out for anything, just sensed there was more. But you’re right. That’s plenty.” Dylan: The longing was as strong as it was unexpected. He didn’t understand it and that should have scared the daylights out of him. But oddly enough, it didn’t. When he couldn’t figure out a way to crawl inside and be one with her, he did the next best thing. He kissed her. Dylan: “Dammit, Molly, I kissed you because I wanted to, not out of some twisted sense of pity,” he called after her, but it was too late. She’d already gone into the house. “Philosophy over pancakes,” she said, and smiled. “Whatever will I get if I make waffles?” “French poetry,” he teased. “Really?” She made a show of looking around the kitchen. “I must check to see if we have a waffle iron.” Molly had heard the stories—everyone in town had. That both Dylan’s parents drank. That his father beat both mother and child. That visits to the emergency room for treatment of lacerations and broken bones were not uncommon. Molly: “Two,” she said at last, because she couldn’t think of anything funny to say. “There have been two men in my life. Including Grant. And the fact that I slept with that loser is just too depressing for words.” Long after their adventure was over, she would look back and savor each day they’d spent together. Whatever the outcome, she would be grateful that he’d helped her get through this difficult time. Dylan read her mind. “You want kids, Molly?” With all her heart, but would they be in her future? That question could bring her to tears. “I’m not sure,” she lied. This had me thinking she was waiting for results from the doctor for cancer or not being able to have kids was why she had to keep checking her voicemail. Dylan: She was an attractive woman now, but she had been an ugly duckling back then. At twenty, that sort of thing had still mattered to him. Another one of his asshole thoughts…. She was as sweet and warm as he remembered. Her lips yielded to him, as if they, too, felt the homecoming. He pressed his mouth against hers, then parted slightly. When she followed his lead, a small sound escaped from deep in her throat. Half moan, half cry. Molly: “The Monday before Thanksgiving, I lost my job and on Tuesday Grant called me from Mexico. On Wednesday morning, while I was in the shower, I found a lump in my left breast.” “That’s why I check my messages every night. The doctor is going to let me know when she gets the results back from th-the lab. I’m waiting to hear about the lump. The problem is, they’re short-staffed because of the holidays. They said everything takes longer this time of year.” Dylan: While that didn’t take away the wanting, it changed it into something even more powerful. He had a fierce desire to bring her pleasure, to wipe out all the bad memories. He couldn’t fix her, but he would very much like to help her forget. Molly: My mother was lonely and unhappy. She had an affair. It was over quickly, but I’m the living, breathing reminder that it happened. She wouldn’t tell me anything about my biological father, and I don’t really care about him anymore. The man who raised me as his never took any interest in Janet, either, so I don’t blame him for ignoring me. My mother is another matter.” Dylan tells her he wants to have sex with her: “You are with me.” “I want to make love with you.” “I want you, too,” she whispered. “Don’t,” he said, taking hold of her arm. “Don’t leave me like this. Do you really think it matters that you’ve got a cut and a few stitches? I don’t want to look because I have this morbid fascination with your surgery. I want to see you naked because the thought of it turns me on. I’ve been imagining us doing this for a long time. I want to touch and taste every part of you.” He was torn, wanting to love her like this forever, yet desperately wanting her to find her release. In the end, he helped her over the edge and caught her when she fell. After, she welcomed him inside of her. “I made love with you because I wanted you. No other reason.” At the exact moment they gazed into each other’s eyes and watched the explosion, she understood that what she’d thought was merely the continuation of her crush was so much more. Perhaps it had started that way, but something had fundamentally changed between them. At least for her. She wasn’t with Dylan because he was good to her, or handsome or funny or bright. She was with him because she loved him. Perhaps she’d always loved him. “I do think about the possibilities,” he told her. “Not just about what the doctor might tell you, but also the future. Christmas is getting closer. Our time together is almost up.” “I know. I’ll miss you.” Molly: “That was my boss, Harry. Actually, he would be my ex-boss. He said that the company has reevaluated the situation and they want me to come back to work for the firm. Not only that, they’re offering me a promotion and a raise.” Mollys thoughts about Grant: Her only regret was that it had taken his leaving for her to see the truth. She got her call from the doctor: I’m fine. The lump was completely benign. No cancer, nothing. I just have lumpy breasts. Isn’t that great?” He was so happy for her. This was what she deserved. She had her job back, if she wanted it, and a second chance to make things right. Very few people had that opportunity. The best part was, not only did Molly deserve it, but he knew she would make the best of it. A voicemail to Molly from Grant: Molly, I miss you and I still love you. Please, can’t we talk? We had something really special together and I’d like another chance. I know I have a lot to make up for and I—” Dylan: “One by one the pieces of your life have been restored. You have your job back if you want it—actually, it’s a better job, with a raise. You’ve found out you’re healthy. Now Grant is begging forgiveness. It’s as though none of this ever happened.” She was, of course. She would survive. But she wanted it to be with him. She wanted the magic to continue. Still, she had no right to hold him against his will. He had been so incredibly generous with her—she could do no less. No regrets, she reminded herself. Even knowing what she did at this minute, with her heart breaking and her soul battered, she wouldn’t go back and change a thing. She wanted to ask him if they could try to make it work, if maybe there was a chance, but she already knew the answer. Oddly enough, despite the pain, she could live with that. It was okay that he didn’t love her back. Loving him had been enough. She’d given with a full heart and she’d kept her promise to herself. She could never regret what they’d shared. Every Christmas for the rest of her life, she would pull out her memories of this special time with the man who had helped her to believe in herself. Grant was at Mollys when Dylan goes to drop her off: Molly wouldn’t want to know how he felt and he didn’t want to embarrass either of them. It was better this way, he told himself, despite the disappointment and the pain moving up from his gut to his chest. Molly to Dylan: She pressed her fingers against his mouth. “I don’t want you to say anything back, because that’s not why I’m telling you this. I just want you to know that I love you. You’ve made me believe in myself again, and for the first time in my life, you’ve made me believe in love. No matter what happens or where you go, know that you carry a piece of my heart with you.” “First,” she said, “don’t sell out. Black Lightning is your heart and soul and you’ll never be happy working for someone else. Just my opinion, but I mean it.” “This.” She dug into her jeans pocket and pulled out the gold wedding ring that had first brought her to him. “If you ever need an adventure, come find me. No matter what, I’ll go with you.” She pressed the ring into his palm and closed his fingers over the band. Molly to grant: “The doctor got two opinions. They’re sure and so am I.” She walked to the door and held it open. “Goodbye, Grant.” Dylan: It wasn’t just because he missed Molly—he also regretted that he’d left her without telling her the truth. That he loved her. He, who had never loved anyone before. Dylan to Grant after he punches him: “That was for Molly,” he said. “Don’t you talk about her as if she’s damaged goods. She’s ten times the person you’ll ever be. I’m glad she had the good sense to dump you. Stay away from her. If you bother her again, I’ll be back to finish this.” She had made some decisions about her future—she was going to reject the job offer, sell her condo and go back to school to get her MBA—but a sense of hopefulness hadn’t kicked in yet. She needed time, she knew that. She just felt so lonely, even surrounded by her sister’s boisterous family. She missed Dylan. Dylan to Molly: “I can’t let you go,” he said. “I’ve tried and tried, but I keep thinking about you, about how much I want you and need you in my life. You are so incredibly strong and brave and you deserve someone so much better than me. I know that. But I also know no one will ever love you more.” He squeezed her fingers tightly in his. “I love you, Molly. All of you. I love how we laugh together, how smart you are, how you look first thing in the morning. I love how you feel in my arms and my bed. I want to be with you always. I want to marry you and make babies with you. I want my life to be an adventure with you.” This wasn’t the plain gold band he’d offered her sister fourteen years ago. This was a beautiful round diamond that glinted in the afternoon light. He took her left hand and slid it in place. She says yes!! Dylan: “How would you feel about working for a small but growing design firm? The boss can be tough at times, but I hear he’s fair. He’s also looking for a partner.”“I would very much like you to be a part of Black Lightning. If you’re interested. I hate the business end of things. I want to get back to design.” Dylan had said she was his Christmas miracle. The best part of it all was that he was her miracle, too. This was a super cute book. The Christmas wedding ring. Dylan had given her that ring as a promise for adventure and 14 years later she cashes it in when she needs the escape. They have an adventure, make the decisions they needed to make, and fall in love in the process. So then he proposes with her own wedding ring and they get to live happily ever after. Super cute little holiday romance. Perfect hallmark Christmas book of the biker bad boy and the good girl who was supposed to be with the lawyer. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review

“I promised myself no regrets,” she whispered into the darkness. “No what-ifs, no second guessing. I promised myself that I was going to live my life, instead of always taking the safe route.” Rounding out my Christmas 2015 reading list, I recently finished The Christmas Wedding Ring by Susan Mallery. It was a sweet holiday story that had a nice message of being happy with who you are, making the most of every day and living with no regrets. Overall I enjoyed the story, I had a few gripes (which I’ll get into in a moment) but for the most part I really enjoyed Molly and Dylan and was happily swept up in their romance. This book is perfect for the Christmas season because it’ll leave you feeling all warm and fuzzy inside! “I didn’t want you to go. There were assorted reasons, but the only one I was willing to tell you was that you’d promised me an adventure when I grew up. So you handed me the ring and said that when I was ready for that adventure, I was to bring this to you.” She cleared her throat. Color stained her cheeks, and she ducked her head so she was staring at the table. “Well, I’m ready if you’re still willing.” So that’s basically the premise of the story. When Molly Anderson was a teenager, she had a huge crush on her sister’s boyfriend, bad boy Dylan Black. At her sister’s wedding (to another man), Dylan shows up and Molly runs out to talk to him. He’s on his way out of town and gives her a wedding ring that he had purchased for her sister, telling her that when she’s grown, if she’s ever looking for an adventure to come find him and bring the ring. Now, 14 years later, Molly is having the worst week of her life. With everything falling apart around her, she decides to run from her problems (at least for a little while) and she goes to find Dylan to cash in on that adventure he promised her. To Dylan’s end, he’s also being faced with some difficult decisions, and when little Molly Anderson (who’s not so little anymore) shows up looking for him to take her on an adventure he sees it as the perfect time to go out and try to clear his head. So that’s what they do, and along the way they are faced with some difficult moments and a growing attraction to one another. As things begin to develop between the two of them, Molly is worried that the secret she’s keeping may have Dylan running for the hills if he finds out. “I was so gone on you. It’s kind of funny to look back now, but at the time, I was convinced I would never want another man.” “Of course you wouldn’t.” “What?” She looked at him. “Hey,” he teased. “This is me. What else would I be if not the man of your dreams?” Overall the story was sweet and I appreciated that that Molly wasn’t what most would consider perfect, she had a few extra pounds on her and she was pretty but not what most people would classify as beautiful. It was nice to have a realistic heroine, however the fact that we were constantly reminded of this fact and the fact that Dylan was perfect an how she wasn’t his type, became a little tiresome. I get it, Molly is insecure and Dylan usually goes for model thin, perfect looking women, I didn’t need to be told 5 times in every chapter. It sort of cheapened their relationship a little, there were moments where Dylan would muse that she isn’t his type where it almost made it sound like he was settling for her. But there were other moments where I could feel their connection and knew that there was something deeper between the two, I would have liked there to have been more of focus on this and less on their differences. Even if she brought it up half as many times as she did, we would have still gotten the picture. That was my only real gripe about the book, other than that I thought it was a sweet story and I did like Molly and Dylan’s characters and how their relationship developed. They were cute when they teased one another and their tender moments were very touching. I totally loved the ending of the book though. It was a perfectly sweet and happy way to end the story, like I said earlier, it will definitely leave you feeling all warm and fuzzy inside! I would recommend this book for a quick, easy and sweet holiday story! “All my life,” Dylan said, “I felt like I was on the outside, looking in.” Molly leaned against his strong chest, and he wrapped an arm around her shoulders. “Not anymore,” she said.

Molly Anderson was 12 when she first laid eyes on Dylan Black her older sister’s boyfriend. She had always been the outcast in her family but Dylan never reacted to her that way. He always took an interest in everything she was doing, her school, or her ideas. At 18 he was by far the most handsome guy you ever saw. Unlike all her other boyfriends he would talk to Molly. He would tell her jokes, tease her about silly things but never in a mean hurtful way like her own family. Since Janet saw no future with Dylan, coming from a trailer park kid and show no future in him she broke up with him. Dating and marrying Thomas. On the day of the wedding Dylan shows up only making it to the back of the church. He needed to see for himself that there was no hope left for him and Janet. When Molly sees him from the alter and sneaks off with no one noticing. She catches up with Dylan. She finds out he’s leaving and reminds him that he said that he would take her on an adventure when she was grown up. He said he never breaks a promise and gives her the gold ring he never got a chance to give to Janet. He tells her when you’re grown and you’re ready, find me and give me this back and we’ll go. Dylan would never guess that Molly would not only have had an awful childhood but that the last week she had, had the three most horrendous days of her life. So, who would ever guess that 14 years after he’d given her that ring she would be standing before him. Dylan’s mind is expecting little 14 year old Molly with braces, acne, and glasses. Yet the Molly he sees is little full grown voluptuous Molly. He wouldn’t say she’s model beautiful but she’s pretty in a cute way, with soft curves. Not his type he said to himself. She was nerves as they talked and since it was close to lunch they go out. Molly explains in a roundabout way why she wants, no needs, to go on this adventure. Dylan is sure she is keeping some secrets but before he can follow his brain he says yes. Partly because he has issues going on with his business he has to make decisions on too. They plan on leaving the next afternoon. He needs to get his business in line you see. He has become a successful businessman, but that is all I am telling you… I loved this story beyond words. The emotions that come in the waiting that Molly has to endure is beyond accurate and painfully true I felt every moment again with her. The dynamics between Dylan and Molly are unbelievably touching and erotic. Their love scenes are a scorching hot bag of fire. But like the rest of the story line done in a tasteful manner. I give this 5 stars ++. Provided by Net Galley. Follow us at: www.1rad-readerreviews.com

Ich bin bereits seit Jahren begeisterte Leserin von Susan Mallerys Werken. Zuletzt ist diese Leidenschaft leider viel zu kurz gekommen, sodass dies nun wieder dringend nachgeholt werden muss. Auf der Suche nach neueren Werken von der Autorin ist mir besonders "Pleiten, Pech und Prinzen" aufgefallen, sodass ich diesem Buch unbedingt eine Chance geben wollte und ich bin froh, dass ich es getan habe, denn es ist wunderbar. Susan Mallery besitzt seit jeher einen sehr angenehmen Schreibstil, den ich bei ihren Werken stets genieße. Die Stimmung im Buch ist meist heiter, stellenweise aber auch melancholisch, da die Protagonisten beide ihre ganz eigenen Probleme haben. Dazu werden die romantischen Szenen niemals kitschig dargestellt und die Autorin hat vermieden, besonders viele Klischees in die Geschichte einzubauen. Zugegeben, stellenweise war die Geschichte schon sehr vorhersehbar, vor allem, wenn man die Kurzbeschreibung betrachtet. Dennoch finde ich die Geschichte trotz der Vorhersehbarkeit gelungen, da immer eine gewisse Spannung in der Luft lag. Dazu sind die Figuren gut ausgearbeitet, sodass ich sie ins Herz schließen konnte. Mit Molly lernt man eine Frau kennen, die sympathisch ist, aber durchaus auch nervien kann. Sie wirkt häufig unsicher, kann Komplimente nicht nachvollziehen und entschuldigt sich ständig für alles mögliche, was unglaublich anstrengend sein kann. Dennoch ist sie sehr sympathisch, denn sie wirkt authentisch, setzt sich für andere ein und handelt meistens selbstlos - auch wenn dies nicht immer gut ist. Nachdem sich in ihrem Leben einiges verändert hat, möchte sie einen Neuanfang wagen und meldet sich bei Dylan, dem Ex-Freund ihrer Schwester, mit dem sie vor Jahren einen Pakt geschlossen hat. Zusammen wollen sie ein Abenteuer wagen und eine Woche lang die Seele baumeln lassen. Dass es dabei nicht nur bei Freundschaft bleibt, dürfte schnell klar sein. Dylan wird ebenfalls sehr gut dargestellt. Aus dem kleinen Rebellen ist ein erwachsener und selbstbewusster Mann geworden, der mitten im Leben steht und für fast jeden Spaß zu haben ist. Das Cover gefällt mir sehr gut und passt toll zum Titel. Allgemein muss man sagen, dass dem Mira Taschenbuch Verlag die neuen Cover sehr gut stehen und diese mittlerweile auch der Thematik angepasst sind. Die Kurzbeschreibung ist ebenfalls gelungen und hat mich spontan angesprochen. Insgesamt ist "Pleiten, Pech und Prinzen" typisch Susan Mallery: romantisch, humorvoll und mit interessanten Charakteren bestückt, die ich direkt ins Herz schließen musste. Wer noch kein Buch von Susan Mallery gelesen hat, hat definitiv etwas verpasst. Kaufen, lesen und genießen!

The Christmas Wedding Ring was a very sweet holiday romance about taking risks and learning to live life to the fullest. As a teenager, Molly Anderson couldn’t help having a crush on bad boy Dylan Black, her older sister’s boyfriend. After things didn’t work out between Dylan and her sister, Dylan left town but not before he promised Molly an adventure when she was older. Fourteen years later with her life taking a few unexpected turns, Molly is ready to take Dylan up on his offer. Dylan always enjoyed being around Molly and after she unexpectedly comes back into his life, he’s more than willing to whisk her away for a few weeks of fun. Molly didn’t have the best childhood as she never seemed to be enough for her parents who either ignored her or constantly criticized her. Her relationship with her sister was also strained until they were adults and were able to rebuild the relationship. Prior to her decision for a break from her life, Molly had a rough few days with one bad thing happening after another. After finding out everything she went through, I more than understood her need for an escape. Dylan grew up on the wrong side of the tracks with an abusive father and an alcoholic mother. To say Dylan was ready to leave his hometown behind is an understatement. After leaving, Dylan opened a motorcycle shop where he does custom modifications to bikes. His business became quite successful and Dylan actually has more people wanting his bikes than he’s able to take on. After seeing each other after fourteen years, Molly and Dylan develop an easy friendship with attraction layered beneath. I enjoyed their ability to talk to one another and how they were able to open up about the problems in their lives. The attraction between them is well done and I was happy to see that the barriers that kept them from advancing their relationship sooner were legitimate issues. When things did progress, it was done perfectly and I enjoyed the direction things went. The ending of the book was one of the best parts in my opinion and I really liked the way everything wrapped up for Molly and Dylan. Overall I really enjoyed The Christmas Wedding Ring and it was the perfect read to put you in the holiday spirit. I definitely recommend this book if you’re looking for a fun, holiday romance.

"The Christmas Wedding Ring" is a very prettily packaged re-issue of author Susan Mallery's 1998 release "The Wedding Ring Promise". It took me a while to get into the groove of this story line and to find the appeal of the characters. I am a longtime Susan Mallery fan--so I kept reading. As the hero and heroine got reacquainted with one another and they grew on each other, they began to also grow on me. As a teenager, Molly Anderson was hopelessly infatuated with her older sister Janet's boyfriend. Dylan Black was gorgeous, charming, and a leather-clad, motorcycle-riding "bad boy". What made him even more irresistible to Molly, self-conscious about her braces, blemishes, and chubbiness, was his kindness. He often took the time to talk to her, and his gentle teasing made her feel like he really saw her and liked her for the real Molly. When Janet and Dylan stopped dating, and she soon found a "suitable" marriage prospect, Dylan decided to leave the area. Before he left, however, he and Molly had one last talk, and he gave her the golden wedding band he had intended to give Janet. He told Molly to hold on to the ring until she was grownup and ready for the adventure he had promised on his motorcycle. When that time came, she was to find him and give him back the ring, and off they would go. Fifteen years later, a grownup Molly is at a crisis point in her life, and when she comes across the ring, she decides to find Dylan and see if he remembers his promise. Dylan Black has become a successful businessman, owner of Black Lightning, a cutting-edge motorcycle manufacturing company. Dylan has also reached a turning point in his life, and Molly's surprise reappearance into his life comes at just the right time. Their "adventure" becomes the journey of a lifetime, one of personal discovery and emotional growth. Passion flares to life, kindled by friendship and mutual need--but will it be enough to last a lifetime? Will the holiday season become even more poignant and joyful with the gift of true love? Review Copy Gratis Amazon Vine

We should never give up on childhood dreams Molly Anderson has been thrown way too much at her in a short period of time. Losing her job and fiancé was bad enough but the health scare she is trying to come to grips with pushed her to say, enough. Molly has lived a life of doing the right thing and never taking chances or pursuing dreams she has always sought to find. But now Molly is going to chase down her childhood crush, Dylan Black and see if this bad boy wants to go on an adventure with her. Dylan left town and never thought he would ever see Molly again but here she is in the office of the business he grew from the ground up to being bought out success. She throws down a challenge for both of them to hit the road and experience some fun for just a few days and he jumps at the chance. Molly was a kid when he last saw her but the woman she turned in to is more than just a little bit of temptation. They take off for the open road on his motorcycle and find themselves cuddling up on a beach learning that life has always had plans for them. Each comes with a shaky past topped off with some drama in the present but as they tell their stories of life to one another they realize that the passion at the core of their relationship may be the best part of what can come. When the realities of life come calling it is time to decide if Molly and Dylan go forward together or part ways knowing that this was the best time of their lives. Susan Mallery always writes a love story every reader wishes were part of their own romance.

What a complex and captivating novel. Mallery had me hooked throughout. Her easy flowing writing takes you through this intense tale that touches on so many aspects of life. Although this story is very realistic and extremely plausible, Mallery’s imagination and gift as a storyteller had me hooked. The premise behind this story is not only unique but extremely brave and intriguing. I was completely invested in this story by the end. At times this novel is physically and emotionally frightening – it could happen to any of us – yet it is also emotionally fulfilling. This story is very focussed on the two main characters, but it works exceedingly well for the story at hand. They are both very well developed individuals that you meet not only in the present, but also in the past. Seeing the female lead battle against her own sense of self-worth was quite empowering. There are so many of us who see ourselves in that light that it makes it very easy to identify with her. Her strength of character is quite admirable, and tempered with her doubts and fears. The multifaceted male lead is the perfect counter point for this story. He is equally well developed and very easy to fall in love with, providing an all too real rock for the female lead to lean on. This novel is big on adventure, romance, emotion, and self-discovery. It’s a fantastic, must have for those of us who love a romance over the holidays. Please note that I received a complimentary copy of this work in exchange for an honest review.

3 STARS This is a reissue from 1998. I had not read it before so was glad to see it. I don't know anything about the series Triple Trouble. I liked most of the story. Towards the end their was a lot of love scenes. I like the character Molly Anderson. She has had a really bad week. So she wants to runaway but not sure where. Molly has just been dumped by her fiancé right be for Christmas. She also has some other bad things happen to her. While packing she finds a wedding ring that was given her by her sister's old boyfriend Dylan Black. Dylan promised her a adventure when she grew up. Molly had a big crush on him then. Dylan Black has some tough decisions about his company. He keeps going in circles about what to do. So when he sees Molly again he decides to take off and together have an adventure. No physical, no regrets time to help them both make some decisions and have a break they need too. Of course while they are together they start getting closer and opening up about their problems and grow close to each other but they don't share their feelings. There laughter is helping Molly cope with the stresses in her life. Molly was never close to any of her family growing up. When her sister left the house they started to rely on each other better. The setting is California I liked there journey together. I really like what they chose in the end to do. I was given this ebook of the Christmas Wedding Ring by Net Galley and Harlequin. In return I agreed to give a honest review.

The Christmas Wedding Ring by Susan Mallery was a wonderful holiday love story. Dylan used to go out with Janet, Molly's sister. He was always nice to Molly, who was only fourteen at the time, and she had a big crush on him. The day he saw Janet marry someone else he knew he couldn't stay around any longer. Molly tried to talk him out of it but she couldn't. He gave Molly the wedding band he had been saving for Janet and told her when she was old enough and wanted an adventure to look him up and he would be there for her. Fourteen years later, Molly has had the worst week of her life. She needs to get away and rethink her life. But what is she to do? While packing her suitcase she comes across the ring Dylan had given her. There was her answer. Dylan had his own business and was struggling with whether of not to accept a buyout offer. He was doing very well for himself now but if he took this offer he would be set for awhile. Then Molly shows up looking for her adventure and this is just what Dylan needs to ponder his options. They take off on his motorcycle and don't go far but it's far enough. They are good for one another and before you know it there are sparks. But Dylan thinks that Molly deserves better than him. Molly doesn't think Dylan could love someone like her. There is much more to their story. It was sweet and tender and had me laughing and in tears. I hope you love it as much as I did.

3.5 stars. Review originally posted on Rather Be Reading Blog Nothing says the holidays like bumping into old friends, although… it’s not merely a coincidence when Molly sets out to find Dylan, her sister’s high school boyfriend she was always crushing. Way back when, he promised her an adventure when she needed one most and she hopes he’s ready to pay up. In a stroke of perfect timing, Dylan is ready to take a break from civilization too and agrees to accompany her out of town so they both can catch the breather they need. Even though Molly keeps a few secrets under her belt, her and Dylan fall into an easy friendship sprinkled with moments of chemistry. Don’t be grossed out. She may have been too young for him when he was dating her sister, but their relationship is definitely a possibility now. A fact that scares both of them. But with Molly dealing with a lot of insecurity and Dylan worrying about his future, will they ever get it together? As always, Mallery creates a sweet love story and deals so sensitively with a sub-plot line — I was totally impressed by how well-detailed it was. With sweet Christmas details and the drama you would expect from any romance novel, it was definitely worth the one-sitting read.

A young girl with a crush. A 20 year old guy with a motorcycle and a hard lived past. Now all grown up Molly, the young girl with crush needs time away to figure things out, finds a gold band given to her years ago by her sister's boyfriend. He told her that when she was ready for an adventure, to look him up. After the week Molly has had, an adventure just might be what she needs. She has lost her job, her fiance and there is one more thing she just can't or won't talk about. Dylan, the 20 year old with the motorcycle is grown up as well. He is now a man with business, he still has the motorcycle and she still has her crush. He is at an impasse in his business and needs to make a few decisions. When Molly shows up, he decides an adventure might be a good way to clear his mind and come to his conclusions. Through their adventure they have fun, something neither really know how to do. Molly has such low self-esteem she has no clue of her self worth at all. Neither believe in love or that type of relationship. Trust is also a big issue. Can either of them let go of their past influences that have made them question so many things? I think this was a good little story. It had many qualities in it that I like when reading a romance story. I am not going to say much to ruin it for you, but I do believe you would enjoy reading it. I know I did!!
