I listened to this book on audio and this is my first 5 star book of the year although it was written in 2014. I have since read Little Fires Everywhere by this author which I loved. I usually write short reviews on audiobooks but this book deserves more. It’s been a long time since I have had such a visceral reaction to a book. After I finished I had a terrible urge to call each of my four daughters and ask them if I ever made them feel unappreciated, unloved or pushed to hard to do something. For this is what this story is truly about, parents who are trying to live through their child’s life, the things that they themselves wanted and failed to achieve. We start out during a breakfast moment when the family of James Lee, Marilyn, Nath and Hanna notice that their sister Lydia has not come down for breakfast. After much searching, phone calling, combing the area, the police finally find her body at the bottom of a very nearby lake. Her parents are shocked, they were totally clueless as to their daughters unhappiness, partly because she chose to put on a cloak of normality and happiness for their favor. We then shift to the story being told by each of the family members. James Lee is an American born Chinese American who in this 1970’s time period had felt discrimination all of his life. He had received a scholarship to Harvard and his was a lonely time at school, where he was never accepted by this mostly white, economically privileged student body. As a professor of English history he meets Marilyn whom he chooses as his teaching assistant, falls in love with and marries. He is not a bad man, he is not a cruel man, but his "pushing" will add to his chlidren's feeling of not being good enough. He tries to help his children, in his own way, to rise above the prejudice that they are sure to endure. He feels that the secret to this is to is to excel in academics and “try to fit in”, “make friends” and get involved in other school activities, only the first of which he ever achieved. Marilyn is a Radcliff student who is determined not to end up like her mother, a homemaker, unhappy and racist woman. Marilyn views James as someone exotic and so unlike the other boys that have pursued her. She gets involved with James and soon they are romantically entwined and believe that they are in love. They marry, against her mother’s wishes, and begin their life in a small town in rural Ohio where James will teach at the college. This is probably the biggest mistake that they make, as their children will never fit into this small, all white town where prejudice is high. Marilyn gets pregnant with Nath and soon accepts her role as homemaker, particularly when another child, Lydia comes along. At one point in the story Marilyn decides to leave her family and go back to school, that is until she discovers that she is pregnant with their third, unplanned and pretty much unwanted third child. Later she pins all of her hopes on Lydia living the life that she didn’t get to have, she wants her daughter to be a doctor. Lydia is the golden child, beautiful though exotic looking, very bright and in the beginning very social. As Lydia gets to high school she knows that she will never be accepted by this all white student body even though attempts are make to plan trips to the movies, etc. She is constantly under pressure, particularly from her mother, to excel academically and by her father to make friends, try to fit in, etc. We learn just how desperate she is to first please them and then escape from them. Her only help is her brother Nath whom she tells all of her problems and hurts. Then Nath is accepted to Harvard and she knows he will soon go away, the thought of being in the home without him as a buffer is more than she can bear. Hannah is such a quiet child, given slight attention by her parents. She accepts any scraps of affection that she gets from her siblings, mother and father. But she sees and hears more than they know. I was left in the end wondering how this family will now survive without Lydia. I continually wondered why they didn’t move to a more integrated community to spare their children the prejudice that they face every day. This is the one thing that bothered me the most, knowing how difficult it had to be from a mixed race family in the 70’s, why did they choose a small, all white community? This book was masterfully written and made me feel so much sadness for the children, even for the parents as they seemed to be so sure that they were doing the right thing for their daughter. This is a book not to be missed. Since I listened to the audiobook which was told in the four voices, I’m not sure how the book reads but the audio version is excellent and I highly recommend this book to everyone!
