This is more a continuation of the story than a sequel to The Many-Colored Land ; maybe the publishers felt one volume would be too long? In any case, The Golden Torc picks up right where we left off. The 'time gate' by the time our main protagonists venture back to the Pliocene Era has been formalized, with groups of eight going through each morning. Our eight in the so-called 'green' group were split into two groups upon arrival by the Tanu, the ruling aliens who obviously are related to the Fey of legend. In The Many-Colored Land , we followed one group who managed to escape their captors and hook up with the 'free human' resistance. The Tanu 'process' all the incoming humans, taking what they deem useful, and basically enslaving them via 'grey torcs'. All the Tanu wear Torcs, which allow them to harness their latent ESP powers and communicate via telepathy. May outlines at least six different forms of ESP here (healing, coercion, illusion, etc.) and the various Tanu are grouped into 'guilds' according to their powers. For humans, grey torcs are the most basic, allowing any one with a 'gold' torc to command them, give them pleasure or pain, etc. Silver torcs are reserved for certain humans more allied with the Tanu, and some humans even have the most powerful gold Torcs, making them the elite of the slaves. We witnessed in the last volume, where the human 'resistance' freed one Tanu town, that many human Torc wearers would rather die than lose their Torc and be free; this illustrates the rather complex social dynamic May develops here. The Golden Torc chronicles the trials and tribulations of the other four members of the 'green' arrivals, who were set to the Tanu capital far to the south. These four included a woman with vast ESP powers, even without a Torc (a first to be sent back in time), a pathological 'trickster', a healer and a huge guy destined for the 'games'. It seems each year the Tanu sponsor a major event pitting themselves (and now their human minions) against another branch of the Tanu, the Firvulag, who live in the North. The Tanu and the Firvulag came to Earth together, but have long been at least spiritual opposites. The annual games are really their only point of peaceful contact and they constantly war among each other in normal times. The 'free humans' have a loose alliance with the Firvulag while the enslaved humans are obviously with the Tanu. Whew. Lots of back story, but this is a complex world. The Golden Torc all takes place in just a few months time. We learn much about the political machinations of the Tanu, their complex relationship with humanity and the 'half-breeds' of human/Tanu. Some Tanu want to get rid of the humans and go back to the 'old ways', while others see too much advantage in keeping them around. Our 'green' characters are plunged right into the middle of a long standing debate here, with their lives and freedoms at stake. Meanwhile, we also follow the other half of the 'green' party as they make their way to the capital with a plan to destroy the Torc factory and close the 'time gate'. Lots going on here, and this gets a little heavy at times with the politics, but May's snappy and snarky dialogue moves the story along nicely. 3.5 stars, rounding up for the killer ending!
