Reviewer: MaddalenaC I was fairly sure I had read the story a very long time ago, but couldn't remember the plot, only that the ending was sad. So I read it again The ending is more than sad; it is tragic.. I feel two ways about this book It was a page-turner, and the real mystery lasted until the end. I couldn't stop reading in pursuit of it. Trevanian must have done a lot of research into the Basque culture, and his glimpses of the festival attended by the principal characters are colorful and fascinating, especially for the way in which they bring out a previously unknown side of the normally reserved, albeit forthright in manner, Katya. The narrator is Dr Jean-Marc Montjean, who after serving in the great war has come to the village of Salies-Les Bains in the French Pyrenees near the village where he was born. He meets and falls in love with an innocent and plainspoken young woman who lives with her father and twin brother in an isolated house outside the village. The atmosphere of Etcheverria, the rundown house rented by the absent- minded scholar M. Treville, with his indolent sarcastic son Paul, and his look-alike innocent, and vivacious -at times - twin sister Katya is eerie. There is a sense of secrets in that house. Keep reading as I did in pursuit of the mysteries. Page turner notwithstanding, this is psychological horror. The ending is so traumatic that I now realize why I must have banished the novel from my memory. Now to set about erasing the mental images of the ending from my memory again. You have been warned. Read less

Reviewer: William Higham A beautifully written European romance in a day long gone - with a 'sting in the tale' that'll leave you breathless. Read less

Reviewer: Amazon Customer Well conceived plot that is cleverly camoflaged until the closing pages. Based in a post World War 1 village in a remote part of the Pyrennes, a dangerous family drama plays out amidst the contrasting lifestyles and cultures of urban France. Read less

Reviewer: Stéphane. V. Ce roman, du style thriller psychologique, assez atypique dans l'oeuvre de Trevanian, mérite très largement le détour. Le plus étonnant dans ce livre c'est que l'auteur y décrit avec brio le mécanisme de clivage psychologique qui intervient dans certaines ( je ne dirai pas lesquelles sous peine de révéler l'intrigue!) situations qui ont fait l' objet d'études par des psychologues à une époque assez récente. Read less

Reviewer: Slade Allenbury For two thirds of its length, "The Summer of Katya" is a leisurely-paced idyll about a young doctor falling in love with a mysterious beauty named Katya who has recently moved into a summer house just outside of the small French town where the doctor works. The doctor's attempts at forming an intimate relationship with Katya are largely thwarted by her twin brother, Paul, for reasons that are not initially clear but apparently too sensational for Paul to state outright. Is the brother himself in love with Katya? Are Katya and Paul engaged in an incestuous love affair of their own? And what about the father of Paul and Katya, an absent-minded professor and widower who may have a few deep, dark secrets of his own where Katya is concerned? For a long time Trevanian opts only to tease us with these questions while providing no answers to them. But in the last third of the book, the revelations come fast and furious. When the mystery of why Paul is so strenuously opposed to a union between Katya and the doctor is laid bare, the answers are juicy enough to satisfy even the most demanding fan of sensation fiction. In its final third the book becomes a splendidly lurid potboiler that, though it may stretch credulity just a bit, is thrilling to read. Trevanian's prose is elegant in its simplicity. This is popular fiction of a very high level of craftsmanship. Read less
