Molly Anderson: FMC Dylan Black: MMC Janet: mollys sister Starts 14 years ago at Mollys sisters wedding. But Janet was marrying Thomas because he was a successful lawyer and his family owned a huge law firm in San Francisco. Thomas was marrying Janet because she was beautiful. Janet got nearly everything because she was beautiful. Dylan: “Tell you what, Molly. When you’re all grown up and ready for that adventure, you come find me. Give me this. We’ll go anywhere you want.” Molly: She was going to make him fall in love with her and they were going to live happily ever after. She had his promise. A wedding ring promise. December 5th, fourteen years later Dylan: He already knew the reason, and it had nothing to do with magic or even the devil. He was willing to sell his company because the deal on the table was too sweet to pass up. Not only was he being offered an obscene amount of money, but he had a guaranteed position in the new firm. He would finally have the resources to do all the research he wanted. He could design to his heart’s content. All those projects that had been on the back burner could finally be explored. He would be a fool to pass up the offer. Black Lightning: Dylan’s business Molly to Dylan: “I didn’t want you to go. There were assorted reasons, but the only one I was willing to tell you was that you’d promised me an adventure when I grew up. So you handed me the ring and said that when I was ready for that adventure, I was to bring this to you.” She cleared her throat. Color stained her cheeks, and she ducked her head so that she was staring at the table. “Well, I’m ready if you’re still willing.” Dylan: “I’m wrestling with some difficult decisions myself. Mostly about my business.” He made a dismissive gesture with his hand. “I won’t bore you with the details, but for many reasons, I’m at a crossroads right now, too.” Dylan: “We’re not taking a car on our adventure. We’ll be riding on one of my bikes.” Dylan’s thought that really pissed me off…: The truth was, when faced with the reality of seeing her naked, he doubted she would actually turn him on. Molly: “I have to check my voice mail once a day, but that’s about it.” “Exactly.” Molly tucked a loose strand of hair behind her right ear. “What really bugs me is that I’ve lived such a small life. I didn’t realize it at the time, but I do now. I have a degree in business and I was an accounts receivable supervisor at a communications company. We were recently bought out by one of the really big firms. I found out last Monday that I’d been downsized.” He said they’d changed their minds and that they were letting me go. At least the compensation package was decent. What really frustrates me is that I’d turned down two other job offers when I thought the new company wanted to keep me. Of course both those other jobs are filled now.” “On Tuesday my fiancé—” She shook her head. “Make that my ex-fiancé called me from Mexico. It seems that he and his assistant had been working late hours in the past couple of months. One thing led to another and they ran off together to Mexico. Dylan: “I’m not out for anything, just sensed there was more. But you’re right. That’s plenty.” Dylan: The longing was as strong as it was unexpected. He didn’t understand it and that should have scared the daylights out of him. But oddly enough, it didn’t. When he couldn’t figure out a way to crawl inside and be one with her, he did the next best thing. He kissed her. Dylan: “Dammit, Molly, I kissed you because I wanted to, not out of some twisted sense of pity,” he called after her, but it was too late. She’d already gone into the house. “Philosophy over pancakes,” she said, and smiled. “Whatever will I get if I make waffles?” “French poetry,” he teased. “Really?” She made a show of looking around the kitchen. “I must check to see if we have a waffle iron.” Molly had heard the stories—everyone in town had. That both Dylan’s parents drank. That his father beat both mother and child. That visits to the emergency room for treatment of lacerations and broken bones were not uncommon. Molly: “Two,” she said at last, because she couldn’t think of anything funny to say. “There have been two men in my life. Including Grant. And the fact that I slept with that loser is just too depressing for words.” Long after their adventure was over, she would look back and savor each day they’d spent together. Whatever the outcome, she would be grateful that he’d helped her get through this difficult time. Dylan read her mind. “You want kids, Molly?” With all her heart, but would they be in her future? That question could bring her to tears. “I’m not sure,” she lied. This had me thinking she was waiting for results from the doctor for cancer or not being able to have kids was why she had to keep checking her voicemail. Dylan: She was an attractive woman now, but she had been an ugly duckling back then. At twenty, that sort of thing had still mattered to him. Another one of his asshole thoughts…. She was as sweet and warm as he remembered. Her lips yielded to him, as if they, too, felt the homecoming. He pressed his mouth against hers, then parted slightly. When she followed his lead, a small sound escaped from deep in her throat. Half moan, half cry. Molly: “The Monday before Thanksgiving, I lost my job and on Tuesday Grant called me from Mexico. On Wednesday morning, while I was in the shower, I found a lump in my left breast.” “That’s why I check my messages every night. The doctor is going to let me know when she gets the results back from th-the lab. I’m waiting to hear about the lump. The problem is, they’re short-staffed because of the holidays. They said everything takes longer this time of year.” Dylan: While that didn’t take away the wanting, it changed it into something even more powerful. He had a fierce desire to bring her pleasure, to wipe out all the bad memories. He couldn’t fix her, but he would very much like to help her forget. Molly: My mother was lonely and unhappy. She had an affair. It was over quickly, but I’m the living, breathing reminder that it happened. She wouldn’t tell me anything about my biological father, and I don’t really care about him anymore. The man who raised me as his never took any interest in Janet, either, so I don’t blame him for ignoring me. My mother is another matter.” Dylan tells her he wants to have sex with her: “You are with me.” “I want to make love with you.” “I want you, too,” she whispered. “Don’t,” he said, taking hold of her arm. “Don’t leave me like this. Do you really think it matters that you’ve got a cut and a few stitches? I don’t want to look because I have this morbid fascination with your surgery. I want to see you naked because the thought of it turns me on. I’ve been imagining us doing this for a long time. I want to touch and taste every part of you.” He was torn, wanting to love her like this forever, yet desperately wanting her to find her release. In the end, he helped her over the edge and caught her when she fell. After, she welcomed him inside of her. “I made love with you because I wanted you. No other reason.” At the exact moment they gazed into each other’s eyes and watched the explosion, she understood that what she’d thought was merely the continuation of her crush was so much more. Perhaps it had started that way, but something had fundamentally changed between them. At least for her. She wasn’t with Dylan because he was good to her, or handsome or funny or bright. She was with him because she loved him. Perhaps she’d always loved him. “I do think about the possibilities,” he told her. “Not just about what the doctor might tell you, but also the future. Christmas is getting closer. Our time together is almost up.” “I know. I’ll miss you.” Molly: “That was my boss, Harry. Actually, he would be my ex-boss. He said that the company has reevaluated the situation and they want me to come back to work for the firm. Not only that, they’re offering me a promotion and a raise.” Mollys thoughts about Grant: Her only regret was that it had taken his leaving for her to see the truth. She got her call from the doctor: I’m fine. The lump was completely benign. No cancer, nothing. I just have lumpy breasts. Isn’t that great?” He was so happy for her. This was what she deserved. She had her job back, if she wanted it, and a second chance to make things right. Very few people had that opportunity. The best part was, not only did Molly deserve it, but he knew she would make the best of it. A voicemail to Molly from Grant: Molly, I miss you and I still love you. Please, can’t we talk? We had something really special together and I’d like another chance. I know I have a lot to make up for and I—” Dylan: “One by one the pieces of your life have been restored. You have your job back if you want it—actually, it’s a better job, with a raise. You’ve found out you’re healthy. Now Grant is begging forgiveness. It’s as though none of this ever happened.” She was, of course. She would survive. But she wanted it to be with him. She wanted the magic to continue. Still, she had no right to hold him against his will. He had been so incredibly generous with her—she could do no less. No regrets, she reminded herself. Even knowing what she did at this minute, with her heart breaking and her soul battered, she wouldn’t go back and change a thing. She wanted to ask him if they could try to make it work, if maybe there was a chance, but she already knew the answer. Oddly enough, despite the pain, she could live with that. It was okay that he didn’t love her back. Loving him had been enough. She’d given with a full heart and she’d kept her promise to herself. She could never regret what they’d shared. Every Christmas for the rest of her life, she would pull out her memories of this special time with the man who had helped her to believe in herself. Grant was at Mollys when Dylan goes to drop her off: Molly wouldn’t want to know how he felt and he didn’t want to embarrass either of them. It was better this way, he told himself, despite the disappointment and the pain moving up from his gut to his chest. Molly to Dylan: She pressed her fingers against his mouth. “I don’t want you to say anything back, because that’s not why I’m telling you this. I just want you to know that I love you. You’ve made me believe in myself again, and for the first time in my life, you’ve made me believe in love. No matter what happens or where you go, know that you carry a piece of my heart with you.” “First,” she said, “don’t sell out. Black Lightning is your heart and soul and you’ll never be happy working for someone else. Just my opinion, but I mean it.” “This.” She dug into her jeans pocket and pulled out the gold wedding ring that had first brought her to him. “If you ever need an adventure, come find me. No matter what, I’ll go with you.” She pressed the ring into his palm and closed his fingers over the band. Molly to grant: “The doctor got two opinions. They’re sure and so am I.” She walked to the door and held it open. “Goodbye, Grant.” Dylan: It wasn’t just because he missed Molly—he also regretted that he’d left her without telling her the truth. That he loved her. He, who had never loved anyone before. Dylan to Grant after he punches him: “That was for Molly,” he said. “Don’t you talk about her as if she’s damaged goods. She’s ten times the person you’ll ever be. I’m glad she had the good sense to dump you. Stay away from her. If you bother her again, I’ll be back to finish this.” She had made some decisions about her future—she was going to reject the job offer, sell her condo and go back to school to get her MBA—but a sense of hopefulness hadn’t kicked in yet. She needed time, she knew that. She just felt so lonely, even surrounded by her sister’s boisterous family. She missed Dylan. Dylan to Molly: “I can’t let you go,” he said. “I’ve tried and tried, but I keep thinking about you, about how much I want you and need you in my life. You are so incredibly strong and brave and you deserve someone so much better than me. I know that. But I also know no one will ever love you more.” He squeezed her fingers tightly in his. “I love you, Molly. All of you. I love how we laugh together, how smart you are, how you look first thing in the morning. I love how you feel in my arms and my bed. I want to be with you always. I want to marry you and make babies with you. I want my life to be an adventure with you.” This wasn’t the plain gold band he’d offered her sister fourteen years ago. This was a beautiful round diamond that glinted in the afternoon light. He took her left hand and slid it in place. She says yes!! Dylan: “How would you feel about working for a small but growing design firm? The boss can be tough at times, but I hear he’s fair. He’s also looking for a partner.”“I would very much like you to be a part of Black Lightning. If you’re interested. I hate the business end of things. I want to get back to design.” Dylan had said she was his Christmas miracle. The best part of it all was that he was her miracle, too. This was a super cute book. The Christmas wedding ring. Dylan had given her that ring as a promise for adventure and 14 years later she cashes it in when she needs the escape. They have an adventure, make the decisions they needed to make, and fall in love in the process. So then he proposes with her own wedding ring and they get to live happily ever after. Super cute little holiday romance. Perfect hallmark Christmas book of the biker bad boy and the good girl who was supposed to be with the lawyer. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review
