Less a romance than a travelogue, this book follows a female journalist as she tries to report on the student movement in China which culminates in the Tiananmen Square repression by the government. While the journalist moves on to a fairly standard romance in the latter part of the book, to me it is clear what the author wants us to remember. This is a reasonable read, a little slow-moving but well described.

This book was terrible. There was no point to it until over halfway through and you never really cared about the characters until then. Even when he plot finally started, it was very predictable. This was the first book I read by this author and it will be my last.

This 1991 contemporary romance had many of the elements I enjoy in a lighter read - wonderful locales, some current events of the day, and some intrigue to boot. The romance was the least interesting part of the book, along with the bigger than life and wealthy characters with super successful careers. Of course, if those characters didn't have means, I couldn't enjoy the feeling of being on a terrace drinking a citron press watching the sunset in Provence!!! Light, easy read. Perfect for relaxing outdoors enjoying the summer.

I was rather surprised to find that this book has so much dislikes. From the very start, I found this book engaging. And for me the first chapters are the best part. It even made me teary-eyed and caused a heavy weight on my chest for the early parts, tho I couldn't say they were part of the real plot. True, the dialogs can be unrealistic most of the time but the thoughts have so much truth in it.

A really involving plot. I enjoyed the book as it got me engaged from the first chapters. There are bits of romance and of journalism and politics as well. The storyline is interestingly built and the final part couldn't be more twisted! Every time I thought I figured it out, the author proved me wrong! It was definitely a very good read!

I felt like I was transported back to the 90’s in every sense. Really took a turn south at the end tho

A quick and light read, and with some interesting twists to the plot involving espionage, but one thing I disliked was how the main characters were extremely shallow - rich and spoiled, perfect, jet setters who want for nothing, ever. The trouble with this type of character in romance novels is that they are not usually believable, and are seldom, if ever, relatable. When they can hop a flight to anywhere in the world, any day of the week at a moment's notice, and dine at only the finest restaurants and stay only at 5 star hotels, when their friends or family are royalty, and they never experience a single hitch in plans, I start to get bored with the story quite quickly, even if the plot itself is well written.

2 1/2 out of 4 stars Nicki Wells is a war correspondant who's fiance Charles Devereaux was killed. Just as she has started to get over him with Clee Donovan, a photographer, she finds out Charles is alive, but a spy. Then he really is killed and he turns out to have been a terrorist because of his real father. She and Clee get married.

oh Cynthia- I cannot believe you spoiled the ending for me. I am just in the middle of book now. ok- i find it ok so far..I don;t think is as bad as some people here rated this book.

Buku-buku karya Bradford, kebanyakan memang romance. You know laaah, tipe-tipe lovey dovey dimabuk cinta, kasih intrik sedikit, tapi endingnya pasti memuaskan pembaca 😅😄. . Cuma sepertinyaaaaa, di novel Remember, Bradford mau tampil beda. Masih tetap kisah cinta, hanya saja dibikin seru dengan tambahan misteri 😁. . Nicky Wells, wartawati perang yang terkenal di dunia pertelevisian. Baginya, bisa melaporkan kepada dunia, fakta nyata mengenai kejamnya perang, tak peduli bahaya yang mengintai, sudah merupakan passion yang mendarah daging. Namun di balik sosoknya yang tangguh, siapa sangka hatinya sempat terluka, saat Charles Devereaux, tunangannya, memilih bunuh diri tanpa memberikan penjelasan sedikitpun, saat hubungan mereka sedang mekar-mekarnya. . Tapi 3 tahun kemudian, tanpa disengaja, saat menonton tayangan berita dunia dari Roma, kamera menangkap sesosok wajah yang sangat mirip dengan Charles . Terguncang, tapi instingnya langsung bertekad mencari tahu siapa lelaki yang hampir seperti kembaran ex nya itu. Apa benar Charles masih hidup? Lalu kenapa memalsukan kematiannya? . Aku sendiri sempet curiga, karena di beberapa part, Charles diceritakan sebagai lelaki tampan yang suka bergonta ganti wanita. Tapi kayaknya pura-pura mati setiap mau putus hubungan dari pacar, kok ya ribet caranya 🤣.. . Bagai anjing pelacak, Nicky mencari tahu rahasia yang selama ini selalu ditutupi oleh Charles. Dari NYC, Paris, Roma, London dan Madrid, dia bertekad membongkar habis alasan di sebalik kematian palsu mantan tunangannya! . Seru di awal, tapi sayang Bradford tidak seperti Sheldon, Hitchcock, Brown, dalam menyajikan karya misteri. Ending cerita ini sangat terburu-buru, terlalu gampang, dan bahkan jadi tidak masuk akal. Salah satu buku Bradford yang menurutku ga terlalu bagus alurnya....

Of the Barbara Taylor Bradford books that I've read (and yes, they're all rather over-the-top), this was my favourite. The heroine, Nicky Wells, is a blond, all-American version of Christiane Amanpour, covering conflicts around the world for her American cable television network, and in this novel she globe-trots in pursuit of the truth about a fiancé she had thought dead. The story line gets a little convoluted and the mystery surrounding the fiancé is highly improbable; but I also found that I liked and related to Nicky and one or two of the other characters, such as Clee Donovan, meaning they were sufficiently well-drawn out. The book also offers a travelogue, and the reader gets to experience Nicky's world-class (of course) hotels and locations with her, starting in Beijing and moving around Europe, including England. All of Bradford's novels are escapist, but I liked this one for the memorable (for me) characters and travel. Bradford brought Nicky back for a cameo appearance in 2000's "Where You Belong," and I still harbor a hope that someday the author will bring her back again in another potboiler, perhaps as Nicky's adult daughter (now also a top journalist) aims to solve a mystery.

I was surprised at the low ratings on this book but I didn’t let them deter me from purchasing it. Bradford has always been one of my favorite authors with her Woman of Substance being my favorite. This book was full of mystery, travel, and romance. The main character, Nicky Wells, a well-known TV news correspondent travels far and wide on her stories. The story begins in China at the massacre at Tiananmen Square which gave the reader a feel for how dangerous her job was. There are other characters that come and go throughout the story but only two play more prominent roles in the tale, Nicky and her lover, Cleeland Donovan, a world famous travel photographer. They meet while on many stories in faraway places. Nicky’s fiancé, Charles Devereaux, is in and out of the story but some of the mystery is based around his suicidal death when Nicky sees someone who looks like him on the news. This sighting brings Nicky to follow clues to try and find him and discover once and for all why he supposedly faked his death to disappear. It is quite a long story which could have been shorter and gotten more to the crux of things sooner, but I enjoyed Bradford’s writing style and descriptive prose. Not my favorite story but still an enjoyable one!

I remembered the book during the pandemic and just want to re-read again. I remember found this book a very long time ago when I was a teenager and by accident found this book in a cottage while vacationing with my parents and their friends, I think sometime in the early 1990's. Love the love story between Nicky and Clee. I remember they made a TV movie for this book but I never got a chance to see it, hope someday will be streamed somewhere. And love the location settings, from Tianamen Square in China to Provence, London, New York, Paris... Feel like travelling although not flying in real time due to the pandemic. I lost the paperback book but thanks to Amazon which has the e-book version so I can have it permanently on my devices just in case I would like to re-read it again, I just wish I had bought the paperback version back then to keep for myself since I usually try not to read e-books before bed and I would rather have the physical book version rather than e-books.

I never really managed to connect to any of the characters - they were all too rich, and somehow shallow. Each one of them seems to be characterized by one main and quite overt quality, all their actions being triggered by it. Also, none of them seem to have any duality to them, they are all just good, except for maybe one, but his story is not very enticing either. Anyways, nobody questions themselves or their actions at all, thus seeming too perfect and inhuman. Despite the political events and subplots that are described, the story fails to build up tension and expectation in the reader. However, I read the book until the end because of its traveloguesque aspect. The geographic places are well-described and succeed at transmitting the authentic atmosphere onto the pages. I would recommend this book as a very light read or a European travelogue.

Far fetched. Over done, and it was as if plots and excitement was being thrown in just to be there but for no real reason? I don’t quite understand why everyone treats Nicky like a wounded animal? I don’t super love the details of being a news broadcaster. I was bored by it. I don’t fully understand the perspective being painted of Nick. Is she strong and self confident or meek and scared? I feel like it was a bit whiplashy. I don’t like the “loved her/him as a sister/brother” concept. How? How do you go from viewing one as a sibling to wanting to shack up? I got to around chapter 19, and realized either I missed something big or the big reveal of a really important detail was given just then and it felt wildly out of place and like sometime should of known sooner? I just didn’t like it at all. I thought it might come around but it lost me even harder in the end.

Barbara writes books with substance. The first few chapters in this book were the best. Nicki is a war journalist who reported on the student movement in China during the government's crackdown in Tiananmen Square. Nicki's fiance stages his death, and she is inconsolable. Finally, after three years of accepting Charles's death, she realizes she could be in love with Clee, her coworker and photographer. Having accepted her good fortune, she discovers that Charles is alive. Travelling throughout Europe to discover the truth, Charles & Nicki meet face to face. Most of the truths are revealed regarding his involvement, except for one: he is a spy.

Nicole (Nicky) Wells is a renowned war correspondent known for her bravery in the face of violence. Clee Donovan, a famous photojournalist, was praised for his fearless ability to capture authentic moments in any world crisis. This book starts as their love story, then takes a wild turn into the world of espionage. Ms. Taylor is a master at creating in-depth characters and describing the settings in her books; this book was no exception. However, I felt the last few chapters took a downturn in the storyline. Admittedly, most of the story was somewhat dull and needed a good hook at the end. I don’t think this one worked for me.

Once I got into the plot it captured my interest - Nicky Wells is a strong independent woman who as an investigative journalist has been through disasters, wars and political disharmony but that did not prepare her for the trauma in her personal life! Charles suddenly disappeared believed committing suicide, but it is Cleeland a colleague whose close friendship has helped her to move on. But is her past going to fracture her future? Secrets, spies, terrorism and romance ... gosh the plot held me until the last page when the truth was finally uncovered !

A truly gripping story that held me from start to finish. Nicky Wells is a media war correspondent , but her life is shattered when she loses the love of her life , Charles Devereux . Nicky finds peace and is content with life work and her friendship with photographer Clee Donovan. After a beautiful romance in Provence, Nicky wonders if she might finally be ready to love again. I quite enjoyed reading this book , but it was way too long , l think it could of been half the length but overall an enjoyable romance and an interesting storyline 😊

While they report the murders in Tiananmen Square and try to help their favorite students escape, Nick the glamorous war correspondent (female) and Clee the glamorous photographer (male) feel their friendship turning into Romantic Love. From that point forward this is an expanded version of a Silhouette Romance, enhanced with interior decorating. (Bradford's first book was about interior decorating.) What's worth remembering is Tiananmen Square.

wonderful read I loved the characters and suspense in this novel. Had quite a few surprises in the end that I didn’t expect. Nicky is a tv reporter who saw a lot of devastation in China. From that moment on her life is full of unexpected things. She is still grieving from the end of her romance with Charles and yet not quite ready to fall in love again . A real page turner and hat an ending!

This book has romance, intrigue, mystery, and is dramatic at times as well. This book takes you to various countries and references historical places as the characters travel in their daily lives to live out their various relationships with regards to their careers and personal life also. I enjoyed it and it is similar in part to some other Barbara Taylor Bradford books. Check it out...some suspenseful parts in it as well.

Reminder of how good books once were This book is at least 35 years old but holds up well as historical fiction. The characters are wonderfully, richly drawn, and the story is very intriguing. But it is the writing that is most appreciated. So many young authors of the romance genre make up their own tenses of verbs and wouldn't recognize correct grammar if they read it. Ms. Bradford has always been adept at her craft, and it is applauded.

When beautiful and courageous media superstar, Nicky Wells, discovers that her fiance, aristocrat Charles Devereaux, could have faked his tragic death, she sets out on a mission to find the only man she ever loved and the reasons surrounding his unexpected disappearance; this suspenseful journey will take the determined investigative reporter from New York to Rome, London, and Madrid, where she will use all of her skills to uncover a shocking truth.

I don't feel this book is very well written and it's kinda tied up aimlessly. The romance between Clee and Nicky was boring but I'm not really one for romance. I liked her trying to track down her ex who supposedly committed suicide. When she found out he didn't and when she got the real details the payoff just wasn't worth it to me. This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers. Show full review

This was recommended in a book review newsletter I recently read and the premise interested me. For me the book was extremely hard to get into. The writing isn’t bad but everything is so descriptive it’s almost distracting from the story line. The middle of the book was intriguing and kept me interested, but I really disliked the ending.

Slow and the characters were not very interesting. Read halfway through and just had to walk away as I found the book boring. Given the description of the lead female character, I thought it would be an "unput downable read." Taylor Bradford's books are a hit or a miss for me and this was a miss.

I'll make it simple. I liked the fact that it talks about what happened in China and the war between Jews and Arabs but the story itself was terrible. The characters were shallow, the storyline was messy and the plot was low-key irrelevant. Also, since WHEN do you marry someone you've been with for barely two months ??? Ridiculous.

Bastante interesante al principio, luego se me cayó un poco al volverse romanticón. A pesar de algunas frases un poco xd puesto que hace ya 30 años que de escribió, en general ha estado curiosón. No insistiría en que lo leyeses, pero si lo tienes, da el pase. Un libro pa leerse en la playa un puente y pasar el rato entretenida.

Read this in my late teens and this book surely left an impression. This one is for the romantic at heart, with the backdrop of the gory tianamannen square massacre, then to the lushy villa in Italy this book will trouble and soothe you at the same time.
