Reviewer: Vaibhav Raj Bhushan I am yet to read this book but its very small book i bought it for 260 rs .. it has small fonts and bad paper quality ..... But its Asimov book we cant complain , story should be good Read less

Reviewer: Procyon Apart from that hogwash of an ending, I really enjoyed reading this book. I don't mean the ending was bad, ending was technically good but inner pessimist in me absolutely loathes such a wholesome ending. But if I keep filtering out books from my reading list that contains tiniest bit of positiveness in it, I'll be left with only Albert Camus and the like. Read less

Reviewer: Dee The print quality is very bad Read less

Reviewer: Pratyush VM Nothing against the book, just that the print quality is poor, and the size is very small. Expected a better quality paper and print for the price. Read less

Reviewer: Placeholder small font and poor quality paper Read less

Reviewer: Amazon Customer It’s a knockoff of the lowest quality, truly disappointing! Read less

Reviewer: Alejandro Es un libro muy bueno, (spoiler: es la base para todo el universo de la fundacion), yo lo leí hace unos años en pdf, y lo quise ahora buscar en físico, y vi que estaban con esta editorial junto con los libros del ciclo del imperio galactico, tonssss lo compré para que sean los 4 libros en mi colección y se ven muy chulos juntos 10/10 Read less

Reviewer: JJDDT Nice continuation / finish to Foundation series - if separate book. Loved the ideas in this. Read less

Reviewer: Leila Maia Yes, it is, and as amazing as everything he wrote. Do I really need to say anything? No, I don’t Read less

Reviewer: Bryan Sebesta Asimov has often been criticized for not developing characters’ emotions with realistic or even minimal complexity. I was surprised, in so many ways, to find that this book read oppositely: it was an engaging tale that absorbed you into a too-human organization too-seeming to be omnipotent. The lead character, Harlan, is fascinating, as are the other characters. They are well developed, full-fleshed, and I grew really, really attached to many of the plot’s characters—and Asimov need let my initial impression of any character remain fixed. Asimov’s time-tale story doesn’t content itself with dealing with paradoxes only, although those are discussed. Rather, it deals with evolution, what’s best for humanity, love, what it means to have a “sense of place” (and time), and the ethics of the multiverse. For example, what dangers lie in separating ourselves from the concept of “home” and “time” and “place"? Who should (and should anyone?) decide what is best for humanity? What is the cost of having a moderate human history, void of extremes or risk-taking? What is man’s destiny? It’s also a fascinating (and largely forgotten) prelude to the Foundation series. Certain elements of this book—which I won’t go into too much, to avoid spoilers—suggest that the “Eternals”—those who run the time-engineering organization called “Eternity”—have much to do with foreshadowing the rise of the Galactic Empire. The connection isn’t explicit, but I find sufficient value in it. Both Seldon and Harlan are intimately involved in an organization that seeks to guide humanity toward something greater. (The differences, by the way, such as how the organization of the Foundation and Eternity came into being and it’s intended duration, are also fascinating.) Some questions that my friends and I have discussed include: -One reviewer wrote that "[Asimov] has fun making digs at the unchanging fundamentals of human nature... amid centuries of changing social mores.” What values *are* unchanging? What change? -The main characters pretend objectivity, but are any of them truly objective? Is subjectivity “good”? -What evaluation does the book make on the concept of adjusting history? (What are the costs and benefits?) -What key philosophical differences exist between the Eternals and those of the Hidden Centuries in how they employ time travel and temporal tampering? -Does Asimov see change, evolution, and adaptation as good? Are those three terms interchangeable? -Given that both attempt to “guide” history, what are the differences and similarities between Eternity and the Foundation? What does Asimov seem to suggest about each? Read less

Reviewer: Rene This is probably my favorite book oat. Shipping and quality where fine to. Read less
