Read this a long time ago and thought it was quite humorous.

I don't know how many years it was after reading the 1st book that I learned there were more in the series. And I don't really know why it has taken a few more years since then to finally get a hold of the books and read them (excepting the years in the east when my library didn't carry them). But I'm so glad that the whole series is in my system and so glad I'm back in the Taylor family's world. And this sequel is just as funny as I remember the first book being. Andy's adventures are exactly as they're described: zany. And you don't even have to be LDS to enjoy the humor of some of them. Still, it's always fun to read a book with plenty of cultural references (and learning to smile about some of them!) that don't need to be explained. A few things are now dated, but I find it neat that I've "been around long enough" to remember the things referenced and to know when the changes took place years later. Still, even if a few of those things are now outdated, it is still hilarious! I think some of my LDS reading teens at the library would still enjoy it. I bet my mother would continue to love the series! Indeed, any LDS woman with a sense of humor would enjoy the silliness of it all.

Bad guys, missed flights, and some powerful glue. As an extremely generous thank-you gift for putting up with him all these years, Andy's brother Nick is taking her and her entire family to England on vacation. She is thrilled! A little less thrilling is the reality of her offer to hold onto Nick and Zan's wedding gifts while they're on their honeymoon. Particularly the macaw (from Edith--who else?) that cusses a blue streak and imitates household noises. Then Andy is hit by a sudden attack of stomach flu in the airport, and misses the flight (everyone else has already boarded.) If that weren't bad enough, upon returning home, she finds a couple of burglars--or something--in her house. Before long, she is on her own [almost] private flight to England, along with her kidnappers and Edith--who was just stopping by and insists on coming along. She is supposed to lead them to her brother (his shadowy past catching up with him), but there are plenty of things that could go wrong in the meantime. She hopes. * * * * * I like the beginning and the ending of this one the best. The middle is good for a smile here and there, but yeah. Get your laughs in at the beginning, then stick it out to the surprise ending. I blog at www.ofbooksandblooms.com

I think every group of people likes laughing at themselves sometimes. And Mormons are no different! In this book you will meet extremes of many people in your average Mormon community. But through it all there is love and understanding (or at least attempts at understand). That's what a love about books like this. We don't need to be perfect in order to be loved! **Talking Points - who do you identify most with in this book? If you were going to write a book called Around the Ward in 80 days about your own ward (or church), what characters and characteristics would you include? Have you have people in the past that were hard to be friends with, how did you deal with that? Did friendship ever form? Do you have people now that are hard to be friends with? Why? Can one person develop a friendship, or does it take two?

I recently re-read this book. It's good for a laugh, but totally far-fetched. Don't expect amazing writing or a plot that leaves you thinking. Instead this is a bubble bath book - a great book to read in the tub, in front of the fire, or in bed, just for fun. I still enjoy it, and I'll probably pick it up again sometime - once again, just for fun!

I didn't enjoy this one as much as the first. Where the first one is an exaggeration of LDS culture, this one is basically about a family vacation gone wrong. I did enjoy the relationship between Andy and her husband in this book. It is still incredibly funny and fun to read, and I will still continue to read the rest of the series.

I read this at a time in my life when I needed some postive and lots of belly laughing to lift my spirits. This is an excellent book and I could actually in my mind picture people in my ward who could have been the characters in this book.

I was camping out in a friend's basement and came across this on a shelf. Picked it up because I remembered the author from my teenage years. I stayed up very late reading it all and laughed myself sick. Joni Hilton is a true LDS Comedy Queen. I would love to read the rest of the series.

The first was definitely better. It was about some "being Mormon"; things with touching spiritual moments. This was more an adventure story with Mormon characters. On the plus side, they were the same characters from the first, so that gave them history.

again, hilarious. book about funny things that go on in wards. Also, about herself as well.

A wierd sequel to As the Ward Turns. But a fun ride none the less.

Not as good as the first, but Joni Hilton, makes you love these charcters.

kind of surprised by some of the content.

Loved the first one ordered the next. The hilarity continues. Loads of fun.

Oh my gosh I was laughing so hard with this book. I kept thinking that sounds exactly like so-n-so from my old ward with a lot of the characters. Fun quick read.

Just as good as the first. I will never tire of Joni Hilton!

This was a really good book. It started off a little slow but ended really good.

Hilarious! Even funnier than the first one. I stayed up late reading it one night and woke up Gareth with my laughing!

These books get funnier and funnier. What a light hearted read. Recommend it to anyone who needs a good laugh.

This one was even more improbable and less believable than the first...

Joni Hilton is a genius. If you're interested in all things Mormon and quirky with an eccentric pioneer grandma thrown into the mix you better read this book. I still can't stop laughing.

Hilarious! I was giggling the whole time while I was reading.

This book was a lot of fun to read. It will keep you laughing. I suggest this book to anyone!
