Narrator Ramatoulaye's story, could, with a couple of tweaks, be the subject of a thread on Mumsnet or a similar forum frequented by middle-aged women. 'OMG my husband remortgaged our house to get flats for his younger girlfriend and her mum, and now he's died.' (Only in the novel, it's beautifully written.) In the story it may be polygamy the narrator is unhappy about in 1970s Senegal rather than separation or a mistress, but there is more similarity and relatability than the old fashioned and Othery presentation of some editions of the novel might imply. Besides, in the West at that time - probably even more so in France than in the UK or North America - women were commonly expected to turn a blind eye to male philandering and not get too upset about it. The cover and blurb of common English editions - the UK ones and the Goodreads default - give an impression to the Western reader of something Other and abject: a "struggle for survival", a woman kneeling in a desert, looking miserable. This US edition is better, the flag showing it's a state-of-the-nation novel, and the wing conveying national independence, women's liberation, the sense of new beginnings, progress and hope. It's a novella - under 100 pages in many editions - about professional middle-class people: the narrator is a teacher ( as was the author herself ), her late husband was a senior civil servant. She addresses the 'letters' of the novel to her best friend Aïssatou (not letters qua letters, but a format that also addresses an audience as well as her friend, explaining things they both know - as would a speech at a party or family occasion, and some other types of literary 'letter' created for publication). Aïssatou is an interpreter who's gone to work abroad, and *her* ex-husband was a hospital doctor. There is a lot of reflection on women's lib - as it was then called - as in European and American feminist novels of the mid-1960s to 1980s. (It would be interesting to see what parallels there are between de Beauvoir's The Second Sex and So Long a Letter ; presumably de Beauvoir would have been more widely read in Francophone Senegal than US 1970s feminists; but I have never finished The Second Sex to be able to make this comparison myself.) Ramatoulaye is a modern, educated woman who wants her daughters to study and work, but around her are other women still happy to take advantage of patriarchal habits for financial gain, and men who, for the most part, expect women to do as much at home as they did before they went out to work. Men who agree with feminism, like a member of parliament the narrator knows, are on some level welcome, but on another also frustrating, because they are still hogging power and benefiting from tradition. The novel has a scope extending beyond the feminist personal as political. It can be seen as part of a tradition of French socio-political novels like Balzac and Zola, as hinted here . There is much in the book about the New Africa, countries in the decades immediately after independence, and the hopes of national improvement and advancement held by people like the narrator and her circle. I should do some reading and research on this, but I found the narrator's feelings about Westernisation a surprising contrast after reading contemporary material online by indigenous activists (North America and Australia/NZ), about how much had been lost because of colonisers, in traditional ways of being, learning and organising society. This is probably comparing apples and oranges, not simply about a changing focus of activism and scholarship over 40 years. (Interested in opinions and links about this from anyone better informed who is reading this post.) Ramatoulaye sees hope, especially for women and girls, and for society in general, in adopting West European-style education and political and social structures as much as possible now that the French have left. The French colonisers othered the locals as backward, and now the educated middle class of the independent nation are determined to show that their country can be equal to Europeans. This was written several years before the publication of Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o's book Decolonizing the Mind , and long before that idea in a larger sense became widely talked about, as it has been increasingly in the last few years. I was also surprised so many readers find this book primarily sad. (Especially people who are young and have not experienced being widowed, which would bring different resonances to the reading.) I read it instead as someone realising she finds life easier without a husband, and mourning is part of that process. Bittersweet? ( A 2010 academic paper suggests parallels between Ramatoulaye's grief and a societal grief for "social and cultural losses involved in urbanisation". But the narrator is optimistic for the future of her family and country. She has not had to think about the impact of climate change in that part of the world as her counterparts 40 years later might, and the novel pre-dates many of the famines and wars in Africa that were to make headlines abroad in the 1980s (though of course the war and politically-induced famine in Biafra were only ten years earlier). Again, would love to hear perspectives from people who [have] live[d] in West Africa on how this book seems in the context of modern history as seen locally, as my research so far has not turned up any articles from the region that look at this aspect of the novel. (Read & reviewed Feb 2020. Group read for the 100 Best Women in Translation group .)
