Each profession, intellectual or manual, deserves consideration, whether it requires painful physical effort or manual dexterity, wide knowledge or the patience of an ant. Ours, like that of a doctor, does not allow for any mistake. You don't joke with life, and life is both body and mind. To warp a soul is as much a sacrilege as murder. A comparison to Sleepless Nights is not too far apace, for what is more familiar of the epistolary form is counterbalanced by a less novelized perspective, expanding that much often abused 'difficult' to include a reader's blinkers with the usual linguistic fireworks. There is also the saturation to consider; ninety pages of pedagogy, politics, much maligned Islam and a little less so emotional turmoil, complete with footnotes to account for the barriers of language, culture, skin and gender. In this, one must consider all the works of this country and continent that did not make it to the lists of 500 GBBW, 1001, all those one will never know on what schemes of quality they fell short. The best of the best of the best are the only ones fit for global perusal, perhaps, but the childhood favorites? The soap opera pleasures? The quick and easy casual reading that says much more of a writer who reads them than the factory produced lists of classics, enough to necessitate a covering with 'guilt'? I wonder, sometimes, what works the elite of Senegal scoff at, which ones they covet with false delight, what familiar lines of public engagement with literature I see only in the Anglo world and am missing everywhere else. In short, what works did Bâ grow up on that are not proclaimed everywhere else? I read a piece like hers that pulls out from my subconscious names like Woolf and Evans (Eliot for those who have not yet caught up) and wonder whether I am understanding the inspired or translating a familiar breed of inspiration. Perhaps it is because this work has less of fellow Senegalese lit God's Bits of Wood 's preoccupation with what is Euro and what is self, but when one searches a rare combination of demographic and finds a love, one must not be content with a lone mascot. It does a disservice to literature to treat with it as a fill-in-the-blank, rather than a living entity that existed long before you and will continue long after you're gone. I see I've gone and not talked much about this work I say is amazing. Well, the prose is beauteous, the plot treats with an entirety of life probed in a delightfully full and empathetic manner, intellect couples wondrously with love, different choices of life do not feel the need to compete with the other, the old is there and is understood, the new is there and adapted to, pain heals slow and sure and friendship is raised to the heights it deserves. A personal bonus was the Muslim feminism that the temper of these times call for so desperately along with so many other categories of the written word, but I've spent enough time on the quagmires of representation. For more practical folk, this is rather short and super cheap a tome, so without reservations, experience away. The power of books, this marvelous invention of astute human intelligence. Various signs associated with sound: different sounds that form the word. Juxtaposition of words from which springs the idea, Thought, History, Science, Life. Sole instrument of interrelationships and of culture, unparalleled means of giving and receiving. Books knit generations together in the same continuing effort that leads to progress. They enabled you to better yourself.
