I’ve been lucky with the books I’ve come across this year, and this might be my favourite so far. As soon as I finished I wanted to learn about the author. I suspected the story was at least somewhat autobiographical, the voice is so clear and so powerful. It is an epistolary novel so the tone is intimate, like eavesdropping on a confession. The letter is written to her childhood friend who had left her husband and taken her children to America. She is writing during her period of seclusion after her own husband’s death, while she mourns and reflects on her marriage and the betrayal that defined her later life. After 25 years her husband secretly took a second wife, a friend of their daughters to make it even more humiliating. It is set in the wake of Senegal’s independence, so it captures a society in flux. It pits western education and feminist ideals against caste systems and patriarchal interpretations of religion. It is a character study of two paths: Ramatoulye, the stoic, she stays. She is the traditionalist who tries to modernize from within, suffering through the indignity of her husband’s second marriage because she still believes in the sanctity of their union. Aissatou, the nonconformist, she leaves. She represents the new woman who breaks the cycle and finds independence through her own career. It doesn’t just look at gender, it is also about class and education. Both women are highly educated schoolteachers, which puts them in a specific social realm. There is a clash between their enlightened education and rigid expectations. Here is what I learned about the real life connections: Ramatoulye’s husband is a successful man involved in the trade unions and politics of a newly independent nation. The author’s husband was a Senegalese politician and member of parliament. Just like in the novel, her marriage faced the strain of the patriarchal structures she critiqued. Where successful men often discarded their first wives for younger, trophy wives. In the book, the narrator stays while her friend leaves. In her own life, Mariama Ba chose the path of the friend. She divorced her husband. Which made me wonder why she split the persona. At least one critic said it was to give a voice to the women who couldn't leave. By making the narrator the one who stays, she was able to explore the psychological toll of "patience" and "social dignity" that she rejected. It’s poignant to note that she died in 1981, just as the book was gaining international fame. She never got to see its impact on African literature. But what a gift she left, a very heavy book for such a slim volume.
