" Matt Drabble is a name that will one day be as widely recognized as Stephen King& Dean Koontz " - READERS FAVORITE WINNER OF THE 2025 KINDLE BOOK REVIEW AWARD FOR HORROR/SUSPENSE For Tyler Clayton it was supposed to be a routine prisoner transfer on a routine night. The only out of the ordinary thing was the last minute addition to the bus’s mix of eclectic prisoner and guard characters. Archie Knox is an old school gangster, a throwback celebrity criminal whose reach is wide enough to cause ripples the size of tidal waves that could drown Clay & those he cares about. A reach that stretches to his cold hearted and vicious granddaughter and her plans for a rescue operation. Once enough strings are pulled and palms greased the transfer bus is redirected out onto the desolate Bleak Peak Moors. The scene is set to extract Knox, but no amount of careful planning could have predicted what they were about to run into. Cut off from the world and stranded in the middle of nowhere this band of opposites are going to have to find a way to work together if they ever want to see the morning sun rise again. But with ulterior motives and hidden agendas muddying the waters Clay is going to find that he is in for the fight of his life just to avoid dying, or something far worse. Out on the moors, everyone is fair game. SEQUEL OUT NOW Selected other works by Matt Drabble: ABRA-CADAVER - The 2017 Readers Favorite Silver Medal Winner for Horror Fiction. Winner of a prestigious Indie Book of the Day Award, a 2015 Kindle Book Review Award Finalist and is the 2016 Book Excellence Awards winner for Horror Fiction. THE GATED TRILOGY - Winner of multiple achievements including - a UK & US Horror Chart Top 10 best seller, 2015 Readers Favorite Gold Medal Winner for Horror Fiction & the 2014 Full Moon Awards Horror Book of the year. THE ASYLUM TRILOGY - an Amazon US Horror Chart #5 best seller, voted #5 on The Horror Novel Review's Top 10 Books of 2013 and is a 2014 Readers Favorite Gold Medal winner, a 2016 Readers Favorite Silver Medal winner for Anthology Fiction. THE LAST RESORT - The 2019 Readers Favorite Silver Medal Winner for Horror Fiction & The 2019 Kindle Book Review's Winner for Horror/Suspense. To find more information: Website : mattdrabble.co.uk Twitter: MattDrabble01 Facebook: matt.drabble.3 Instagram : mattdrabble01
